VILLAGE OF MARIEMONT, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-3 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance No. O-3-25, passed 1-27-2025
State legislation current through December 31, 2024
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS
of the
VILLAGE OF MARIEMONT, OHIO
 
 
Village Council
Rob Bartlett      Bob Van Stone
Susan Brownknight Matthew Ayer
Marcy Lewis       Randy York
 
Village Officials
Village Officials
Bill Brown          Mayor
Edward J. McTigue   Solicitor
Kelly Rankin        Fiscal Officer
Rod Holloway        Building/Zoning Officer
XPEX                Building Inspector
Chris Ertel         Village Engineer
Joanee B. Van Pelt  Village Administrative Assistant
Chuck Barlow        Village Tax Administrator
 
 
Planning Commission
Bob Van Stone Bill Brown
Matt Painter  Shelley Reed
             JP Burleigh
 
 
Architecture Review Board
Bill Brown Brad Lockhart
Matt Ayer  Tina Getter
Peter Wren Aileen Beatty
Doug Zemke  
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. O-7-16
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE VILLAGE OF MARIEMONT,
STATE OF OHIO, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE POLITICAL SUBDIVISION DEALING WITH SUBJECTS
EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES, AND TO DECLARE EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, The present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Ohio empower and authorize
the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and compile any
existing ordinances and all new ordinance not heretofore adopted or published
and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book form: and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision has authorized
a general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the
Political Subdivision of a general and permanent nature and publication of such
ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this Ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE VILLAGE OF MARIEMONT,
STATE OF OHIO, A MAJORITY OF THE MEMBERS DULY ELECTED THEREUNTO CONCURRING:
SECTION I. The general ordinances of the Political Subdivision as revised,
amended, restated, codified and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and
shall constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Village of Mariemont, State of
Ohio".
SECTION II. Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section I shall consist of
the following Titles:
Title I:      General Provisions
Title III:   Administration
Title V:   Public Works
Title VII:   Traffic Code
Title IX:   General Regulations
Title XI:   Business Regulations
Title XIII:   General Offenses
Title XV:   Land Usage
SECTION III. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects in such a Code of
Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in
such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or
penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying
taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory, establishing
franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons, authorizing public
improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing of money,
authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property, granting or
accepting easements, plat of dedication of land to public use, vacating or
setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall such repeal
affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or pertaining to
subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
SECTION IV: Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Fiscal Officer of the
Political Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such
Code of Ordinances in the Office of the Fiscal Officer.
SECTION V. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section 6
and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
SECTION VI. This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary for
the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of
the residents of The Village of Mariemont. The reason for said emergency is so
the Code of Ordinances may take effect at the earliest date provided by law.
Passed: February 8, 2016
                           Dan Policastro /s/
                           Dan Policastro, Mayor
ATTEST:
Anthony J. Borgerding /s/
Anthony J. Borgerding, Fiscal Officer
   I, Anthony J. Borgerding, Fiscal Officer of the Village of Mariemont, Ohio,
do hereby certify that there is no newspaper printed in said municipality and
that publication of the foregoing Ordinance was duly made by posting true
copies thereof at five of the most public places in said corporation as
determined by the Council, as follows: the Concourse, Miami Bluff and
Flintpoint Way; the Tennis Court property, on the east side of Plainville Road
between Maple and Chestnut Streets; the site of the Municipal Building; Wooster
Pike and Crystal Springs Road; the northeast corner of the intersection of
Rembold and Miami Road inside the enclosure; the northwest corner of the Old
Town Center, intersection of Chestnut and Oak Streets; each for a period of
fifteen days commencing on the 9th day of February, 2016
                                       Anthony J. Borgerding /s/
                                       Anthony J. Borgerding, Fiscal Officer
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.05   Construction of section references
   
10.06   Conflicting provisions
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Ordinances repealed
   
10.11   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.12   Ordinances saved
   
10.13   Application to future ordinances
   
10.14   Interpretation
   
10.15   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.16   Statutory references
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights, and liabilities
   
10.18   Determination of legislative intent
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the municipality,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Mariemont Municipal Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”,
“codified ordinances”, or “code” may be substituted. Title, chapter, and
section headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the
code.
(R.C. § 1.01)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01". Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
(2000 Code, § 10.01)
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND/OR. The word “and” may be read as “or”, and the word “or” may be read as
“and”, if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOND. Includes an undertaking.
   CERTIFIED MAIL. Includes registered mail.
   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   COUNCIL. The Village Council of the Village of Mariemont.
   COUNTY. Hamilton County, Ohio.
   FIRE CHIEF. Includes the Chief of the Fire Department if a Fire Department
has been established in the municipality, and shall include the Fire Prevention
Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the municipality.
   IMPRISONED. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.
   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-federal
interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork
known as the World Wide Web.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The Village Council of the Village of Mariemont.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   MUNICIPALITY, CITY, TOWN, VILLAGE, or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. When used in
this code, shall denote the municipality irrespective of its population or
legal classification.
   O.A.C. Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   OATH. Includes affirmation.
   OF UNSOUND MIND. The person lacks the relevant mental capacity.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or part of that property.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, and association.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real property.
   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER, and SEWERS. Includes sewers,
sewage disposal works, and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations,
together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state, or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   R.C. Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   SWEAR. Includes affirm.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   UNDERTAKING. Includes a bond.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITING. Includes printing.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. The terms include any representation of words,
letters, symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating
to signatures.
   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01) (2000 Code, § 10.02)
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Common and technical usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
   (B)   Singular and plural; gender; tenses. As used in this code, unless the
context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular;
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders; and
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(R.C. § 1.43)
   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   As used in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above, LEGAL HOLIDAY means
the following days:
         (a)   The first day of January, known as New Year’s Day;
         (b)   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King, Jr.
Day;
         (c)   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln Day;
         (d)   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968", 82 Stat. 250,
5 U.S.C. § 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         (e)   The nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth day;
         (f)   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         (g)   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         (h)   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         (i)   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s Day;
         (j)   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         (k)   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day; and
         (l)   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, the priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
      (7)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME or NOTICE
shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the
duty or compliance with the notice.
   (D)   Numbers. If there is a conflict between figures and words in
expressing a number, the words govern.
(R.C. § 1.46)
   (E)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (F)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving that
authority to a majority of the officers or other persons, unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority, or it is
inconsistent with state law or municipal charter provisions.
   (G)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
contains any express provision excluding the construction, or when the subject
matter or context of the law is repugnant thereto.
(2000 Code, § 10.03)
§ 10.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
(R.C. § 1.57)
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not, except
as provided in division (C) below:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
   (D)   An ordinance which is reenacted or amended is intended to be a
continuation of the prior ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it is
the same as the prior ordinance.
(R.C. § 1.54)
(2000 Code, § 10.04)
§ 10.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, the reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions, or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
(R.C. § 1.23)
   (C)   A reference to any portion of a provision of this code applies to all
reenactments or amendments thereof.
(R.C. § 1.55)
   (D)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and
the last numbers or letters are included.
(R.C. § 1.56)
   (E)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter has been
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(2000 Code, § 10.05)
§ 10.06 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision,
they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both. If the
conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special or local
provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general
provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general
provision prevail.
(R.C. § 1.51)
   (B)   (1)   If ordinances enacted at different meetings of the legislative
authority are irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of enactment
prevails.
      (2)   If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different
meetings of the legislative authority, one amendment without reference to
another, the amendments are to be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may
be given to each. If the amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the
latest in date of enactment prevails. The fact that a later amendment restates
language deleted by an earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted
by an earlier amendment, does not of itself make the amendments irreconcilable.
Amendments are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot reasonably
be put into simultaneous operation.
(R.C. § 1.52)
   (C)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this code,
or between any of the provisions of this code and any standard code adopted by
the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the provision that establishes the
higher or stricter standard shall control.
(2000 Code, § 10.06)
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of this code or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions are severable.
(R.C. § 1.50) (2000 Code, § 10.07)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the municipality exercising the powers, duties,
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
(2000 Code, § 10.08)
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any words necessary to express the intention of the
provisions affected, the use of words to which no meaning can be attached, or
the use of a word when another word was clearly intended to express the
intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and the words supplied, omitted, or
substituted shall conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall
have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as
originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
(2000 Code, § 10.09)
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   With the exception of any ordinances specifically saved by the municipality,
this code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
(2000 Code, § 10.10)
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
and all ordinances specifically saved by the municipality shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
(2000 Code, § 10.11)
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intention of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature
serving the purpose, effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent
thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
(2000 Code, § 10.12)
§ 10.13 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
(2000 Code, § 10.13)
§ 10.14 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
(2000 Code, § 10.14)
§ 10.15 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and need not be inserted in
this code, but shall be treated as if printed for inclusion herein.
   (B)   The following language may be used by the municipality to amend, add,
or repeal a chapter, section, or division:
      (1)   To amend a section: “Section _______ of the municipal code of
ordinances is amended to read as follows: ....”.
      (2)   To add a section: “Section of the municipal code of ordinances,
which is to be added to and amends the municipal code of ordinances, reads as
follows: ....”.
      (3)   To repeal a section: “Section ________ of the municipal code of
ordinances, which reads as follows, is repealed: ....”
(2000 Code, § 10.15)
§ 10.16 STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, located in parentheses
immediately following a division or section of this code, this indicates that
the text of the division or section is substantially equivalent to the
statutory provision.
  Example: (R.C. § 4511.02)
   (B)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following
the text of a section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information.
Example:
      § 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         Unless otherwise exempted by state law, all public records shall be
promptly prepared and made available for inspection to any person.
      Statutory reference:
         Public records, see R.C. § 149.43
(2000 Code, § 10.16)
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS, AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings, and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into, or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment, or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
(2000 Code, § 10.17)
§ 10.18 DETERMINATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   In enacting an ordinance, it is presumed that:
      (1)   Compliance with the constitutions of the state and of the United
States is intended;
      (2)   The entire ordinance is intended to be effective;
      (3)   A just and reasonable result is intended; and
      (4)   A result feasible of execution is intended.
(R.C. § 1.47)
   (B)   An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation unless
expressly made retrospective.
(R.C. § 1.48)
   (C)   If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the intention
of the legislative authority, may consider among other matters:
      (1)   The object sought to be attained;
      (2)   The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted;
      (3)   The legislative history;
      (4)   The common law or former legislative provisions, including laws
upon the same or similar subjects;
      (5)   The consequences of a particular construction; and
      (6)   The administrative construction of the ordinance.
(R.C. § 1.49)
(2000 Code, § 10.18)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which
a violation continues or occurs.
   (B)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for the failure.
(2000 Code, § 10.99)
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see R.C. § 715.67
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY
      
32.   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
      
33.   JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
      
34.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
35.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
36.   CIVIL ACTIONS AGAINST THE MUNICIPALITY
      
37.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
      
38.   SALE OR LEASE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Fees; Generally
   
30.01   Application of Title III
   
30.02   Qualifications; oaths
   
30.03   Bonds of officers and employees; amount
   
30.04   Additional bond; where bonds recorded and kept
   
30.05   Approval of bonds
   
30.06   Sufficiency of form of bond
   
30.07   Filling vacancies in offices
   
30.08   Public records available
   
30.09   Meetings of public bodies to be open; exceptions; notice
   
30.10   Charges for notices of public meetings
   
30.11   Employment policies
   
30.12   Public purpose expenditures
   
30.13   Guidelines for requiring certificate of insurance when using village
property
   
30.14   Prisoner confinement reimbursement fee
   
30.15   Residency requirements prohibited; exceptions
Fees
   
30.30   Video service provider fee
   
30.31   Convenience fees charged for credit card payments and returned checks
Statutory reference:
   Village accounting and financial reporting, State Auditor administrative
regulations, see O.A.C. Ch. 117-9
FEES; GENERALLY
§ 30.01 APPLICATION OF TITLE III.
   (A)   Title III of this code of ordinances is designed to include and
incorporate, insofar as it is practical, all legislation concerning the
organization, qualifications, appointment or election, terms of office,
compensation, and the powers and duties of the officials, boards, and bodies of
the village. Pertinent sections of the Ohio Revised Code relative to these
village offices and boards have been assembled and adopted as a part of this
Title. No material changes of the Revised Code sections referred to in the
legislative histories have been made. The purpose of including these sections
is to afford easy reference to the statutory provisions.
   (B)   In the interest of uniformity and consistency, all references to
“village”, as the term appears in the Revised Code, have been changed to read
“municipality” throughout this title; however, the provisions of this chapter
shall only apply to the administration of village local government.
(2000 Code, § 30.01)
§ 30.02 QUALIFICATIONS; OATHS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) below or in another
section of the Revised Code, each officer of the municipality or of any
department or board of the municipality, whether elected or appointed as a
substitute for a regular officer, shall be an elector of the municipality and,
before entering upon official duties, shall take an oath to support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the state and an oath
that the officer will faithfully, honestly, and impartially discharge the
duties of the office to which elected or appointed. These provisions as to
official oaths shall extend to deputies, but they need not be electors.
   (B)   Neither this section nor any section of the Revised Code requires, or
shall be construed to require, that a Fire Chief be an elector of the
municipality.
(R.C. § 733.68) (2000 Code, § 30.02)
§ 30.03 BONDS OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; AMOUNT.
   Before entering upon the discharge of his or her duties, each officer and
employee, where such is required by the legislative authority, shall execute a
bond approved according to law in the amount set forth for his or her
respective office or position.
(2000 Code, § 30.03)
§ 30.04 ADDITIONAL BOND; WHERE BONDS RECORDED AND KEPT.
   Except as otherwise provided in the municipal charter or in R.C. § 3.061,
each officer required by law or ordinance to give bond shall do so before
entering upon the duties of the office. Except as otherwise provided in the
municipal charter or in R.C. § 3.061, the Legislative Authority may at any time
require each officer to give a new or additional bond. Each bond, except that
of the Auditor or Clerk, upon its approval, shall be delivered to the Auditor
or Clerk, who shall immediately record it in a record provided for that purpose
and file and carefully preserve it in the Auditor’s or Clerk’s office. The bond
of the Auditor or Clerk shall be delivered to the Treasurer, who shall in like
manner record and preserve it.
(R.C. § 733.69) (2000 Code, § 30.04)
§ 30.05 APPROVAL OF BONDS.
   The official bonds of all municipal officers shall be prepared by the
Village Solicitor. Except as otherwise provided in state law, the bonds shall
be in a sum as the legislative authority prescribes by general or special
ordinance, and be subject to the approval of the Mayor, except that the Mayor’s
bond shall be approved by the legislative authority, or, if it is not legally
organized, by the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the
municipality or the larger part thereof is situated.
(R.C. § 733.70) (2000 Code, § 30.05)
§ 30.06 SUFFICIENCY OF FORM OF BOND.
   (A)   In each bond mentioned in §
30.05, the condition that the person elected or appointed shall faithfully
perform the duties of the office shall be sufficient.
   (B)   The fact that the instrument is without a seal; that blanks for the
date or amount have been filled subsequent to its execution, but before its
acceptance, without the consent of the sureties; that all the obligees named in
the instrument have not signed it; that new duties have been imposed on the
officers; or that any merely formal objection exists shall not be available in
any suit on the instrument.
(R.C. § 733.71) (2000 Code, § 30.06)
§ 30.07 FILLING VACANCIES IN OFFICES.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, vacancies arising in appointive and
elective offices of the municipality shall be filled by appointment by the
Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term; provided, that:
   (A)   Vacancies in the office of the Mayor shall be filled in the manner
provided by R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance;
   (B)   Vacancies in the membership of the legislative authority shall be
filled in the manner provided by R.C. § 731.43, or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance;
   (C)   Vacancies in the office of President Pro Tem of the legislative
authority shall be filled in the manner provided by R.C. § 731.11, or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance;
   (D)   Vacancies in the office of Clerk or Treasurer may be filled in the
following manner: the Mayor may appoint a person to serve as acting officer to
perform the duties of the office until a permanent officer is appointed to fill
the vacancy.
(R.C. § 733.31(A)) (2000 Code, § 30.07)
§ 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   (A)   (1)   Upon request by any person and subject to division (H) of this
section, all public records responsive to the request shall be promptly
prepared and made available for inspection to the requester at all reasonable
times during regular business hours. Subject to division (H) of this section,
upon request by any person, a public office or person responsible for public
records shall make copies of the requested public record available to the
requestor at cost and within a reasonable period of time.
      (2)   When considering whether a state or local law enforcement agency
promptly prepared a video record for inspection or provided a video record for
production within a reasonable period of time, in addition to any other
factors, a court shall consider the time required for a state or local law
enforcement agency to retrieve, download, review, redact, seek legal advice
regarding, and produce the video record. Notwithstanding any other requirement
set forth in R.C. Chapter 149, a state or local law enforcement agency may
charge a requester the actual cost associated with preparing a video record for
inspection or production, not to exceed $75 per hour of video produced, nor
$750 total. As used in this division, ACTUAL COST, with respect to video
records only, means all costs incurred by the state or local law enforcement
agency in reviewing, blurring or  otherwise obscuring, redacting, uploading, or
producing the video records, including but not limited to the storage medium on
which the record is produced, staff time, and any other relevant overhead
necessary to comply with the request. A state or local law enforcement agency
may include in its public records policy the requirement that a requester pay
the estimated actual cost before beginning the process of preparing a video
record for inspection or production. Where a state or local law enforcement
agency imposes such a requirement, its obligation to produce a video or make it
available for inspection begins once the estimated actual cost is paid in full
by the requester. A state or local law enforcement agency shall provide the
requester with the estimated actual cost within five business days of receipt
of the public records request. If the actual cost exceeds the estimated actual
cost, a state or local law enforcement agency may charge a requester for the
difference upon fulfilling a request for video records if the requester is
notified in advance that the actual cost may be up to 20% higher than the
estimated actual cost. A state or local law enforcement agency shall not charge
a requester a difference that exceeds 20% of the estimated actual cost.
      (3)   If a public record contains information that is exempt from the
duty to permit public inspection or to copy the public record, the public
office or the person responsible for the public record shall make available all
of the information within the public record that is not exempt. When making
that public record available for public inspection or copying that public
record, the public office or the person responsible for the public record shall
notify the requester of any redaction or make the redaction plainly visible. A
redaction shall be deemed a denial of a request to inspect or copy the redacted
information, except if federal or state law authorizes or requires a public
office to make the redaction. When the auditor of state receives a request to
inspect or to make a copy of a record that was provided to the auditor of state
for purposes of an audit, but the original public office has asserted to the
auditor of state that the record is not a public record, the auditor of state
may handle the requests by directing the requestor to the original public
office that provided the record to the auditor of state.
   (B)   To facilitate broader access to public records, a public office or the
person responsible for public records shall organize and maintain public
records in a manner that they can be made available for inspection or copying
in accordance with this section. A public office also shall have available a
copy of its current records retention schedule at a location readily available
to the public. If a requester makes an ambiguous or overly broad request or has
difficulty in making a request for copies or inspection of public records under
this section, such that the public office or the person responsible for the
requested public record cannot reasonably identify what public records are
being requested, the public office or the person responsible for the requested
public record may deny the request but shall provide the requester with an
opportunity to revise the request by informing the requester of the manner in
which records are maintained by the public office and accessed in the ordinary
course of the public office’s or person’s duties.
   (C)   If a request is ultimately denied, in part or in whole, the public
office or the person responsible for the requested public record shall provide
the requester with an explanation, including legal authority, setting forth why
the request was denied. If the initial request was provided in writing, the
explanation also shall be provided to the requester in writing. The explanation
shall not preclude the public office or the person responsible for the
requested public record from relying upon additional reasons or legal authority
in defending an action commenced under R.C. § 149.43(C).
   (D)   Unless specifically required or authorized by state or federal law or
in accordance this section, no public office or person responsible for public
records may limit or condition the availability of public records by requiring
disclosure of the requester’s identity or the intended use of the requested
public record. Any requirement that the requester disclose the requester’s
identity or the intended use of the requested public record constitutes a
denial of the request.
   (E)   A public office or person responsible for public records may ask a
requester to make the request in writing, may ask for the requester’s identity,
and may inquire about the intended use of the information requested, but may do
so only after disclosing to the requester that a written request is not
mandatory and that the requester may decline to reveal the requester’s identity
or the intended use and when a written request or disclosure of the identity or
intended use would benefit the requester by enhancing the ability of the public
office or person responsible for public records to identify, locate, or deliver
the public records sought by the requester.
   (F)   If any person requests a copy of a public record in accordance with
this section, the public office or person responsible for the public record may
require the requester to pay in advance the cost involved in providing the copy
of the public record in accordance with the choice made by the requester under
this division. The public office or the person responsible for the public
record shall permit the requester to choose to have the public record
duplicated upon paper, upon the same medium upon which the public office or
person responsible for the public record keeps it, or upon any other medium
upon which the public office or person responsible for the public record
determines that it reasonably can be duplicated as an integral part of the
normal operations of the public office or person responsible for the public
record. When the requester makes a choice under this division, the public
office or person responsible for the public record shall provide a copy of it
in accordance with the choice made by the requester. Nothing in this section
requires a public office or person responsible for the public record to allow
the requester of a copy of the public record to make the copies of the public
record.
   (G)   (1)   Upon a request made in accordance with this section and subject
to division (F) above, a public office or person responsible for public records
shall transmit a copy of a public record to any person by U.S. mail or by any
other means of delivery or transmission within a reasonable period of time
after receiving the request for the copy. The public office or person
responsible for the public record may require the person making the request to
pay in advance the cost of postage if the copy is transmitted by United States
mail or the cost of delivery if the copy is transmitted other than by U.S.
mail, and to pay in advance the costs incurred for other supplies used in the
mailing, delivery or transmission.
      (2)   Any public office may adopt a policy and procedures that it will
follow in transmitting within a reasonable period of time after receiving a
request, copies of public records by United States mail or by any other means
of delivery or transmission pursuant to division (G) of this section. A public
office that adopts a policy and procedures under division (G) of this section
shall comply with them in performing its duties under that division.
      (3)   In any policy and procedures adopted under division (G) of this
section:
         (a)   A public office may limit the number of records requested by a
person that the office will physically deliver by United States mail or by
another delivery service to ten per month, unless the person certifies to the
office in writing that the person does not intend to use or forward the
requested records, or the information contained in them, for commercial
purposes.
         (b)   A public office that chooses to provide some or all of its
public records on a web site that is fully accessible to and searchable by
members of the public at all times, other than during acts of God outside the
public office’s control or maintenance, and that charges no fee to search,
access, download, or otherwise receive records provided on the web site, may
limit to ten per month the number of records requested by a person that the
office will deliver in a digital format, unless the requested records are not
provided on the web site and unless the person certifies to the office in
writing that the person does not intend to use or forward the requested
records, or the information contained in them, for commercial purposes.
         (c)   For purposes of division (G) of this section, COMMERCIAL shall
be narrowly construed and does not include reporting or gathering news,
reporting or gathering information to assist citizen oversight or understanding
the operation or activities of government, or nonprofit educational research.
   (H)   A public office or person responsible for public records is not
required to permit a person who is incarcerated pursuant to a criminal
conviction or a juvenile adjudication to inspect or to obtain a copy of any
public record concerning a criminal investigation or prosecution or concerning
what would be a criminal investigation or prosecution if the subject of the
investigation or prosecution were an adult, unless the request to inspect or to
obtain a copy of the record is for the purpose of acquiring information that is
subject to release as a public record under this section and the judge who
imposed the sentence or made the adjudication with respect to the person, or
the judge’s successor in office, finds that the information sought in the
public record is necessary to support what appears to be a justiciable claim of
the person.
   (I)   (1)   Upon written request made and signed by a journalist, a public
office, or person responsible for public records, having custody of the records
of the agency employing a specified designated public service worker, as
defined in R.C. § 149.43, shall disclose to the journalist the address of the
actual personal residence of the designated public service worker and, if the
designated public service worker’s spouse, former spouse or child is employed
by a public office, the name and address of the employer of the designated
public service worker’s spouse, former spouse or child. The request shall
include the journalist’s name and title and the name and address of the
journalist’s employer and shall state that disclosure of the information sought
would be in the public interest.
      (2)   Division (I)(1) of this section also applies to journalist requests
for:
         (a)   Customer information maintained by a municipally owned or
operated public utility, other than social security numbers and any private
financial information such as credit reports, payment methods, credit card
numbers, and bank account information.
         (b)    Information about minors involved in a school vehicle accident
as provided in division R.C. § 149.43(A)(1)(gg), other than personal
information as defined in R.C. § 149.45.
      (3)   As used in this division (I), JOURNALIST means a person engaged in,
connected with or employed by any news medium, including a newspaper, magazine,
press association, news agency,  or wire service, a radio or television
station, or a similar medium, for the purpose of gathering, processing,
transmitting, compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general
public.
   (J)   Upon a request made by a victim, victim’s attorney, or victim’s
representative, as that term is used in R.C. § 2930.02, a public office or
person responsible for public records shall transmit a copy of a depiction of
the victim as described in R.C. § 149.43(A)(1)(ii) to the victim, victim’s
attorney, or victim’s representative.
   (K)   (1)   To ensure that all employees of public offices are appropriately
educated about a public office’s obligations under this section, all elected
officials or their appropriate designees shall attend training approved by the
Attorney General as provided in R.C. § 109.43. A future official may satisfy
the requirements of this division by attending the training before taking
office, provided that the future official may not send a designee in the future
official’s place.
      (2)   All public offices shall adopt a public records policy in
compliance with this section for responding to public records requests. In
adopting a public records policy under this division, a public office may
obtain guidance from the model public records policy developed and provided to
the public office by the Attorney General under R.C. § 109.43. Except as
otherwise provided in this section or R.C. § 149.43, the policy may not limit
the number of public records that the public office will make available to a
single person, may not limit the number of public records that it will make
available during a fixed period of time, and may not establish a fixed period
of time before it will respond to a request for inspection or copying of public
records, unless that period is less than eight hours.
      (3)   The public office shall distribute the public records policy
adopted by the public office under this division (K) to the employee of the
public office who is the records custodian or records manager or otherwise has
custody of the records of that office. The public office shall require that
employee to acknowledge receipt of the copy of the public records policy. The
public office shall create a poster that describes its public records policy
and shall post the poster in a conspicuous place in the public office and in
all locations where the public office has branch offices. The public office may
post its public records policy on the internet web site of the public office if
the public office maintains an internet web site. A public office that has
established a manual or handbook of its general policies and procedures for all
employees of the public office shall include the public records policy of the
public office in the manual or handbook.
(R.C. § 149.43(B), (E)) (2000 Code, § 30.08)
Statutory reference:
   Availability and scope of public records; mandamus action to compel
disclosure, see R.C. § 149.43
   Competitive bidding, public inspection and copying prohibited, see R.C. §
125.071
§ 30.09 MEETINGS OF PUBLIC BODIES TO BE OPEN; EXCEPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (A)   This section shall be liberally construed to require public officials
to take official action and to conduct all deliberations upon official business
only in open meetings, unless the subject matter is specifically excepted by
law.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      MEETING. Any prearranged discussion of the public business of the public
body by a majority of its members.
      PUBLIC BODY. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any board, commission, committee, council, or similar decision-
making body of a state agency, institution, or authority, and any legislative
authority or board, commission, committee, council, agency, authority, or
similar decision-making body of any county, township, municipal corporation,
school district, or other political subdivision or local public institution;
         (b)   Any committee or subcommittee of a body described in division
(a) of this definition; or
         (c)   A court of jurisdiction of a sanitary district organized wholly
for the purpose of providing a water supply for domestic municipal and public
use when meeting for the purpose of the appointment, removal or reappointment
of a member of the board of directors of such a district pursuant to R.C. §
6115.10, if applicable, or for any other matter related to such a district
other than litigation involving the district. As used in this division (c),
COURT OF JURISDICTION has the same meaning as “court” in R.C. § 6115.01.
      PUBLIC OFFICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.011.
      REGULATED INDIVIDUAL. Either of the following:
         (a)   A student in a state or local public educational institution; or
         (b)   A person who is, voluntarily or involuntarily, an inmate,
patient or resident of a state or local institution because of criminal
behavior, mental illness, an intellectual disability, disease, disability, age,
or other condition requiring custodial care.
   (C)   (1)   All meetings of any public body are declared to be public
meetings open to the public at all times. A member of a public body shall be
present in person at a meeting open to the public to be considered present or
to vote at the meeting and for purposes of determining whether a quorum is
present at the meeting.
      (2)   The minutes of a regular or special meeting of any public body
shall be promptly prepared, filed, and maintained and shall be open to public
inspection. The minutes need only reflect the general subject matter of
discussions in executive sessions authorized under division (F) below.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following: a grand jury; an
audit conference conducted by the auditor of state or independent certified
public accountants with officials of the public office that is the subject of
the audit; or to other entities as set forth in R.C. § 121.22(D) and (E).
   (E)   (1)   Every public body, by rule, shall establish a reasonable method
whereby any person may determine the time and place of all regularly scheduled
meetings and the time, place, and purpose of all special meetings. A public
body shall not hold a special meeting unless it gives at least 24 hours’
advance notice to the news media that have requested notification, except in
the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action. In the event of
an emergency, the member or members calling the meeting shall notify the news
media that have requested notification immediately of the time, place, and
purpose of the meeting.
      (2)   The rule shall provide that any person, upon request and payment of
a reasonable fee, may obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at
which any specific type of public business is to be discussed. Provisions for
advance notification may include, but are not limited to, mailing the agenda of
meetings to all subscribers on a mailing list or mailing notices in self-
addressed, stamped envelopes provided by the person.
   (F)   Except as provided division (F)(8) below, the members of a public body
may hold an executive session only after a majority of a quorum of the public
body determines, by a roll call vote, to hold an executive session and only at
a regular or special meeting for the sole purpose of the consideration of any
of the following matters:
      (1)   To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline,
promotion, demotion, or compensation of a public employee or official, or the
investigation of charges or complaints against a public employee, official,
licensee, or regulated individual, unless the public employee, official,
licensee, or regulated individual requests a public hearing. Except as
otherwise provided by law, no public body shall hold an executive session for
the discipline of an elected official for conduct related to the performance of
the elected official’s official duties or for the elected official’s removal
from office. If a public body holds an executive session pursuant to this
division (F)(1), the motion and vote to hold that executive session shall state
which one or more of the approved purposes listed in this division (F)(1) are
the purposes for which the executive session is to be held, but need not
include the name of any person to be considered at the meeting;
      (2)   (a)   To consider the purchase of property for public purposes, the
sale of property at competitive bidding, or the sale or other disposition of
unneeded, obsolete, or unfit-for-use property in accordance with R.C. § 505.10,
if premature disclosure of information would give an unfair competitive or
bargaining advantage to a person whose personal, private interest is adverse to
the general public interest. No member of a public body shall use this division
(F)(2) as a subterfuge for providing covert information to prospective buyers
or sellers. A purchase or sale of public property is void if the seller or
buyer of the public property has received covert information from a member of a
public body that has not been disclosed to the general public in sufficient
time for other prospective buyers and sellers to prepare and submit offers.
         (b)   If the minutes of the public body show that all meetings and
deliberations of the public body have been conducted in compliance with this
section, any instrument executed by the public body purporting to convey,
lease, or otherwise dispose of any right, title or interest in any public
property shall be conclusively presumed to have been executed in compliance
with this section insofar as title or other interest of any bona fide
purchasers, lessees, or transferees of the property is concerned.
      (3)   Conferences with an attorney for the public body concerning
disputes involving the public body that are the subject of pending or imminent
court action;
      (4)   Preparing for, conducting or reviewing negotiations or bargaining
sessions with public employees concerning their compensation or other terms and
conditions of their employment;
      (5)   Matters required to be kept confidential by federal law or
regulations or state statutes;
      (6)   Details relative to the security arrangements and emergency
response protocols for a public body or a public office, if disclosure of the
matters discussed could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the security of
the public body or public office;
      (7)    In the case of a county hospital operated pursuant to R.C. Ch.
339, a joint township hospital operated pursuant to R.C. Ch. 513, or a
municipal hospital operated pursuant to R.C. Ch. 749, to consider trade
secrets, as defined in R.C. § 1333.61; and
      (8)   To consider confidential information related to the marketing
plans, specific business strategy, production techniques, trade secrets, or
personal financial statements of an applicant for economic development
assistance, or to negotiations with other political subdivisions respecting
requests for economic development assistance; provided, that both of the
following conditions apply:
         (a)   The information is directly related to a request for economic
development assistance that is to be provided or administered under any
provision of R.C. Ch. 715, 725, 1724, or 1728 or R.C. §§ 701.07, 3735.67 to
3735.70, 5709.40 to 5709.43, 5709.61 to 5709.69, 5709.73 to 5709.75, or 5709.77
to 5709.81, or that involves public infrastructure improvements or the
extension of utility services that are directly related to an economic
development project; or
         (b)   A unanimous quorum of the public body determines, by a roll call
vote, that the executive session is necessary to protect the interests of the
applicant or the possible investment or expenditure of public funds to be made
in connection with the economic development project.
      (9)   If a public body holds an executive session to consider any of the
matters listed in divisions (F)(2) through (F)(8) above, the motion and vote to
hold that executive session shall state which one or more of the approved
matters listed in those divisions are to be considered at the executive
session; or
      (10)   A public body specified in division (c) of the definition of
“public body” in this section shall not hold an executive session when meeting
for the purposes specified in that division (c).
   (G)   A resolution, rule, or formal action of any kind is invalid unless
adopted in an open meeting of the public body. A resolution, rule, or formal
action adopted in an open meeting that results from deliberations in a meeting
not open to the public is invalid unless the deliberations were for a purpose
specifically authorized in division (F) above and conducted at an executive
session held in compliance with this section. A resolution, rule, or formal
action adopted in an open meeting is invalid if the public body that adopted
the resolution, rule, or formal action violated division (E) above.
   (H)   (1)   (a)   Any person may bring an action to enforce this section. An
action under this division (H)(1) shall be brought within two years after the
date of the alleged violation or threatened violation.
         (b)   Upon proof of a violation or threatened violation of this
section in an action brought by any person, the Court of Common Pleas shall
issue an injunction to compel the members of the public body to comply with its
provisions.
      (2)   (a)   If the Court of Common Pleas issues an injunction pursuant to
division (H)(1) above, the court shall order the public body that it enjoins to
pay a civil forfeiture of $500 to the party that sought the injunction and
shall award to that party all court costs and, subject to reduction as
described in this division (H)(2), reasonable attorney’s fees. The court, in
its discretion, may reduce an award of attorney’s fees to the party that sought
the injunction or not award attorney’s fees to that party if the court
determines both of the following:
            1.   Based on the ordinary application of statutory law and case
law as it existed at the time of violation or threatened violation that was the
basis of the injunction, a well-informed public body reasonably would believe
that the public body was not violating or threatening to violate this section;
or
            2.   A well-informed public body reasonably would believe that the
conduct or threatened conduct that was the basis of the injunction would serve
the public policy that underlies the authority that is asserted as permitting
that conduct or threatened conduct.
         (b)   If the Court of Common Pleas does not issue an injunction
pursuant to division (H)(1) above and the court determines at that time that
the bringing of the action was frivolous conduct, as defined in R.C. § 2323.51
(A), the court shall award to the public body all court costs and reasonable
attorney’s fees, as determined by the court.
      (3)   Irreparable harm and prejudice to the party that sought the
injunction shall be conclusively and irrebuttably presumed upon proof of a
violation or threatened violation of this section.
      (4)   A member of a public body who knowingly violates an injunction
issued pursuant to division (H)(1) above may be removed from office by an
action brought in the Court of Common Pleas for that purpose by the Prosecuting
Attorney or the attorney general.
(R.C. § 121.22)
(2000 Code, § 30.09)
Statutory reference:
   Application of open meetings and exceptions to specific entities, see R.C. §
121.22(D), (E) and (J)
§ 30.10 CHARGES FOR NOTICES OF PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   Any person, firm, partnership, proprietorship, corporation, or association
desiring notice of meetings of Council, committee of the whole, or Planning
Commission meetings shall:
   (A)   Submit annually, in writing, a request for notices, this request to be
sent to the Village Fiscal Officer;
   (B)   Give the name and address to whom these notices should be directed;
   (C)   Give the name and telephone number of the party to be notified in the
event of emergency;
   (D)   Pay to the Village Fiscal Officer the sum of $25 per annum as fee for
providing such notices, payable in advance annually; and
   (E)   Provide the Village Fiscal Officer with self- addressed envelopes with
sufficient postage for mailing of the notices.
(1967 Code, § 30.02) (Ord. O-7-76, passed 4-26-1976)
§ 30.11 EMPLOYMENT POLICIES.
   Provisions regarding employment policies, copies of which are on file in the
office of the Village Clerk, are adopted by reference and are incorporated
herein as part of this code of ordinances as if set out in their entirety
herein.
(1967 Code, § 35.03) (Ord. O-25-65, passed 12-13-1965; Ord. O-15-81, passed 6-
22-1981; Ord. O-19-82, passed 6-28-1982; Ord. O-33-82, passed 10-25-1982; Ord.
O-24-83, passed 6-27-1983; Ord. O-18-84, passed 6-25-1984; Ord. O-11-85, passed
6-24-1985; Ord. O-14-89, passed 6-19-1989; Ord. O-6-90, passed 2-26-1990; Ord.
O-28-92, passed 8-10-1992; Ord. O-42-92, passed 12-14-1992; Ord. O-11-93,
passed 3-25-1993; Ord. O-10-95, passed 4-10-1995; Ord. O- --97, passed 4-14-
1997; Ord. O-9-99, passed 4-26-1999; Ord. O-12-99, passed 5-10-1999; Ord. O-1-
00, passed 1-10-2000; Ord. O-9-01, passed 3-26-2001; Ord. O-12-01, passed 4-23-
2001; Ord. O-2-02, passed 1-28-2002; Ord. O-10-02, passed 7-22-2002; Ord. O-5-
03, passed 3-24-2003; Ord. O-18-03, passed 11-24-2003; Ord. O-2-04, passed 1-
12-2004; Ord. O-7-04, passed 4-12-2004; Ord. O-7-05, passed 4-25-2005)
§ 30.12 PUBLIC PURPOSE EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   (1)   Public funds may be used for the purchase of gifts, plaques, and
honorary items which cost less than $75, if such expenditures serve a public
purpose for the village.
      (2)   Expenditures of this type must be approved by the Mayor,
Chairperson of the Finance Committee, and a majority of Council before payment
is made.
   (B)   (1)   Public purpose shall include expenditures for the public health,
safety, general welfare, and the contentment of the inhabitants within the
village.
      (2)   Public purpose is further defined in state case law and relevant
opinions.
(2000 Code, § 30.12) (Ord. O-6-82, passed 3-22-1982)
§ 30.13 GUIDELINES FOR REQUIRING CERTIFICATE OF INSURANCE WHEN USING VILLAGE
PROPERTY.
   (A)   Use of public areas within the village shall require valid
authorization to be issued by and at the discretion of the Mayor.
   (B)   Liability insurance of not less than $1,000,000 shall be secured as
required at the discretion of the Mayor. This liability insurance coverage
shall include the party using the village property for the event and function
on the public property of the village as well as the village, the village’s
elected officials, and agents as named insureds.
   (C)   The Mayor shall be provided with the certificate of insurance 24 hours
before the event.
   (D)   The person, group, or parties seeking permission to use village
property shall provide appropriate security and traffic control at their cost
as approved by the Chief of Police.
   (E)   The person, group, or parties seeking permission to use village
property shall assume full responsibility for the clean-up of the areas used.
(2000 Code, § 30.13) (Ord. O-17-96, passed 10-28-1996)
§ 30.14 PRISONER CONFINEMENT REIMBURSEMENT FEE.
   All prisoners shall reimburse the village for the cost of their confinement
in jail within a reasonable time period as authorized and specified under state
law, including, but not limited to, R.C. §§ 753.02 and 2929.37. Indigent
convicted persons, as determined under state law, may, with their consent, be
allowed to perform labor in the service of the village with credit given for
their work at the state minimum wage against their prison confinement fee,
fine, and costs.
(2000 Code, § 30.14) (Ord. O-13-97, passed 5-12-1997)
§ 30.15 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.01.
      VOLUNTEER. A person who is not paid for service or who is employed on
less than a permanent full-time basis.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) below, no political
subdivision shall require any of its employees, as a condition of employment,
to reside in any specific area of the state.
   (C)   (1)   Division (B) above does not apply to a volunteer.
      (2)   (a)   To ensure adequate response times by certain employees of
political subdivisions to emergencies or disasters while ensuring that those
employees generally are free to reside throughout the state, the electors of
any political subdivision may file an initiative petition to submit a local law
to the electorate, or the legislative authority may adopt an ordinance or
resolution, that requires any individual employed by that political
subdivision, as a condition of employment, to reside either in the county where
the political subdivision is located or in any adjacent county in this state.
         (b)   For purposes of this section, an initiative petition shall be
filed and considered as provided in R.C. §§ 731.28 and 731.31, except that the
Fiscal Officer of the political subdivision shall take the actions prescribed
for the Auditor or Clerk if the political subdivision has no Auditor or Clerk,
and except that references to a municipal corporation shall be considered to be
references to the applicable political subdivision.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) above, employees of
political subdivisions of this state have the right to reside any place they
desire.
(R.C. § 9.481) (2000 Code, § 30.15)
FEES
§ 30.30 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.
   (A)   The Village Council hereby establishes a VSP fee that is calculated by
applying a VSP fee percentage of 5% to the video service provider’s gross
revenues as defined in § 1332.32(B) of the Video Law. For purposes of
calculating the VSP fee, the provider’s gross revenues shall include
advertising revenues in accordance with § 1332.23(B)(2)(g) of the Video Law.
The VSP fee percentage and Video Law gross revenues definition, as modified in
this section, shall apply equally to all video service providers and cable
television operators providing video service in the village.
   (B)   The VSP fee shall be paid by each video service provider providing
service in the village on a quarterly basis but not sooner than 45 days nor
later than 60 days after the end of each calendar quarter. (R.C. § 1332.32(A))
   (C)   The Mayor is authorized and directed to provide any video service
provider with notice of the VSP fee percentage and gross revenues definition as
determined by this Council above, which notice shall be given by certified
mail, upon receipt of notice from such video service provider that it will
begin providing video service in the village pursuant to a state-issued video
service authorization.
   (D)   It is found and determined that all formal actions of the Council
concerning and relating to the adoption of this section were adopted in an open
meeting of this Council, and that all deliberations of the Council and any of
its committees that resulted in such formal action were in meetings open to the
public in compliance with all legal requirements.
   (E)   This section is hereby declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare of the
village and this section shall become immediately effective upon receiving the
affirmative vote of two-thirds of all members elected to Council and approval
of the Mayor, otherwise from and after the earliest period allowed by law.
(Ord. O-2-10, passed 2-22-2010)
§ 30.31 CONVENIENCE FEES CHARGED FOR CREDIT CARD PAYMENTS AND RETURNED CHECKS.
   (A)   Any credit card payment accepted by the village shall be charged a
convenience fee in the amount of 3.5% of the amount being charged.
   (B)   Any check made payable to the village that is returned unpaid shall be
charged a fee of $35.
(Ord. O-23-19, passed 11-11-2019)
CHAPTER 31: EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY
Section
General Provisions
   
31.001   Executive power; where vested
   
31.002   Salary and bond
   
31.003   Uniforms
   
31.004   Residency requirements for Police Chief
   
31.005   Mutual aid agreements
Mayor
   
31.020   Term of Mayor; power and duties
   
31.021   General duties of the Mayor
   
31.022   Communications to the legislative authority
   
31.023   Protest against excess of expenditures
   
31.024   Supervision of conduct of officers
   
31.025   Annual report to the legislative authority
   
31.026   Mayor to file charges against delinquent officers
   
31.027   Vacancies in office of the Mayor
   
31.028   Privacy act duties
   
31.029   Civil emergencies
   
31.030   Mayor’s spending authority
Village Fiscal Officer
   
31.040   Creation of position
   
31.041   Powers and duties of Village Fiscal Officer
   
31.042   Accounts of Village Fiscal Officer
   
31.043   Quarterly account; annual report
   
31.044   Receipt and disbursement of funds
   
31.045   Duty of delivering money and property
   
31.046   Eligibility requirements
   
31.047   Removal of Village Fiscal Officer
   
31.048   Assistants
   
31.049   Effective date
Street Commissioner
   
31.060   Qualifications
   
31.061   General duties
   
31.062   Assistants
Other Officials
   
31.075   Legal counsel
   
31.076   Administrator
   
31.077   Building Commissioner
   
31.078   Zoning Official
   
31.079   Village Engineer
Cross-reference:
   Fire Chief, see §
35.02
   Fire Prevention Officer, see §
35.02
   Offenses against public peace, see
Ch. 132
   Swimming Pool Manager, see §
95.30
Statutory reference:
   Council, see R.C. §§ 731.09 through 731.13, 731.43 through 731.47, and
731.48
   Mayor, see R.C. §§ 733.24, 733.30, 733.32 through 733.35, and 733.41
   Mayor’s Court, see R.C. Ch. 1905
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.001 EXECUTIVE POWER; WHERE VESTED.
   The executive power and authority of the municipality shall be vested in the
Mayor, Village Fiscal Officer, Marshal, Street Commissioner, and such other
officers and departments as are created by law.
(R.C. § 733.23) (2000 Code, § 31.01)
§ 31.002 SALARY AND BOND.
   (A)   The salary to be paid and the bond required of the Mayor, the Village
Fiscal Officer, and each Council Member shall be established by Council.
(1967 Code, § 32.01)
   (B)   (1)   The salary to be paid and bond required of all village employees
shall be established by Council. Salary and bond provisions in effect as of the
adoption of this code shall remain in effect until modified or terminated.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall apply to the compensation of
volunteer firefighters.
(1967 Code, § 33.10)
(Ord. O-15-63, passed 10-28-1963; Ord. O-4-04, passed 2-9-2004)
§ 31.003 UNIFORMS.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to furnish a complete uniform for each person
employed for Police and Fire Department service and the full-time maintenance
employees when necessary. The uniforms shall at all times be the property of
the village.
   (B)   When a new person is employed, the person shall be fitted, if
possible, with uniforms owned by the village. When it is impossible to fit the
person as herein provided, the Mayor is authorized to purchase additional units
of uniform necessary to furnish the new person with a complete uniform.
   (C)   The Mayor is authorized to replace such items of uniform for all
police officers and firefighters when replacement is necessary by reason of
wear or accident.
   (D)   The provisions above shall apply only after the expiration of the
probationary period unless there are not enough items of uniform to outfit a
person from the village wardrobe.
   (E)   For the purposes of this section, a complete uniform shall consist of:
      (1)   Police officers:
         (a)   Protective body armor;
         (b)   One leather gun belt;
         (c)   One Sig Sauer .45 auto weapon;
         (d)   One leather holster;
         (e)   Two extra magazines;
         (f)   One leather magazine case;
         (g)   One can of chemical mace;
         (h)   One mace case;
         (i)   One set of handcuffs;
         (j)   One cuff holder;
         (k)   Four leather belt keepers;
         (1)   One pair of leather gloves;
         (m)   Five S/S shirts;
         (n)   Five L/S shirts;
         (o)   Four pairs of pants;
         (p)   One all-weather jacket;
         (q)   One summer hat;
         (r)   One winter hat;
         (s)   One hat badge;
         (t)   Two black clip-on ties;
         (u)   One rain coat;
         (v)   One pair of shoes/boots;
         (w)   One belt;
         (x)   Two badges; and
         (y)   One dress blouse (Chief and Lieutenant. only).
      (2)   Police Clerk:
         (a)   Four pairs of pants and/or skirts;
         (b)   Five shirts/blouses;
         (c)   One pair of shoes;
         (d)   One jacket; and
         (e)   One belt.
      (3)   Bike patrol unit:
         (a)   Two bike shirts;
         (b)   Two pairs of bike shorts;
         (c)   One pair compression shorts;
         (d)   One pair of shoes;
         (e)   One helmet; and
         (f)   One pair of gloves.
      (4)   Firefighters:
         (a)   Two pairs of trousers;
         (b)   One blouse (uniform);
         (c)   One car duty jacket;
         (d)   Dress caps, one winter and one summer;
         (e)   One car duty cap;
         (f)   Six shirts;
         (g)   Two black ties;
         (h)   One raincoat;
         (i)   Two pair boots;
         (j)   One light duty jacket;
         (k)   One pair coveralls;
         (1)   Collar and lapel brass; and
         (m)   One belt and one pair of shoes per year, if the Department head
determines that they are necessary.
      (5)   Crossing guards:
         (a)   Two skirts;
         (b)   Three shirts;
         (c)   Two pairs of pants;
         (d)   One winter jacket;
         (e)   One pair of gloves;
         (f)   One cap;
         (g)   One raincoat;
         (h)   One pair of shoes; and
         (i)   One reflective vest.
      (6)   Maintenance employees:
         (a)   Three pairs of trousers;
         (b)   Three summer shirts; and
         (c)   Three winter shirts.
(1967 Code, § 33.11) (Ord. O-16-73, passed 11-26-1973; Ord. O-16-75, passed 8-
25-1975; Ord. O-16-77, passed 7-25-1977; Ord. O-17-79, passed 12-10-1979; Ord.
O-41-93, passed 11-22-1993)
§ 31.004 RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS FOR POLICE CHIEF.
   The Police Chief need not be an elector of the village or reside in the
village unless the legislative authority would otherwise by ordinance so
decree.
(2000 Code, § 31.04) (Ord. O-27-81, passed 12-14-1981; Ord. O-22-99, passed 11-
8-1999; Ord. O-15-21, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 31.005 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The Mayor and Village Fiscal Officer are hereby authorized to sign the
mutual aid agreement for law enforcement for the village and the village will
perform pursuant to the agreement and will receive the benefits of the
agreement. The mutual aid agreement for law enforcement is incorporated by
reference as if fully set out herein.
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor and Village Fiscal Officer are hereby authorized to
enter into a new mutual aid agreement for law enforcement for the village and
that the village will perform pursuant to the agreement and will receive the
benefits of the new agreement which is attached hereto as Exhibit A and is
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.
      (2)   This division (B) shall go into effect at the earliest date allowed
by law.
(2000 Code, § 37.20) (Ord. O-11-83, passed 3-28-1983; Ord. O-6-92, passed 1-27-
1992; Ord. O-9-96, passed 6-10-1996; Ord. O-26-13, passed 11-25-2013)
MAYOR
§ 31.020 TERM OF MAYOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be elected for a term of four years commencing on the
first day of January next after his or her election.
   (B)   He or she shall be an elector of the municipality, and shall have
resided in the municipality for at least one year immediately preceding his or
her election. He or she shall be the chief conservator of the peace within the
municipality, and shall have the powers and duties provided by law.
   (C)   He or she shall be the President of the legislative authority, and
shall preside at all regular and special meetings thereof, but shall have no
vote except in case of a tie.
(R.C. § 733.24) (2000 Code, § 31.10)
§ 31.021 GENERAL DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor shall perform all the duties prescribed by the by-laws and
ordinances of the municipality. He or she shall see that all ordinances, by-
laws, and resolutions of the legislative authority are faithfully obeyed and
enforced.
   (B)   He or she shall sign all commissions, licenses, and permits granted by
the legislative authority, or authorized by Title VII of the Revised Code, and
such other instruments as by law or ordinance require his or her certificate.
(R.C. § 733.30) (2000 Code, § 31.11)
§ 31.022 COMMUNICATIONS TO THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor shall communicate to the legislative authority from time to time a
statement of the finances of the municipality, and other information relating
thereto, and the general condition of the affairs of the municipality as he or
she deems proper, or as is required by the legislative authority.
(R.C. § 733.32) (2000 Code, § 31.12)
§ 31.023 PROTEST AGAINST EXCESS OF EXPENDITURES.
   If, in the opinion of the Mayor, an expenditure authorized by the
legislative authority exceeds the revenues of the municipality for the current
year, he or she shall protest against the expenditure and enter the protest,
and the reason therefor, on the journal of the legislative authority.
(R.C. § 733.33) (2000 Code, § 31.13)
§ 31.024 SUPERVISION OF CONDUCT OF OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall supervise the conduct of all the officers of the
municipality, inquire into and examine the grounds of all reasonable complaints
against any officers, and cause their violations or neglect of duty to be
punished promptly or reported to the proper authority for correction.
(R.C. § 733.34) (2000 Code, § 31.14)
§ 31.025 ANNUAL REPORT TO THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   At the first regular meeting in January of each year, and at other times as
the Mayor deems expedient, he or she shall report to the legislative authority
concerning the affairs of the municipality, and recommend such measures as seem
proper to him or her.
(R.C. § 733.41) (2000 Code, § 31.15)
§ 31.026 MAYOR TO FILE CHARGES AGAINST DELINQUENT OFFICERS.
   (A)   Generally. The Mayor shall have general supervision over each
department and the officers provided for in Title VII of the Ohio Revised Code.
When the Mayor has reason to believe that the head of a department or an
officer has been guilty, in the performance of his or her official duty, of
bribery, misfeasance, malfeasance, nonfeasance, misconduct in office, gross
neglect of duty, gross immorality, or habitual drunkenness, he or she shall
immediately file with the legislative authority, except when the removal of the
head of the department or officer is otherwise provided for, written charges
against the person, setting forth in detail a statement of alleged guilt, and,
at the same time, or as soon thereafter as possible, serve a true copy of the
charges upon the person against whom they are made. Service may be made on the
person or by leaving a copy of the charges at the office of the person. Return
thereof shall be made to the legislative authority, as is provided for the
return of the service of summons in a civil action.
(R.C. § 733.35)
   (B)   Hearing of charges; action of the legislative authority. Charges filed
with the legislative authority under division (A) above shall be heard at the
next regular meeting thereof, unless the legislative authority extends the time
for the hearing, which shall be done only on the application of the accused.
The accused may appear in person and by counsel, examine all witnesses, and
answer all charges against him or her. The judgment or action of the
legislative authority shall be final, but to remove the officer the votes of
two-thirds of all members elected thereto shall be required.
(R.C. § 733.36)
   (C)   Suspension of accused pending hearing. Pending any proceedings under
divisions (A) and (B) above, an accused person may be suspended by a majority
vote of all members elected to the legislative authority, but the suspension
shall not be for a longer period than 15 days, unless the hearing of the
charges is extended upon the application of the accused, in which event the
suspension shall not exceed 30 days.
(R.C. § 733.37)
   (D)   Power of the legislative authority as to process. For the purpose of
investigating charges filed pursuant to division (A) above against the head of
any department or officer, the legislative authority may issue subpoenas or
compulsory process to compel the attendance of persons and the production of
books and papers before it, and the legislative authority may provide by
ordinance for exercising and enforcing this section.
(R.C. § 733.38)
   (E)   Oaths; compulsory testimony; costs.
      (1)   In all cases in which the attendance of witnesses may be compelled
for an investigation under division (D) above, any member of the legislative
authority may administer the requisite oaths, and the legislative authority has
the same power to compel the giving of testimony by attending witnesses as is
conferred upon courts. In all these cases, witnesses shall be entitled to the
same privileges and immunities as are allowed witnesses in civil cases.
      (2)   Witnesses shall be paid the same fees and mileage provided for
under R.C. § 1901.26, and the costs of all such proceedings shall be payable
from the General Fund of the municipality.
(R.C. § 733.39)
(2000 Code, § 31.16)
§ 31.027 VACANCIES IN OFFICE OF THE MAYOR.
   (A)   When the Mayor is absent from the municipality, or is unable for any
cause to perform his or her duties, the President Pro Tem of the legislative
authority shall be acting Mayor.
   (B)   In case of the death, resignation, or removal of the Mayor, such
President Pro Tem shall become the Mayor and shall hold office until his or her
successor is elected and qualified.
   (C)   Such successor shall be elected to the office for the unexpired term
at the first regular municipal election that occurs more than 40 days after the
vacancy has occurred, except that when the unexpired term ends within one year
immediately following the date of such election, an election to fill such
unexpired term shall not be held and the President of the legislative authority
shall hold the office for such unexpired term.
(R.C. § 733.25) (2000 Code, § 31.17)
§ 31.028 PRIVACY ACT DUTIES.
   The Mayor is designated as the person to be responsible for the
administration of R.C. Ch. 1347.
(1967 Code, § 32.05) (Ord. O-2-77, passed 1-3-1977)
§ 31.029 CIVIL EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Whenever in his of her judgment the Mayor determines that an emergency
exists as a result of any natural disaster or human-made calamity, or clear and
present danger thereof, or riot, insurrection, mob action, or other civil
disturbance causing danger of injury to or damages to persons or property, the
Mayor shall have power to impose by proclamation any or all of the following
regulations necessary to restore the peace and order of the village:
      (1)   Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or
congregate on the public highways or public sidewalks or any outdoor place, or
in any theater, restaurant, place of public assembly, or commercial
establishment to which the public has access;
      (2)   Restrict or prohibit movement within, above, or beneath the area or
areas which, in his or her judgment, are imperiled by the public danger or
emergency;
      (3)   Establish a curfew during those hours of the day or night as he or
she deems advisable and prohibit persons from being out of doors during the
curfew;
      (4)   Prohibit or restrict the carrying or possession on the public
streets or public sidewalks or in any public park or square or any other public
place a weapon or any object intended to be used as a weapon, including, but
not limited to, firearms, bows and arrows, air rifles, sling shots, knives,
razors, broken bottles, fire bombs, missiles of any kind, clubs, blackjacks,
billies, chains, or similar items;
      (5)   Prohibit or restrict the retail sale, distribution, dispensing, or
giving away of acids, caustics, or any chemicals or other substances capable of
being used singly or in combination to cause injury or damage to persons or
property;
      (6)   Call on regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the village to assist in preserving and keeping
the peace within the village; or
      (7)   Prohibit the sale of beer, wine, and intoxicating liquor.
(1967 Code, § 136.16)
   (B)   When the Mayor determines that an emergency exists, the Mayor shall
forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of the same and the time of its
inception, and shall issue a proclamation thereof, to the public, through the
news media, and such other means of dissemination as he or she deems advisable.
(1967 Code, § 136.17)
   (C)   Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this
section shall terminate after 72 hours of the issuance thereof or on the
issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists, whichever
occurs first; provided, that such emergency may be extended for additional
periods of time as determined necessary by the Council.
(1967 Code, § 136.18)
   (D)   (1)   The powers conferred by divisions (A) through (C) above, are in
addition to any other power which may be conferred by federal law or state
statute or village ordinance, and nothing in this section shall be construed to
modify or limit any authority, powers, duties, and responsibilities of any
officer or public official as may be provided by law.
      (2)   Nothing in divisions (A) through (C) above, shall be construed to
permit suspension of the privilege to a writ of habeas corpus.
(1967 Code, § 136.19)
   (E)   (1)   No person shall violate any prohibition contained in, or
knowingly fail to perform any duty required by, a proclamation, order, or
regulation issued and in effect pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(1967 Code, § 136.99(B))
(Ord. O-11-70, passed 5-25-1970) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Misconduct at an emergency, see §
132.06
Statutory reference:
   Emergency management and civil defense agencies, see R.C. Ch. 5502
   Local emergency management organizations, see O.A.C. 4501:3-3-01
§ 31.030 MAYOR’S SPENDING AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor shall have the ability to enter into contracts not in excess of
$5,000 and to incur expenditures for the benefit of the village for amounts not
to exceed $5,000 without the approval of Council. Any expenditures in excess of
said amount shall require legislative approval.
(Ord. O-18-18, passed 6-25-2018)
VILLAGE FISCAL OFFICER
§ 31.040 CREATION OF POSITION.
   The village hereby establishes the position of Village Fiscal Officer. Said
position shall be appointed by the Mayor of the village, but said appointment
does not become effective until it is approved by a majority vote of the
village legislative authority.
(Ord. O-4-14, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 31.041 POWERS AND DUTIES OF VILLAGE FISCAL OFFICER.
   (A)   (1)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall attend all meetings of the
legislative authority and keep a record of its proceedings and of all rules,
by-laws, resolutions, and ordinances passed or adopted, which shall be subject
to the inspection of all persons interested.
      (2)   In case of the absence of the Village Fiscal Officer, the
legislative authority shall appoint one of its members to perform his or her
duties.
   (B)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall attend training programs for Clerks,
Treasurers, and Village Fiscal Officers as may be provided by the Auditor of
the state pursuant to R.C. § 117.44.
   (C)   (1)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall demand and receive from the
County Treasurer taxes levied and assessments made and certified to the County
Auditor by the legislative authority, and placed on the tax list by the Auditor
for collection, monies from persons authorized to collect or required to pay
them, accruing to the municipality from any judgments, fines, penalties,
forfeitures, licenses, and costs taxed in Mayor's Court, and debts due the
municipality.
      (2)   These funds shall be disbursed by the Village Fiscal Officer on the
order of any person authorized by law or ordinance to issue orders therefor.
   (D)   (1)   Meeting with the village's independent auditors before and after
each audit;
      (2)   Monitoring the progress of the financial and compliance audit;
      (3)   Evaluating the results of the financial and compliance audit; and
      (4)   Ensuring that the internal control and legal compliance issues
identified in the audit are promptly and effectively remedied.
      (5)   Providing Council with the final audit report, along with a report
from the Fiscal Officer explaining what steps are being implemented to remedy
any issues identified in the audit.
(Ord. O-4-14, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 31.042 ACCOUNTS OF VILLAGE FISCAL OFFICER.
   (A)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall keep the books of the municipality,
exhibit accurate statements of all monies received and expended, of all of the
property owned by the municipality, and the income derived therefrom, and of
all taxes and assessments.
   (B)   (1)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall keep accurate account of:
         (a)   All monies received by him or her, showing the amount thereof,
the time received, from whom, and of what account received; and
         (b)   All disbursements made by him or her, showing the amount
thereof, the time made, to whom, and on what account paid.
      (2)   (a)   He or she shall so arrange his or her books so that the
amount received and paid on account of separate funds, or specified
appropriations, shall be exhibited in separate accounts.
         (b)   In addition to the ordinary duties of the Village Fiscal
Officer, he or she shall have such powers and perform such duties as are
required by any .ordinance of the municipality, not inconsistent with R.C.
Title VII and not incompatible with the nature of the office.
(Ord. O-4-14, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 31.043 QUARTERLY ACCOUNT: ANNUAL REPORT.
   (A)   The Village Fiscal Officer shall settle an account with the
legislative authority at least quarterly and at any other time which it by
resolution or ordinance requires.
   (B)   (1)   At the first regular meeting of the legislative authority in
January of each year, the Village Fiscal Officer shall report to it the
condition of the finances of the municipality the amount received by the
Village Fiscal Officer, the sources of the receipts, the disbursements made by
him or her, and on what account during the year preceding.
      (2)   This account shall exhibit the balance due on each fund which has
come into the Village Fiscal Officer's hands during the year.
(Ord. O-4-14, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 31.044 RECEIPT AND DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   The Village Fiscal Officer shall receive and disburse all funds of the
municipality and such other funds as arise in or belong to any department or
part of the municipality.
(Ord. O-4-14, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 31.045 DUTY OF DELIVERING MONEY AND PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Village Fiscal Officer, at the expiration of his or her term of
office, or on his other resignation or removal, shall deliver to his or her
successor, all monies, books, papers, and other property in his or her
possession as Village Fiscal Officer.
   (B)   In the case of the death or incapacity of the Village Fiscal Officer
or his or her legal representatives, he or she shall, in like manner, deliver
the money and property which were in the Village Fiscal Officer's hands to the
person entitled thereto.
(Ord. O-4-14, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 31.046 ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS.
   The Village Fiscal Officer need not be an elector of the village or reside
in the village unless the legislative authority would otherwise by ordinance so
decree.
(Ord. O-4-14, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 31.047 REMOVAL OF VILLAGE FISCAL OFFICER.
   The Village Fiscal Officer may be removed without cause either by the Mayor
with the consent of a majority of the members of the village legislative
authority or by a three-fourth vote of the village legislative authority with
or without the consent of the Mayor.
(Ord. O-4-14, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 31.048 ASSISTANTS.
   The Mayor may, with the advice and consent of the Mayor and Council, have an
assistant to assist the Village Fiscal Officer in the performance of his or her
various duties. Any salary paid to the Village Fiscal Officer and his or her
assistant shall be determined in accordance with the terms of the village’s
salary ordinance.
(Ord. O-4-14, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-2021)
§ 31.049 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect at the earliest date allowed by law.
(Ord. O-4-14, passed 2-10-2014; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-2021)
STREET COMMISSIONER
§ 31.060 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   So long as the municipality has not provided for the appointment of an
Administrator under R.C. § 735.271 or a substantially similar municipal
ordinance, a Street Commissioner shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed
by the legislative authority for a term of one year. He or she need not be an
elector of the village or reside in the village unless the legislative
authority would otherwise by ordinance so agree. Vacancies in the office of
Street Commissioner shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term.
   (B)   The appointment of a Street Commissioner shall include a probationary
period of six months. If an appointment is made for an unexpired term, and if
the same Street Commissioner is reappointed at the end of that term, the
probationary period shall continue into his or her next term. No appointment is
final until the appointee has satisfactorily completed his or her probationary
period. If the service of the appointee is unsatisfactory during the
probationary period, he or she may be removed by the Mayor and the reasons for
the removal shall be communicated to the legislative authority. If a person is
appointed to successive terms as Street Commissioner, he or she shall serve
only one six-month probationary period during those successive terms.
   (C)   The Marshal shall be eligible to appointment as Street Commissioner.
(R.C. § 735.31) (2000 Code, § 31.50) (Ord. O-16-21, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 31.061 GENERAL DUTIES.
   Under the direction of the Mayor or other chief executive officer, the
Street Commissioner, or an engineer, when one is provided by the legislative
authority, shall supervise the improvement and repair of streets, avenues,
alleys, lands, lanes, squares, wards, landings, market houses, bridges,
viaducts, sidewalks, sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, ship channels, streams,
and water courses. The Street Commissioner or engineer shall also supervise the
lighting, sprinkling, and cleaning of all public places, and shall perform such
other duties, consistent with the nature of his or her office, as the Mayor or
other chief executive officer requires.
(R.C. § 735.32) (2000 Code, § 31.51)
§ 31.062 ASSISTANTS.
   The Street Commissioner or engineer mentioned in this subchapter shall have
such assistants as the legislative authority provides, who shall be employed by
the Street Commissioner, and serve for such time and compensation as is fixed
by the legislative authority.
(R.C. § 735.33) (2000 Code, § 31.52)
OTHER OFFICIALS
§ 31.075 LEGAL COUNSEL.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, when it considers it
necessary, the legislative authority may provide legal counsel for the
municipality, or for any department or official of the municipality, for a
period not to exceed two years and shall provide compensation for the legal
counsel.
(R.C. § 733.48)
   (B)   The legal counsel shall be known as the Village Attorney, shall be an
attorney at law and shall be admitted to practice in the courts of the state.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Attorney to provide all legal services and
advice, including preparation and presentation of ordinances and resolutions as
requested by Council and officers of the village while acting in their official
capacity, to serve as prosecutor for Mayor’s Court, and provide such legal
services and advice as required by the state statutes regarding the position.
   (D)   Consideration for additional compensation shall be given by the
Village Finance Committee with approval of Village Council for the following
services on an individual basis: bond issuance or tax assessment proceedings;
and services rendered in court action regarding village liability.
(1967 Code, § 32.02) (Ord. O-2-76, passed 1-12-1976; Ord. O-13-19, passed 4-22-
2019)
§ 31.076 ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Appointment powers, term, and removal. The legislative authority may
establish the position of Administrator by ordinance. The Administrator
established under this section shall have those powers provided by division (B)
below. The Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor, but shall not take
office unless his or her appointment has been approved by a majority vote of
the members elected to the legislative authority. The Administrator need not be
an elector of the village or reside in the village unless the legislative
authority would otherwise by ordinance so decree. The Administrator shall not
be an elected official of the municipality at the time of his or her
appointment or during his or her tenure in office. The Administrator shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and the legislative authority and may be
removed without cause by the Mayor with the consent of a majority of the
members elected to the legislative authority, or he or she may be removed
without cause by the affirmative vote of three-fourths of the members elected
to the legislative authority, without the consent of the Mayor. The legislative
authority may abolish the position of Administrator by ordinance.
   (B)   Powers and duties of the Administrator.
      (1)   The Administrator shall manage, conduct, and control the water
works, electric light plants, artificial or natural gas plants, or other
similar public utilities, furnish supplies of water, electricity, or gas, and
collect all water, electric, and gas rents.
      (2)   The Administrator may make such by-laws and regulations as he or
she deems necessary for the safe, economical, and efficient management and
protection of such works, plants, and public utilities. Such by-laws and
regulations, when not repugnant to municipal ordinances and resolutions or to
the State Constitution, shall have the same validity of ordinances.
      (3)   The rates for service and charges for municipally-owned utilities
shall be determined by the legislative authority.
      (4)   The Administrator shall have the same powers or perform the same
duties as are provided in R.C. §§ 743.05 to 743.07, 743.10, 743.11, 743.18, and
743.24, and all the powers and duties relating to water works in any such
sections shall extend to and include electric light, power, gas plants, and
other similar public utilities.
      (5)   The Administrator shall supervise the improvement and repair of
streets, avenues, alleys, lands, lanes, squares, landings, market houses,
bridges, viaducts, sidewalks, sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, streams, and
water courses as well as lighting, sprinkling, and cleaning of all streets,
alleys, and public buildings and places.
      (6)   The Administrator shall appoint officers, employees, agents,
clerks, and assistants, provided such positions are first authorized by the
legislative authority, but such appointments shall be subject to approval by
the Mayor. Such appointments and the Mayor’s approval shall be in writing, and
shall be filed with the Village Fiscal Officer.
      (7)   The Administrator shall be under the general supervision and
control of the Mayor, and shall have such other powers and duties as are
prescribed by ordinance or by law and which are not inconsistent herewith. The
Administrator shall perform all duties and shall have all powers of Boards of
Public Affairs and Street Commissioners as prescribed by law, except as
otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 735.271 and 735.272.
(R.C. § 735.273) (2000 Code, § 31.61) (Ord. O-14-21, passed 3-8-2021)
Cross-reference:
   Administrator, contracting and central purchasing, see §
32.25(B)
§ 31.077 BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint a Building Commissioner, subject to
confirmation of Council. The Building Commissioner shall be subject to removal
at any time by the Mayor. Appointment shall be for a two-year period.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall have charge of all buildings, and
buildings under construction, to be inspected. He or she shall pass on all
questions arising under the Building Code, the enforcement of which he or she
is charged with, and the village laws and ordinances relating to the same
subject matter. He or she shall be a practical builder with at least ten years
experience, a registered professional engineer, or a registered professional
architect of the state. In the absence of the Building Commission, an assistant
may be appointed by the Mayor, who shall perform all duties of the Building
Commissioner which are detailed as follows.
      (1)   General. The Building Commissioner shall be charged with the
inspection of buildings, enforcement of the Building Code, and all laws and
ordinances relating to the erection, construction, alteration, additions to,
repair of, inspection, wrecking, razing, moving, and safety of buildings,
structures, signs, elevators, boilers, heating and ventilating apparatus, gas
fittings, house drainage and plumbing, electric wiring, fire escapes, and other
protective devices; shall pass on all questions relating to the strength and
durability of buildings, structures, and materials; shall examine and approve
all plans and specifications therefor before a permit shall be issued, and
shall promptly acknowledge receipt of all official communications, notices, and
reports. In addition, he or she shall have the duties of inspection of sewers
and drains, of the investigation of stoppages and complaints, and other matters
in connection with the sewerage and drainage that may be brought to his
attention; of the issuance of permits for, and the inspection of, sidewalk
construction, reconstruction, and repairs; of the investigation of complaints
of defective conditions in sidewalks and other work in connection with, or
related to, all of the aforesaid categories assigned to the Building
Commissioner by the Council or the Mayor.
      (2)   Authority. The Building Commissioner shall have the authority to
inspect any building or structure in the village for purposes as set forth in
this section and no person shall hinder or prevent him or her from so doing. In
the event permission is denied to conduct a search of rental property, the
Building Commissioner shall have the authority to obtain a warrant from a court
of proper jurisdiction to conduct said search.
      (3)   Precautionary measures. Whenever the Building Commissioner finds
any structure in an unsafe or unsanitary condition endangering life or
property, and the condition could be averted by immediate precautionary
measures, he or she shall have the authority to and shall notify the property
owner to take precautionary measures as necessary to place the structure in a
safe and sanitary condition. The notice shall state the nature of the work
required to be done and when it shall be completed by the owner of the
structure notified.
      (4)   Condemnation.
         (a)   The Building Commissioner shall have the authority, when unable
to locate the owner in person or by letter, to post the following notice on the
building: “This structure is in a dangerous condition. It has been condemned by
the Building Commissioner and must be wrecked or repaired”.
         (b)   No person shall remove the notice without the permission of the
Building Commissioner. In case the owner refuses to comply, it shall be
unlawful for anyone to occupy or use that structure.
      (5)   Assistants. Whenever necessary, the Building Commissioner shall
have the right to take with him or her, or appoint, assistants necessary for
the performance of his or her duties.
      (6)   Immediate action. In any case when the public safety requires
immediate action, the Building Commissioner may enter on the premises, and
cause to be made or make any structure safe, secure, and sanitary without delay
and the public protected at the expense of the property owner.
      (7)   Keep records. The Building Commissioner shall keep proper records
and make a monthly report to the Village Fiscal Officer of all income received
during the preceding month accompanied by the cash collected, make monthly
reports to the Council, County Auditor, Regional Planning Commission, and the
Village Planning Commission of the number of permits issued during the
preceding month and the charges therefor, the estimated value of the
construction of those buildings, structures, or work for which the permits were
issued, including number of family units, number of inspections and charges
therefor, and any further information that may be required.
      (8)   Responsibility. No oversight or dereliction on the part of the
Building Commissioner shall legalize the violation of any part of the Building
Code.
         (a)   No one shall use any materials, devices, or appliances not in
accordance with the Building Code provisions or the approval of the Building
Commissioner.
         (b)   The Building Commissioner shall have the right to verify and
correct the estimated cost of any proposed improvement and any other
information required to be given, as provided for in the Building Code.
         (c)   The Building Commissioner may adopt rules, including but not
limited to such rules as may be deemed necessary to maintain the historic and
aesthetic character of the village in accordance with Title XV, which, when
approved by Council, shall have the force and effect of ordinances. Until other
rules have been adopted and approved by Council, the recommended provisions of
various approved technical organizations, with exceptions and additions as
specified in the Building Code, shall be considered the rules applicable and
shall have the force and effect of ordinances, except when the rules are
nonconforming with other Building Code Provisions. The Building Commissioner
shall keep at least two copies of all rules in his office for public reference.
         (d)   Any officer or employee charged with Building Code enforcement,
acting for the village, in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not be
personally liable and is relieved from all personal liability for any damage
that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of duties. Any suit brought against any officer or
employee because of an act performed by him or her in the enforcement of any
provision of the Building Code, shall be defended by the Village Attorney until
the final termination of the proceedings therein.
         (e)   The rate of pay for the Village Building Commissioner shall be
established by Council.
(1967 Code, § 33.01) (Ord. O-15-63, passed 10-28-1963; Ord. O-6-05, passed 4-
25-2005; Ord. O-14-16, passed 7-18-2016; Ord. O-17-17, passed 10-9-2017; Ord.
O-21-20, passed 11-23-2020)
Cross-reference:
   Building code, see
Ch. 150
§ 31.078 ZONING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The position of Zoning Official is hereby created. The Zoning Official
shall be a contractor to the village and shall work on an as-needed basis as
requested by the Mayor, Village Administrator, or their designee, or as
required by law.
   (B)   The Zoning Official is hereby designated as the official responsible
for carrying out duties, powers, and responsibilities designated to the
Building Commissioner in the Mariemont Code Book, as well as such other matters
necessary to enforce the Zoning Code.
   (C)   The Mayor shall appoint the Zoning Official with the consent of
Council. The Zoning Official may be removed by Council. To fill a vacancy in
the position, including as to the appointment of the initial Zoning Official,
the Mayor may appoint an interim Zoning Official, subject to confirmation of
Council, until such time as a permanent Zoning Official can be appointed.
   (D)   Compensation for the Zoning Official shall be at the rate of $20 per
hour, payable bi-weekly. Any changes to this pay will require the approval of
Council.
(Ord. O-23-21, passed 6-14-2021)
§ 31.079 VILLAGE ENGINEER.
   (A)   There is created the position of Village Engineer, to be filled by
appointment of a suitable person who shall be a registered professional
engineer, licensed to practice in the state, and shall have experience in the
design and construction of public works and municipal facilities.
   (B)   The Village Engineer shall, on request, attend meetings of Council or
meetings of any committees thereof for consultation and advice. At the request
of the Mayor, Building Commissioner, or Council, he or she shall make a cursory
examination and report of the condition of any streets, sidewalks, buildings,
or any other property owned by or under the control of the village; make
recommendations as to necessary or desirable tests, explorations, surveys,
repairs, or replacements. It is anticipated that work under this division (B)
will require an average of five hours per month for the entire year. For the
aforementioned services the compensation range shall be established from time
to time by Council.
   (C)   In addition to the compensation mentioned in division (B) above, the
Village Engineer shall be paid for the performance of all additional duties
including, but not limited to, those described below; and compensation shall
also be paid to firms or individuals assisting the Village Engineer with his or
her services as described below.
   (D)   When directed by the Council, the Village Engineer shall select
projects or streets for public works projects based on budget recommendations
from Council committees; prepare reports or studies other than described under
division (B) above; direct or assist in consultant selection process; direct
consultant services; prepare plans and specifications, detailed cost estimates,
review bids; recommend awarding public works contracts; review plans or reports
prepared by others; prepare line and grade surveys, construction management for
street, sidewalk, utility and other public works projects; prepare funding
applications; represent the village in meetings or correspond with city,
county, and state officials or citizen groups; and assist in preparing
agreements. The Village Engineer shall be compensated as established by Council
from time to time.
   (E)   The Mayor shall, upon the recommendation of the Village Engineer,
appoint necessary assistants and fix the amount of their compensation at such
times as the services of assistants appear to be necessary or advisable.
   (F)   The Village Engineer may serve as an agent of the village in the
selection and procurement of technical engineering services as required on a
per project basis, subject to the approval of Council prior to the performance
of such services.
   (G)   In the event of a conflict between the interests of the village and
those of other employers of the Village Engineer, with respect to any village
work requiring engineering or surveying services, the Council may employ an
engineer or surveyor other than the Village Engineer to perform such services.
(1967 Code, § 33.03) (Ord. O-14-80, passed 4-14-1980; Ord. O-42-83, passed 11-
28-1983; Ord. O-24-85, passed 12-9-1985; Ord. O-26-87, passed 12-14-1987)
CHAPTER 32: LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   Members of the legislative authority; election; terms of office
   
32.02   President Pro Tempore; employees
   
32.03   Vacancy when President Pro Tempore becomes Mayor
   
32.04   Qualifications of members of the legislative authority
   
32.05   Compensation and bonds of municipal officers and employees
   
32.06   Vacancy
   
32.07   Judge of election and qualification of members; quorum and special
meetings
   
32.08   Rules; journal; expulsion of members
   
32.09   Meetings
   
32.10   General powers
   
32.11   Failure to take oath or give bond
   
32.12   Notice when new bond required
   
32.13   Rules of Council
Contracts, Bids and Proceedings
   
32.25   Contracts by the legislative authority or Administrator
   
32.26   Bids and proceedings
   
32.27   Alterations or modifications of contract
   
32.28   Contract restrictions
   
32.29   Award to lowest responsive and responsible bidder
Statutory reference:
Initiative and referendum, see R.C. §§ 731.28 et seq.
Ordinances and resolutions, adoption and publication, see R.C. §§ 731.17
through 731.27
Village accounting and financial reporting, State Auditor administrative
regulations, see O.A.C. Ch. 117-9
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY; ELECTION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) or (C) below, the
legislative power of each municipality shall be vested in, and exercised by, a
legislative authority, composed of six members, who shall be elected by the
electors of the municipality at large, for terms of four years.
   (B)   The legislative authority may adopt an ordinance or resolution that,
if approved by a majority of the electors voting on the issue, would reduce the
number of members of the legislative authority to five. A certified copy of the
ordinance or resolution shall be filed with the Board of Elections no later
than 4:00 p.m. of the ninetieth day before the day of the next election at
which members of the legislative authority are to be elected.
   (C)   The electors may propose a reduction in the number of members of the
legislative authority from six to five by initiative petition in accordance
with the procedure set forth in R.C. § 731.28.
   (D)   (1)   If a majority of the votes cast on the question proposed under
divisions (B) or (C) above is in the affirmative, the legislative authority
shall be composed of five members, who shall be elected at large, for terms of
four years.
      (2)   If members of the legislative authority have staggered terms of
office as required by this section, the decrease in number of members shall be
implemented as necessary over the next two municipal elections at which members
of the legislative authority would be elected.
      (3)   If the legislative authority has adopted an ordinance or resolution
to eliminate staggered terms of office under division (E) below, the five
members shall be elected as set forth in division (E)(2)(b) below.
(R.C. § 731.09)
   (E)   (1)   The legislative authority may, by the adoption of an ordinance
or resolution to eliminate staggered terms of office, determine that all
members of the legislative authority shall be elected at the same municipal
election as provided for in this section.
      (2)   At the regular municipal election occurring not less than 90 days
after the certification of the ordinance or resolution to the Board of
Elections eliminating staggered terms of office, the following apply.
         (a)   If there are six members of the legislative authority, the
number of members eligible for election at that regular municipal election
shall be elected to two-year non-staggered terms, and all members of the
legislative authority shall be elected to four-year non-staggered terms at all
following municipal elections.
         (b)   If there are five members of the legislative authority, a number
of members that is one less than the number of members that would otherwise be
eligible for election at that regular municipal election but for the first-time
implementation of the new membership of five, or, in the case of a village that
has previously reduced its number of members to five, then the number of
members eligible for election at that regular municipal election shall be
elected to two-year non-staggered terms, and all members shall be elected to
four-year non-staggered terms at all following municipal elections.
(R.C. § 731.091)
(2000 Code, § 32.01)
§ 32.02 PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE; EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   At the first meeting in January of each year, the legislative
authority shall immediately proceed to elect a President Pro Tem from its own
number, who shall serve until the first meeting in January next after his or
her election. The legislative authority may provide employees for the
municipality as it determines, and employees may be removed at any regular
meeting by a majority of the members elected to the legislative authority.
   (B)   When the Mayor is absent from the municipality, or is unable, for any
cause, to perform his or her duties, the President Pro Tem shall be the acting
Mayor, and shall have the same powers and perform the same duties as the Mayor.
(R.C. § 731.10) (2000 Code, § 32.02)
§ 32.03 VACANCY WHEN PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE BECOMES MAYOR.
   When the President Pro Tem of the legislative authority becomes the Mayor,
the vacancy thus created shall be filled as provided in §
32.06, and the legislative authority shall elect another President Pro Tem from
its own number, who shall have the same rights, powers, and duties as his or
her predecessor.
(R.C. § 731.11) (2000 Code, § 32.03)
§ 32.04 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   (1)   Each member of the legislative authority shall have resided in
the municipality for at least one year immediately preceding the member’s
election, and shall be an elector of the municipality.
      (2)   No member of the legislative authority shall hold any other public
office, be interested in any contract with the municipality, or hold employment
with the municipality, except that the member may be a notary public, a member
of the state militia, or a volunteer firefighter of the village; provided, that
such member shall not receive any compensation for his or her services as a
volunteer firefighter of the village in addition to his or her regular
compensation as a member of the legislative authority.
      (3)   Any member who ceases to possess any of these qualifications, or
who moves from the municipality, shall forfeit his or her office.
   (B)   The purpose of establishing a one-year residency requirement in this
section is to recognize that the municipality has a substantial and compelling
interest in encouraging qualified candidacies for election to the office of
member of the legislative authority by ensuring that a candidate for the office
has every opportunity to become knowledgeable with and concerned about the
problems and needs of the area the candidate seeks to represent. In enacting
this requirement, the municipality finds that the one-year period is reasonably
related to this purpose, while leaving unimpaired a person’s right to travel,
to vote, and to be a candidate for public office.
(R.C. § 731.12) (2000 Code, § 32.04)
§ 32.05 COMPENSATION AND BONDS OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The legislative authority shall fix the compensation and bonds of all
officers, clerks, and employees of the municipality, except as otherwise
provided by law.
   (B)   The legislative authority shall, in the case of elective officers, fix
their compensation for the ensuing term of office at a meeting held not later
than five days prior to the last day fixed by law for filing as a candidate for
such office. All bonds shall be made with sureties subject to the approval of
the Mayor. The compensation so fixed shall not be increased or diminished
during the term for which any officer is elected or appointed. This section
does not prohibit the payment of any increased costs of continuing to provide
the identical benefits provided to an officer at the commencement of his or her
term of office.
(R.C. § 731.13) (2000 Code, § 32.05)
§ 32.06 VACANCY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) below, when the office of
a member of the legislative authority becomes vacant, the vacancy shall be
filled by election by the legislative authority for the unexpired term. If the
legislative authority fails within 30 days to fill the vacancy, the Mayor shall
fill it by appointment, except that subject to division (B) below, when the
vacancy occurs because of the operation of R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance, the successor shall hold office only for the
period the President Pro Tem of the legislative authority holds the office of
Mayor.
   (B)   (1)   When a vacancy occurs in the office of a member of the
legislative authority of a village with a population of less than 2,000 because
of the operation of R.C. § 733.25, or a substantially similar municipal
ordinance, at the time the President Pro Tem becomes Mayor, the President Pro
Tem shall decide whether he or she wishes to serve the remainder of his or her
unexpired term as a member of the legislative authority when the Mayor’s
successor is elected and qualified in accordance with R.C. § 733.25, or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the President Pro Tem decides to serve the remainder of his or
her unexpired term as a member of the legislative authority, the vacancy on the
legislative authority shall not be filled and the President Pro Tem shall
resume serving his or her unexpired term on the legislative authority as soon
as the Mayor’s successor is elected and qualified. If the President Pro Tem
decides not to resume serving the remainder of his or her unexpired term as a
member of the legislative authority as soon as the Mayor’s successor is elected
and qualified, then the vacancy in the office of the member of the legislative
authority shall be filled in accordance with this section.
(R.C. § 731.43(A)) (2000 Code, § 32.06)
§ 32.07 JUDGE OF ELECTION AND QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS; QUORUM AND SPECIAL
MEETINGS.
   (A)   The legislative authority shall be the judge of the election and
qualification of its members. A majority of all the members elected shall be a
quorum, but a lesser number may adjourn from day to day and compel attendance
of absent members in a manner and under penalties as are prescribed by
ordinance.
   (B)   The legislative authority shall provide rules for the manner of
calling special meetings.
(R.C. § 731.44) (2000 Code, § 32.07)
Cross-reference:
   Open meetings, see §
30.09
§ 32.08 RULES; JOURNAL; EXPULSION OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   (1)   The legislative authority shall determine its own rules, and
keep a journal of its proceedings.
      (2)   It may punish or expel any member for disorderly conduct or
violation of its rules, and declare his or her seat vacant for absence without
valid excuse, where the absence has continued for two months.
   (B)   No expulsion shall take place without the concurrence of two-thirds of
all the members elected, and until the delinquent member has been notified of
the charge against him or her, and has had an opportunity to be heard.
(R.C. § 731.45) (2000 Code, § 32.08)
§ 32.09 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The legislative authority shall not be required to hold more than one
regular meeting in each week. The meetings may be held at a time and place as
is prescribed by ordinance, and shall, at all times, be open to the public.
   (B)   The Mayor, or any three members of the legislative authority, may call
special meetings upon at least 12 hours’ notice to each member, served
personally or left at his or her usual place of residence.
(R.C. § 731.46) (2000 Code, § 32.09)
Cross-reference:
   Open meetings, see §
30.09
§ 32.10 GENERAL POWERS.
   The legislative authority shall have the management and control of the
finances and property of the municipality, except as otherwise provided.
(R.C. § 731.47) (2000 Code, § 32.10)
§ 32.11 FAILURE TO TAKE OATH OR GIVE BOND.
   The legislative authority may declare vacant the office of any person
elected or appointed to the office who, within ten days after he or she has
been notified of his or her appointment or election, or obligation to give a
new or additional bond, fails to take the required official oath or to give any
bond required of him or her.
(R.C. § 731.49) (2000 Code, § 32.11)
Statutory reference:
   Ordinances and resolutions generally, see R.C. §§ 731.17 through 731.27
§ 32.12 NOTICE WHEN NEW BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   When the legislative authority declares by resolution that an officer
shall give a new bond, written notice shall be served by the Village Fiscal
Officer upon the officer designated, and a copy of the notice, with a statement
of the time and place of service, shall be recorded in the proceedings of the
legislative authority.
   (B)   If the officer fails to give such new bond, with sureties, to the
satisfaction of the Mayor, within ten days after such service, the legislative
authority shall declare the office vacant, and the vacancy shall be filled in
the manner provided in Title VII of the Revised Code.
   (C)   When a new bond is accepted or the legislative authority declares the
office vacant, the sureties of the original bond shall cease to be liable for
the acts of such officer done thereafter, but shall continue to be liable for
his or her acts then already done.
(R.C. § 731.50) (2000 Code, § 32.12)
§ 32.13 RULES OF COUNCIL.
   The following rules shall apply in connection with the organization and
administration of the meetings of the Council of the municipality.
   (A)   Rule 1. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the Council
chambers the evenings of the second and fourth week of each month, commencing
at 6:30 p.m.
   (B)   Rule 2. Discussions at Council meetings shall be confined to members
thereof except at designated public hearings, when the public shall be
permitted to address Council. Any person or designated representative of a
group of persons or organization shall be permitted to address Council, but
first must be recognized by the Mayor or presiding officer, then rise and give
full name, residence address, and the subject on which he or she proposes to
direct Council’s attention. Any person or designated representative of a group
of persons or organization shall be limited to three minutes at the podium
unless a majority of Council would otherwise agree.
   (C)   Rule 3. The Mayor shall take the Chair at the hour appointed for the
Council to meet, and shall immediately call the members to order. The roll
shall be called and the Village Fiscal Officer shall enter the names of the
members present in the minutes at each meeting.
   (D)   Rule 4. In the absence of the Mayor, the President Pro Tem of Council
shall preside and perform the duties of the Mayor.
   (E)   Rule 5. The Mayor or any three members of Council may call a special
meeting of Council upon at least 12 hours’ notice to each member of Council,
served personally in writing or left at his usual place of residence.
   (F)   Rule 6. The Mayor shall preserve decorum and decide all questions of
order, subject to an appeal to the Council. In case of an appeal being taken
the question is: “Shall the decision of the Chair stand as the decision of the
Council”? If any member transgresses the rules of Council, the Mayor or any
member may call the member to order, in which case the member called to order
shall take his or her seat, unless permitted to explain.
   (G)   Rule 7. All questions are to be stated and put by the Chair, who shall
decide all votes. In doubtful cases the Chair may direct, or any member may
call for, a division, which shall be taken by calling the roll and the Village
Fiscal Officer recording the yeas and nays.
   (H)   Rule 8. The Mayor may, at any time, call the President Pro Tem to the
Chair, in his or her absence, or any other member of Council to the Chair, such
substitution not to be continued beyond adjournment.
   (I)   Rule 9. The Mayor shall have the right, at any regular or special
meeting, to call a recess or recesses, any of which shall not exceed 30 minutes
in length.
   (J)   Rule 10. Council shall be seated in alphabetical order, commencing at
the right of the Mayor.
   (K)   Rule 11. Every member of Council, when about to speak on a question or
make a motion, shall respectfully address the Mayor or presiding officer, who
shall pronounce the name of the member entitled to the floor. The member shall
confine himself or herself to the question under debate and avoid
personalities.
   (L)   Rule 12. No member shall be allowed to speak except from his or her
own desk, more than once until every member choosing to speak has spoken, nor
shall the member speak more than twice on the same subject without consent of
the Council.
   (M)   Rule 13. Every member present when a question is put shall vote unless
the Council, for special reasons, excuses the member. Application to be so
excused must be made before Council is divided or the call of the yeas and nays
commenced. When the reasons for the request have been briefly stated, the
question shall be immediately put by the Mayor.
   (N)   Rule 14. Any member may demand the division of an ordinance,
resolution, or motion, by paragraph, when the same will admit thereof.
   (O)   Rule 15. Any member shall have the liberty to dissent from or protest
against any Council ordinance or resolution, and have the reason or reasons
thereof entered on the journal. Such dissent must be in writing, in respectful
language, and shall be presented to Council not later than the next regular
meetings following that of the passage of that ordinance or resolution.
   (P)   Rule 16. No member is to leave the Council without the consent of the
majority of those present.
   (Q)   Rule 17. At the regular meetings of the Council the following shall be
the order of business:
      (1)   Call to order by Mayor or President Pro Tem;
      (2)   Roll call by the Village Fiscal Officer;
      (3)   Reading minutes of preceding meeting;
      (4)   Communications:
         (a)   Private parties;
         (b)   Mayor; and
         (c)   Other officers.
      (5)   Permission to address Council by citizens;
      (6)   Report of standing committees:
         (a)   Rules and Laws;
         (b)   Health and Recreation;
         (c)   Finance;
         (d)   Public Safety;
         (e)   Public Works and Services; and
         (f)   Planning, Zoning, and Economic Development Committee.
      (7)   Presentation of notices;
      (8)   Miscellaneous resolutions (three readings);
      (9)   Resolutions directing officers of village (three readings);
      (10)   Resolution of finance or legal resolutions (three readings);
      (11)   Introduction of ordinance (three readings), second reading;
      (12)   Second reading:
         (a)   Ordinances; and
         (b)   Resolutions.
      (13)   Third reading:
         (a)   Ordinances;
         (b)   Resolutions; and
         (c)   Indefinite postponement.
      (14)   Adjournment.
   (R)   Rule 18. When the petitions have been presented, the business of all
meetings will commence at the point where the order of business at the
preceding meeting was interrupted by the adjournment. This section not to apply
to meetings called for purposes specifically named. At such meetings no other
business except that specifically named in the call shall be in order.
   (S)   Rule 19. There shall be six standing committees appointed of three
members each. Each member of Council shall be Chairperson of one committee and
serve on two other committees. The standing committees are as following with
functions:
      (1)   Rules and Laws. General assembly, law, contracts, and claims;
      (2)   Health and Recreation. Health, sanitation, parks, playgrounds,
waste, and garbage collection;
      (3)   Finance. Appropriation of property, sale of property, assessments
for improvement, finance, ways and means;
      (4)   Public Safety. Fire, police, and traffic;
      (5)   Public Works and Services. Light, telephone, telegraph, gas, water,
conduits, sewers, heat, streets, roads, and transportation; and
      (6)   Planning, Zoning, and Economic Development. Building code, zoning,
and dedication of property.
      (7)   Items shall be assigned to the committees by the Mayor with the
consent of Council. Items can also be moved from one committee to another by
the Mayor again with the consent of Council.
      (8)   Any special committees or commissions created by the village shall
be voted on and approved by Council. A charter shall also be created, laying
out clear responsibilities, deliverables, and any desired timelines. Any
committees or commissions that are temporary should be called out as such.
   (T)   Rule 20. All committees shall be appointed by the Mayor or presiding
officer, unless otherwise ordered by Council.
   (U)   Rule 21. The members of a committee shall meet on the call of the
Chairperson, who shall be the first named person on the committee. In case of
absence of the Chairperson, the person named second on the committee shall be
recognized as the Chairperson. A majority shall constitute a quorum to do
business.
   (V)   Rule 22. The report of all committees (except committees of the
whole), shall be in writing, agreed to in committee assembled and shall not be
presented unless signed by a majority of the committee. The papers referred
shall be returned with the report. Nothing in this section shall prevent the
introduction of a minority report.
   (W)   Rule 22A. When any matter is referred to a committee, instructions
when to report thereon may be included in the order of reference.
      (1)   If no instructions are included, the committee chair shall provide
an estimate of the expected completion date by the following meeting. This date
may be adjusted as the matter is researched.
      (2)   If no written report of the matter is tendered by the committee,
and no further time is asked for and/or granted by the estimated completion
date, the matter will be added to the agenda to be discussed at the next
meeting.
      (3)   The Council may, by a majority vote of its members, summarily
recall any matter and all documents pertaining thereto from any committee to
which it theretofore has been referred.
   (X)   Rule 23. In forming the Committee of the Whole, the Mayor shall leave
the Chair, and the President Pro Tem shall preside, and the rules of Council
shall govern the committee, except that no limit shall be placed on the time or
frequency of speaking so that the previous question cannot be moved and the
yeas and nays cannot be demanded.
   (Y)   Rule 24. All resolutions and ordinances shall be introduced by a
member of Council in writing and filed with Council and the Clerk of Council at
least 24 hours prior to a regular meeting of Council, and read by the Clerk, or
by a member in his place. The contents shall be briefly stated and referred to
a committee, unless otherwise agreed to by Council. Per the Ohio Auditor,
resolutions are to be used for short term policies or decisions, such as
contracts, major expenditures or sales, adopting policies, or for
administrative purposes. Ordinances are typically used for permanent laws or
regulations.
   (Z)   Rule 25. When a motion is made and seconded, before debate, it shall
be stated by the Mayor or presiding officer. A motion shall be reduced to
writing, if the Mayor or any member requires it. The writing of such motion can
occur during the meeting or be presented at a following meeting, at the
discretion of the person making the motion.
   (AA)   Rule 26.
      (1)   When a question is before Council, no motion shall be entertained
unless:
         (a)   To adjourn;
         (b)   To recess;
         (c)   To postpone indefinitely;
         (d)   To lay on the table;
         (e)   For the previous question;
         (f)   To postpone to a certain time;
         (g)   To refer; or
         (h)   To amend.
      (2)   Such motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are
here inserted.
   (BB)   Rule 27. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order except on
immediate repetition or when a member has the floor, when the previous question
has been ordered, or when the Council is engaged in voting. When any business
is pending, the motion must be made in its simplest form, and is not subject to
amendment or debate, but if made when no other business is pending, it can be
amended the same as other questions.
      (1)   When the consideration of a question is interrupted by an
adjournment, it is removed from before Council and must be brought forward in
the usual way.
      (2)   A motion to recess shall stipulate the time, which is not to exceed
24 hours nor for more than one hour if meeting is to continue after recess.
      (3)   An indefinite postponement is equivalent to a rejection.
      (4)   A motion to lay on the table shall preclude all debate or
amendments. If the motion prevails, consideration of the subject cannot be
resumed, except as unfinished business, without consent of a majority of
members present.
      (5)   The previous question shall be put in these words: “Shall the main
question be now put”? It shall be admitted on the demand of two members and,
until decided, shall preclude all further debate or amendment, but pending
amendments, shall be put before the main question.
      (6)   All motions to postpone may be amended as to time, but preclude
debate on the main question.
      (7)   A motion to refer shall preclude debate or amendment of the main
question.
      (8)   A motion to refer it to a standing committee shall have preference.
      (9)   A motion to amend is susceptible to but one pending amendment. An
amendment, once rejected, cannot be moved again in the same form.
   (CC)   Rule 29. A vote of a majority of members present shall be required to
make any subject a special order.
   (DD)   Rule 30. A motion to suspend the rules shall require concurrence of
three-fourths of all the members elected, and shall be decided without debate.
   (EE)   Rule 31.
      (1)   Any member who voted with the prevailing side of a question may
move a reconsideration at any time, and a motion to reconsider once put and
lost, shall not be renewed. This is a privileged motion and takes precedence
over all other questions and may be considered at any time after pending
business is disposed of.
      (2)   A majority of those present may reconsider any vote except that by
which an ordinance or resolution was passed, which shall require no fewer than
four votes. No resolution or ordinance shall be reconsidered after one regular
meeting has intervened after its passage.
   (FF)   Rule 32. The first reading of an ordinance or resolution proposed
shall be for information, the second for the purpose of amendments. If at the
third reading an ordinance shall be ordered laid on the table, it shall not be
taken up again except by a majority vote of all the members elected.
   (GG)   Rule 33.
      (1)   The following procedures shall apply to the passage of ordinances
and resolutions.
         (a)   Each ordinance and resolution may be read by title only,
provided, the legislative authority may require any reading to be in full by a
majority vote of its members.
         (b)   Each ordinance or resolution shall be read on three different
days, provided the legislative authority may dispense with this rule by a vote
of at least three-fourths of its members.
         (c)   The vote on the passage of each ordinance or resolution shall be
taken by yeas and nays and entered on the journal.
         (d)   An ordinance or resolution shall be passed, except as otherwise
provided by law, by a vote of at least a majority of all the members of the
legislative authority, excluding blanks or abstentions.
      (2)   Action by the legislative authority, not required by law to be by
ordinance or resolution, may be taken by motion approved by at least a majority
vote of the members present at the meeting when the action is taken.
   (HH)   Rule 34.
      (1)   Each member of Council shall be furnished a copy of any ordinance
or resolution at least 48 hours prior to any meeting which he or she is
expected to vote thereon.
      (2)   This copy or copies shall be delivered to the residence of the
Council member, by such means as may be expedient to comply with (HH)(1) above.
   (II)   Rule 35. On each ordinance containing an emergency clause, there may
first be had the usual vote necessary for the passage of the particular
ordinance. That vote, however, may be on the ordinance exclusive of the
emergency section, and shall be announced as the vote on the ordinance.
Immediately on the passage of that ordinance, a vote may be taken by separate
roll call on the emergency section. The emergency section may be passed on the
affirmative vote of two-thirds of all members elected to Council.
   (JJ)   Rule 37.  Robert’s Rules of Order, revised edition, shall be used to
cover all points of parliamentary procedure not covered by the foregoing rules
of procedure.
   (KK)   Rule 38.
      (1)   Bulletin boards shall be located at the following places: at the
Concourse, Miami Bluff, and Flintpoint Way; the tennis court property; on the
east side of Plainville Road between Maple and Chestnut Streets; the site of
the Municipal Building, Wooster Pike, and Crystal Springs Road; the northeast
corner of the intersection of Rembold and Miami Roads inside the enclosure; the
northwest corner of the Old Town Center, intersection of Chestnut and Oak
Streets. These are declared to be the five most conspicuous places in the
village for the publication of ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders,
proclamations, notices, and reports.
      (2)   All ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders, proclamations,
notices, and reports now hereafter requiring publication shall be published by
posting copies thereof at the five places, unless otherwise required by law or
directed by Council or as set forth in division (KK)(3) below.
      (3)   The Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building shall create an e-mail
distribution list data base comprised of residents who wish to submit their
names and e-mail addresses for the purpose of receiving notifications from the
Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building. For such residents and media only,
all notices shall be sent via this e-mail distribution list data base
      (4)   (a)   Any village employee who copies or disseminates this e-mail
distribution list data base to any person or entity which would use it for
purposes other than that intended by this ordinance, which is to notify
residents and media of important information about the village, shall be
subject to disciplinary action, which could include termination from
employment.
         (b)   Any elected official who would use it for purposes other than
that intended by this section, as previously described, or uses the list to
contact village residents for their own personal gain, may be subject to
expulsion under §
32.08.
         (c)   Further, any such violation of this section shall be deemed to
be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, punishable as set forth in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (LL)   Rule 39. The Mayor and Clerk, with consent of Council, shall contract
with a depository for the village funds, the contract to run for a period not
exceeding two years. The depository selected shall conform with R.C. Ch. 135.
Thereafter the Village Treasurer shall deposit all the village funds in the
depository so named.
   (MM)   Rule 40. In the case of a tie vote by Council, the Mayor may cast the
deciding vote on any matter, including, but not limited to, ordinances,
resolutions, and committee reports.
   (NN)   Rule 41. In the absence of the Mayor, when the President Pro Tem of
Council or any other Council member is presiding and performing the duties of
Mayor, they shall retain their Council member right to vote on all matters
coming before Council during that meeting.
(1967 Code, Ch. 31) (Ord. O-6-76, passed 4-12-1976; Ord. O-15-77, passed 7-22-
1977; Ord. O-19-78, passed 10-9-1978; Ord. O-43-83, passed 11-28-1983; Ord. O-
24-84, passed 11-12-1984; Ord. O-12-89, passed 5-22-1989; Ord. O-5-96, passed
5-13-1996; Ord. O-35-98, passed 12-28-1998; Ord. O-3-07, passed 2-26-2007; Ord.
O-28-10, passed 12-13-2010; Ord. O-9-14, passed 3-24-2014; Ord. O-10-14, passed
3-24-2010; Ord. O-15-15, passed 5-26-2015; Ord. O-9-17, passed 4-24-2017; Ord.
O-15-19, passed 5-13-2019; Ord. O-18-20, passed 7-13-2020; Ord. O-23-20, passed
11-23-2020; Ord. O-24-20, passed 11-23-2020; Ord. O-27-20, passed 11-23-2020;
Ord. O-10-21, passed 2-8-2021)
CONTRACTS, BIDS AND PROCEEDINGS
§ 32.25 CONTRACTS BY THE LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY OR ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Contracts by the legislative authority.
      (1)   All contracts made by the legislative authority shall be executed
in the name of the municipality and signed on its behalf by the Mayor and
Clerk. Except where the contract is for equipment, services, materials, or
supplies to be purchased under R.C. §§ 125.04, 713.23(D), or 5513.01, or
available from a qualified nonprofit agency pursuant to R.C. §§ 4115.31 through
4115.35, or required to be purchased from a qualified nonprofit agency under
R.C. §§ 125.60 through 125.6012, or, during the period of emergency declared by
Executive Order 2020-01D, issued on March 9, 2020, when the purchase is for
personal protective equipment necessary to respond to that emergency, when any
expenditure, other than the compensation of persons employed in the
municipality, exceeds the threshold amount specified in R.C. § 9.17, such
contracts shall be in writing and made to the lowest and best bidder after
advertising once a week for not less than two consecutive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation within the municipality. The legislative authority may
also cause notice to be inserted in trade papers or other publications
designated by it or to be distributed by electronic means, including posting
the notice on the legislative authority's internet web site. If the legislative
authority posts the notice on its web site, it may eliminate the second notice
otherwise required to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within
the municipality; provided, that the first notice published in such newspaper
meets all of the following requirements:
         (a)   It is published at least two weeks before the opening of bids.
         (b)   It includes a statement that the notice is posted on the
legislative authority’s internet web site.
         (c)   It includes the internet address of the legislative authority’s
internet web site.
         (d)   It includes instructions describing how the notice may be
accessed on the legislative authority’s internet web site.
      (2)   The bids shall be opened and shall be publicly read by the Clerk or
a person designated by the Clerk at the time, date, and place specified in the
advertisement to bidders or specifications. The time, date, and place of bid
openings may be extended to a late date by the legislative authority; provided,
that written or oral notice of the change shall be given to all persons who
have received or requested specifications no later than 96 hours prior to the
original time and date fixed for the opening. This division (A) does not apply
to the municipality if an Administrator has been appointed pursuant to the
provisions of R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (3)   As used in this division (A), PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT means
equipment worn to minimize exposure to hazards that cause workplace injuries
and illnesses.
   (B)   Contract by Administrator; central purchasing.
      (1)   In those municipalities that have established the position of
Administrator as provided by R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the Administrator shall make contracts, purchase supplies
and materials, and provide labor for any work under the Administrator’s
supervision involving not more than $50,000. When an expenditure, other than
the compensation of persons employed by the municipality, exceeds $50,000, the
expenditure shall first be authorized and directed by ordinance of the
legislative authority. When so authorized and directed, except where the
contract is for equipment, services, materials, or supplies to be purchased
under R.C. §§ 125.04, 713.23(D), or 5513.01 or available from a qualified
nonprofit agency pursuant to R.C. §§ 4115.31 through 4115.35, or required to be
purchased from a qualified nonprofit agency under R.C. §§ 125.60 through
125.6012, the Administrator shall make a written contract with the lowest and
best bidder after advertisement for not less than two nor more than four
consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the municipality
or as provided in R.C. § 7.16. The bids shall be opened and shall be publicly
read by the Administrator or a person designated by the Administrator at the
time, date, and place specified in the advertisement to bidders or
specifications. The time, date and place of bid openings may be extended to a
later date by the Administrator; provided, that written or oral notice of the
change shall be given to all persons who have received or requested
specifications no later than 96 hours prior to the original time and date fixed
for the opening. All contracts shall be executed in the name of the
municipality and signed on its behalf by the Administrator and the Clerk.
      (2)   The legislative authority may provide, by ordinance, for central
purchasing for all offices, departments, divisions, boards, and commissions of
the municipality, under the direction of the Administrator who shall make
contracts, purchase supplies or materials, and provide labor for any work of
the municipality in the manner provided by this division (B).
(2000 Code, § 32.25) (Ord. O-2-25, passed 1-27-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Contracts by legislative authority or administrator, see R.C. §§ 731.14,
731.141
§ 32.26 BIDS AND PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Each bid on any contract under §
32.25 shall contain the full name of every person interested in such bid. If
the bid is for the construction, demolition, alteration, repair, or
reconstruction of an improvement, it shall meet the requirements of R.C. §
153.54.
      (2)   If the bid is for any other contract authorized by §
32.25, it shall be accompanied by a sufficient bond or certified check,
cashier’s check, or money order on a solvent bank or savings and loan
association that, if the bid is accepted, a contract will be entered into and
the performance of it properly secured.
   (B)   (1)   If the bid for work embraces both labor and materials, it shall
be separately stated, with the price thereof.
      (2)   The legislative authority or Administrator, in the event an
Administrator has been appointed as provided by R.C. § 735.271, or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, may reject any and all bids.
      (3)   The contract shall be between the municipality and the bidder, and
the municipality shall pay such contract price in cash.
   (C)   (1)   When a bonus is offered for completion of a contract prior to a
specified date, the legislative authority or Administrator, in the event an
Administrator has been appointed as provided in R.C. § 735.271, or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, may exact a prorated penalty in like
sum for each day or delay beyond the specified date.
      (2)   When there is reason to believe there is collusion or combination
among bidders, the bids of those concerned therein shall be rejected.
(R.C. § 731.15) (2000 Code, § 32.26)
§ 32.27 ALTERATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS OF CONTRACT.
   When it becomes necessary in the opinion of the legislative authority or
Administrator, in the event an Administrator has been appointed as provided in
R.C. § 735.271, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, in the
prosecution of any work under contract, to make alterations or modifications in
such contract, such alterations or modifications shall be made only by the
legislative authority by resolution or by the Administrator in writing. In the
event an Administrator had been appointed as provided in R.C. § 735.271, or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, but such resolution or written
modification shall be of no effect until the price to be paid for the work and
material, or both, under the altered or modified contract has been agreed upon
in writing and signed by the contractor, and by the Mayor or Administrator in
the event an Administrator has been appointed as provided in R.C. § 735.271, or
a substantially similar municipal ordinance, on behalf of the municipality. No
contractor shall recover anything for work or material because of any
alteration or modification unless such contract is made as provided in this
section, nor shall the contractor recover for such work or material, or either,
more than the agreed price. The law relating to requiring the bids and the
awarding of contracts for public buildings, so far as they apply, shall remain
in effect. A duplicate copy of each contract shall be filed in the office of
the Village Fiscal Officer.
(R.C. § 731.16) (2000 Code, § 32.27)
§ 32.28 CONTRACT RESTRICTIONS.
   The legislative authority shall not enter into any contract which is not to
go into full operation during the term for which all the members of such
legislative authority are elected.
(R.C. § 731.48) (2000 Code, § 32.28)
§ 32.29 AWARD TO LOWEST RESPONSIVE AND RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
   (A)   (1)   If the municipality is required by law or by an ordinance or
resolution adopted under division (C) of this section to award a contract to
the lowest responsive and responsible bidder, a bidder on the contract shall be
considered responsive if the bidder’s proposal responds to bid specifications
in all material respects and contains no irregularities or deviations from the
specifications which would affect the amount of the bid or otherwise give the
bidder a competitive advantage. The factors that the municipality shall
consider in determining whether a bidder on the contract is responsible include
the experience of the bidder, the bidder’s financial condition, conduct and
performance on previous contracts, facilities, management skills, and ability
to execute the contract properly.
      (2)   For purposes of this division, the provision of a bid guaranty in
accordance with R.C. § 153.54(A)(1) and (B) issued by a surety licensed to do
business in this state is evidence of financial responsibility, but the
municipality may request additional financial information for review from an
apparent low bidder after it opens all submitted bids. The municipality shall
keep additional financial information it receives pursuant to a request under
this division confidential, except under proper order of a court. The
additional financial information is not a public record under R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   An apparent low bidder found not to be responsive and responsible
shall be notified by the municipality of that finding and the reasons for it.
The notification shall be given in writing and either by certified mail or, if
the municipality has record of an internet identifier of record associated with
the bidder, by ordinary mail and by that internet identifier of record.
   (B)   Where the municipality has adopted an ordinance or resolution under
division (C) of this section and determines to award a contract to a bidder
other than the apparent low bidder or bidders for the construction,
reconstruction, improvement, enlargement, alteration, repair, painting or
decoration of a public improvement, it shall meet with the apparent low bidder
or bidders upon a filing of a timely written protest. The protest must be
received within five days of the notification required in division (A) of this
section. No final award shall be made until the municipality either affirms or
reverses its earlier determination. Notwithstanding any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code, the procedure described in this division is not subject to
R.C. Chapter 119.
   (C)   The municipality may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt a policy of
requiring each competitively bid contract it awards to be awarded to the lowest
responsive and responsible bidder in accordance with this section.
   (D)   As used in this section, INTERNET IDENTIFIER OF RECORD means an
electronic mail address, or any other designation used for self- identification
or routing in internet communication or posting, provided for the purpose of
receiving communication.
(R.C. § 9.312) (2000 Code, § 32.29)
CHAPTER 33: JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Jurisdiction in ordinance cases and traffic violations
   
33.02   Powers of Mayor and Mayor’s Court Magistrate in criminal matters
   
33.03   Duties of Mayor and Mayor’s Court Magistrate; fees; office; seal
   
33.04   Mayor’s Court Magistrate
   
33.05   Court costs established
   
33.06   Mayor’s Court Clerk
   
33.07   Mayor’s Court Computer Fund
Contempt of Court
   
33.20   Summary punishment for contempt
   
33.21   Acts in contempt of court
   
33.22   Hearing
   
33.23   Contempt action for failure to pay support, failure to comply or
interference with a visitation order; summons
   
33.24   Right of accused to bail
   
33.25   Hearing on contempt; penalties; support orders; failure to withhold or
deduct money pursuant to support order
   
33.26   Imprisonment until order obeyed
   
33.27   Proceedings when party released on bail fails to appear
   
33.28   Release of prisoner committed for contempt
   
33.29   Judgment final
   
33.30   Alternative remedy
 
   
33.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
The ability of a Mayor to preside over a Mayor’s Court was significantly
affected by DePiero v. City of Macedonia, 180 F.3d 770 (6th Cir. 1999), cert.
denied, 120 S. Ct. 844 (2000). The DePiero case essentially put all
municipalities on notice that a defendant’s due process rights may be violated
each time the Mayor presides over the Mayor’s Court. Such notice suggests that
a Mayor presiding over Mayor’s Court after June 23, 1999 (the date of issuance
of the opinion) could be personally liable to such a defendant for compensatory
and punitive damages. As a result of this case, many municipalities now have a
Magistrate preside over their Mayor’s Court pursuant to R.C. § 1905.05. Please
consult your Village Attorney if you have any questions regarding the impact of
this case.
Statutory reference:
   Contracts with Public Defender Commissions, see O.A.C. § 120-1-09
   Notification to Registrar of Motor Vehicles regarding arrest warrants;
effect on certificates of registration and driver’s licenses, see R.C. §§
4503.13 and 4507.091
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 JURISDICTION IN ORDINANCE CASES AND TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not being
the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge sits pursuant to R.C. §
1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor
has jurisdiction, except as provided in divisions (B), (C), and (E) below and
subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03 and the limitation
contained in R.C. § 1905.031, to hear and determine any prosecution for the
violation of an ordinance of the municipality, to hear and determine any case
involving a violation of a vehicle parking or standing ordinance of the
municipality unless the violation is required to be handled by a parking
violations bureau or joint parking violations bureau pursuant to R.C. Ch. 4521,
and to hear and determine all criminal cases involving any moving traffic
violation occurring on a state highway located within the boundaries of the
municipality, subject to the limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04.
   (B)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not
being the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge of a court sits
as required pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021 or by designation of the judges
pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor has jurisdiction, subject to the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03, to hear and determine prosecutions
involving a violation of an ordinance of the municipality relating to operating
a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine, and to hear and determine criminal causes involving a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance that occur on a
state highway located within the boundaries of the municipality, subject to the
limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04, only if the person charged with the
violation, within six years of the date of the violation charged, has not been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of an ordinance of any municipality relating to
operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine;
         (b)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance;
         (c)   A violation of any ordinance of any municipality or of any
section of the Ohio Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon
the streets, to which all of the following apply:
            1.   The person, in the case in which the conviction was obtained
or the plea of guilty was entered, had been charged with a violation of an
ordinance of a type described in division (B)(1)(a) above, or with a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   The charge of the violation described in divisions (B)(1)(c)1.
above was dismissed or reduced; and
            3.   The violation of which the person was convicted or to which he
or she pleaded guilty arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the
same act as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced;
         (d)   A violation of a statute of the United States or any other state
or a municipal ordinance of a municipality located in any other state that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19.
      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in divisions (B)
(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) above, regardless of where the violation occurred, if the
person charged with the violation, within six years of the violation charged,
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation listed in divisions
(B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c), or (B)(1)(d) above.
      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a violation of an
ordinance of the municipality he or she serves relating to operating a vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them
or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine, or in hearing a criminal cause
involving a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, determines that the person charged, within ten years of the
violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
listed in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c), or (B)(1)(d) above, the
Mayor immediately shall transfer the case to the county court or municipal
court with jurisdiction over the violation charged, in accordance with R.C. §
1905.032.
   (C)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not
being the site of a municipal court and not being a place where a judge of a
court listed in division (A) above sits as required pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021
or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor, subject
to R.C. §§ 1901.031, 2937.08, and 2938.04, has jurisdiction to hear and
determine prosecutions involving a violation of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16 and to hear and
determine criminal causes that involve a moving traffic violation, that involve
a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16, and that occur on a state highway
located within the boundaries of the municipality only if all of the following
apply regarding the violation and the person charged:
         (a)   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.16 or a violation of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
person charged with the violation, within six years of the date of the
violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the
following:
            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.16;
            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4510.16; or
            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or section of the Ohio
Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the highways or
streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of a violation
of a type described in divisions (C)(1)(a)1. or (C)(1)(a)2. above was dismissed
or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation that
arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act as did the
charge that was dismissed or reduced.
         (b)   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or a violation of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
person charged with the violation, within six years of the date of the
violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the
following:
            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A);
            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4510.14(A); or
            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or section of the Ohio
Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the highways or
streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of a violation
of a type described in divisions (C)(1)(b)1. or (C)(1)(b)2. above was dismissed
or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation that
arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act as did the
charge that was dismissed or reduced.
      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in divisions (C)
(1)(a)1. or (C)(1)(a)2. above if the person charged with the violation, within
six years of the violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
any violation listed in divisions (C)(1)(a)1. through (C)(1)(a)3. above and
does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any prosecution or criminal
cause involving a violation described in divisions (C)(1)(b)1. or (C)(1)(b)2.
above if the person charged with the violation, within six years of the
violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
listed in divisions (C)(1)(b)1. through (C)(1)(b)3. above.
      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a violation of an
ordinance of the municipality he or she serves that is substantially equivalent
to R.C. §§ 4510.14(A) or 4510.16 or a violation of R.C. §§ 4510.14(A) or
4510.16, determines that, under division (C)(2) above, he or she does not have
jurisdiction of the prosecution, the Mayor immediately shall transfer the case
to the county court or municipal court with jurisdiction over the violation in
accordance with R.C. § 1905.032.
   (D)   If the Mayor has jurisdiction pursuant to division (B)(1) above to
hear and determine a prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation
described in divisions (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) above, the authority of the Mayor
to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is subject to the limitation
contained in R.C. § 1905.03(C). If the Mayor has jurisdiction pursuant to
divisions (A) or (C) above to hear and determine a prosecution or criminal
cause involving a violation other than a violation described in divisions (B)
(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) above, the authority of the Mayor to hear or determine the
prosecution or cause is subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031
(C).
   (E)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have the
jurisdiction to hear and determine any prosecution or criminal cause involving
any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2919.25 or 2919.27;
         (b)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.211, or
2911.211 that involves a person who was a family or household member of the
defendant at the time of the violation; or
         (c)   A violation a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to an offense described in divisions (E)(1)(a) or (E)(1)(b) above
and that involves a person who was a family or household member of the
defendant at the time of the violation.
      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have the jurisdiction
to hear and determine a motion filed pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or filed
pursuant to a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that
section or to issue a protection order pursuant to that section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (3)   As used in this section, FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2919.25.
   (F)   In keeping his or her docket and files, the Mayor and a Mayor’s Court
Magistrate appointed under R.C. § 1905.05 shall be governed by the laws
pertaining to county courts.
(R.C. § 1905.01) (2000 Code, § 33.01)
Cross-reference:
Mayor generally, see §§
31.020 through
31.029
§ 33.02 POWERS OF MAYOR AND MAYOR’S COURT MAGISTRATE IN CRIMINAL MATTERS.
   (A)   The Mayor has, within the corporate limits, all the powers conferred
upon sheriffs to suppress disorder and keep the peace.
   (B)   The Mayor shall award and issue all writs and process that are
necessary to enforce the administration of justice throughout the municipality.
The Mayor shall subscribe his or her name and affix his or her official seal to
all writs, process, transcripts, and other official papers. A Mayor’s Court
Magistrate, in hearing and determining prosecutions and criminal causes that
are within the scope of his or her authority under R.C. § 1905.05, has the same
powers and duties as are granted to or imposed upon a Mayor under this division
(B).
   (C)   The Mayor shall be disqualified in any criminal case in which he or
she was the arresting officer, assisted in the arrest, or was present at the
time of arrest, and shall not hear the case.
(R.C. § 1905.20) (2000 Code, § 33.02)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor’s power in OMVI cases to suspend or revoke driver’s licenses, see R.C.
§ 1905.201
§ 33.03 DUTIES OF MAYOR AND MAYOR’S COURT MAGISTRATE; FEES; OFFICE; SEAL.
   (A)   The Mayor and a Mayor’s Court Magistrate shall keep a docket. Neither
the Mayor nor a Mayor’s Court Magistrate shall retain or receive for his or her
own use any of the fines, forfeitures, fees, or costs he or she collects. A
Mayor’s Court Magistrate shall account for all such fines, forfeitures, fees,
and costs he or she collects and transfer them to the Mayor. The Mayor shall
account for and dispose of all such fines, forfeitures, fees, and costs he or
she collects, including all such fines, forfeitures, fees, and costs that are
transferred to him or her by a Mayor’s Court Magistrate, as provided in R.C. §
733.40.
   (B)   The Mayor shall be paid such fixed annual salary as the legislative
authority provides under R.C. §§ 731.08 and 731.13, and a Mayor’s Court
Magistrate shall receive compensation as provided in R.C. § 1905.05.
   (C)   The Mayor shall keep an office, provided by the legislative authority,
at a convenient place in the municipality, and shall be furnished by the
legislative authority with the corporate seal of the municipality. In the
center of the seal shall be the words, “Mayor of the Village of...”.
(R.C. § 1905.21) (2000 Code, § 33.03)
§ 33.04 MAYOR’S COURT MAGISTRATE.
   (A)   A Mayor of a municipality that has a Mayor’s Court may appoint a
person as Mayor’s Court Magistrate to hear and determine prosecutions and
criminal cases in the Mayor’s Court that are within the jurisdiction of the
Mayor’s Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01. No person shall be appointed as
a Mayor’s Court Magistrate unless the person has been admitted to the practice
of law in this state and, for a total of at least three years preceding his or
her appointment or the commencement of his or her service as magistrate, has
been engaged in the practice of law in this state or served as a judge of a
court of record in any jurisdiction in the United States, or both.
      (1)   A person appointed as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under this
division (A)(1) is entitled to hear and determine prosecutions and criminal
cases in the Mayor’s Court that are within the jurisdiction of the Mayor’s
Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01. If a Mayor is prohibited from hearing or
determining a prosecution or cause that charges a person with a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181 due
to the operation of R.C. § 1905.03(C), or is prohibited from hearing or
determining any other prosecution or cause due to the operation of R.C. §
1905.031(C), the prohibition against the Mayor hearing or determining the
prosecution or causes does not affect and shall not be construed as affecting
the jurisdiction or authority of a person appointed as a Mayor’s Court
Magistrate under this division (A)(1) to hear and determine the prosecution or
cause in accordance with this section. In hearing and determining such
prosecutions and causes, the magistrate has the same powers, duties, and
authority as does a Mayor who conducts a Mayor’s Court to hear and determine
prosecutions and causes in general, including, but not limited to, the power
and authority to decide the prosecution or cause, enter judgement, and impose
sentence; the powers, duties, and authority granted to Mayors of Mayor’s Courts
by this chapter, in relation to the hearing and determination of prosecutions
and causes in Mayor’s Courts; and the powers, duties, and authority granted to
Mayors of Mayor’s Courts by any provisions of the Ohio Revised Code, in
relation to the hearing and determination of prosecutions and causes in Mayor’s
Courts. A judgement entered and a sentence imposed by a Mayor’s Court
Magistrate do not have to be reviewed or approved by the Mayor who appointed
the Magistrate, and have the same force and effect as if they had been entered
or imposed by the Mayor.
      (2)   A person appointed as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under this
division (A)(2) is not entitled to hear or determine any prosecution or
criminal cause other than prosecutions and causes that are within the
jurisdiction of the Mayor’s Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.
      (3)   A municipality that a Mayor’s Court Magistrate serves shall pay the
compensation for the services of the Magistrate, which shall be either a fixed
annual salary set by the legislative authority or a fixed annual amount or fees
for services rendered set under a contract the Magistrate and the municipality
enter into.
   (B)   The appointment of a person as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under
division (A) above does not preclude the Mayor that appointed the Magistrate,
subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03 and the limitation
contained in R.C. § 1905.031, from also hearing and determining prosecutions
and criminal causes in the Mayor’s Court that are within the jurisdiction of
the Mayor’s Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.
(R.C. § 1905.05) (2000 Code, § 33.04)
§ 33.05 COURT COSTS ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The court costs to be assessed against defendants when defendants are
required to pay the costs of court shall be as determined by Council.
   (B)   In addition, defendants may be required to pay any additional costs or
charges assessed by the state.
(2000 Code, § 33.05) (Ord. O-9-84, passed 4-9-1984)
§ 33.06 MAYOR’S COURT CLERK.
   (A)   There is established the position of Mayor’s Court Clerk, whose duties
shall be to attend all sessions of the Mayor’s Court and, whenever requested by
the Mayor, issue receipts for fines and costs collected, issue and receive
funds, and prepare an accounting of the funds.
   (B)   The Mayor, with the consent and approval of Council, shall appoint the
Clerk of the court.
   (C)   The compensation to be paid to the Clerk shall be as established by
Council from time to time.
   (D)   The Clerk is authorized to pay compensation to the Mayor’s Court
Clerk, on certification by the Mayor of the compensation due.
(1967 Code, § 33.08) (Ord. O-28-74, passed 11-25-1974; Ord. O-9-83, passed 3-
14-1983; Ord. O-13-85, passed 7-22-1985; Ord. O-6-91, passed 3-11-1991)
§ 33.07 MAYOR’S COURT COMPUTER FUND.
   (A)   Pursuant to the general authority provided by R.C. § 5705.12, a Fund
is hereby created, called the Mayor’s Court Computer Fund, requiring that $3 of
every Mayor’s Court case be assessed said fee, that said fee be transferred and
deposited into the Mayor’s Court Computer Fund.
   (B)   Said Fund expenditures be restricted solely for the operational and
maintenance expenses related to the Mayor's Court computer system, which shall
include, but will not be limited to, the following: computer space; computer
electrical, computer air conditioning; computer furniture; computer hardware;
computer software; subscriptions to computer services; staff expenses related
to operating the computer system, including fringe benefits; computer supplies,
for example, computer paper, diskettes, etc.; training sessions, maintenance of
equipment as well as computer needs studies and any other expenditure which may
be appropriate for computerization purposes.
(2000 Code, § 33.06) (Ord. O-32-98, passed 11-9-1998; Ord. O-22-21, passed 5-
10-2021)
CONTEMPT OF COURT
§ 33.20 SUMMARY PUNISHMENT FOR CONTEMPT.
   A court, or judge at chambers, may summarily punish a person guilty of
misbehavior in the presence of or so near the court or judge as to obstruct the
administration of justice.
(R.C. § 2705.01) (2000 Code, § 33.20)
§ 33.21 ACTS IN CONTEMPT OF COURT.
   (A)   A person guilty of any of the following acts may be punished for
contempt:
      (1)   Disobedience of, or resistance to, a lawful writ, process, order,
rule, judgment, or command of a court or officer;
      (2)   Misbehavior of an officer of the court in the performance of
official duties, or in official transactions;
      (3)   A failure to obey a subpoena duly served, or a refusal to be sworn
or to answer as a witness, when lawfully required;
      (4)   The rescue or attempted rescue of a person or of property in the
custody of an officer by virtue of an order or process of court held by the
officer;
      (5)   A failure upon the part of a person recognized to appear as a
witness in a court to appear in compliance with the terms of the person’s
recognizance;
      (6)   A failure to comply with an order issued pursuant to R.C. § 3109.19
or 3111.81;
      (7)   A failure to obey a subpoena issued by the Department of Job and
Family Services, the Department of Children and Youth, or a child support
enforcement agency pursuant to R.C. § 5101.37;
      (8)   A willful failure to submit to genetic testing, or a willful
failure to submit a child to genetic testing, as required by an order for
genetic testing issued under R.C. § 3111.41.
(R.C. § 2705.02)
   (B)   If a person summoned to appear as provided in R.C. § 2935.10(B) fails
to appear without just cause and personal service of the summons was had upon
the person, he or she may be found guilty of contempt of court, and may be
fined not to exceed $20 for such contempt. Upon failure to appear, the court or
magistrate may forthwith issue a warrant for his or her arrest.
(R.C. § 2935.11) (2000 Code, § 33.21)
§ 33.22 HEARING.
   In cases under §
33.21, a charge in writing shall be filed with the Clerk of the court, an entry
thereof made upon the journal, and an opportunity given to the accused to be
heard, by himself, herself, or counsel. This section does not prevent the court
from issuing process to bring the accused into court, or from holding him or
her in custody pending such proceedings.
(R.C. § 2705.03) (2000 Code, § 33.22)
§ 33.23 CONTEMPT ACTION FOR FAILURE TO PAY SUPPORT, FAILURE TO COMPLY OR
INTERFERENCE WITH A VISITATION ORDER; SUMMONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, TITLE IV-D CASE has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 3125.01.
   (B)   (1)   Any party who has a legal claim to any support ordered for a
child, spouse, or former spouse may initiate a contempt action for failure to
pay the support. In Title IV-D cases, the contempt action for failure to pay
support also may be initiated by an attorney retained by the party who has the
legal claim, the prosecuting attorney, or an attorney of the Department of Job
and Family Services or the child support enforcement agency.
      (2)   Any parent who is granted parenting time rights under a parenting
time order or decree issued pursuant to R.C. §§ 3109.051 or 3109.12, any person
who is granted visitation rights under a visitation order or decree issued
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3109.051, 3109.11, or 3109.12 or pursuant to any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or any other person who is subject to any
parenting time or visitation order or decree, may initiate a contempt action
for the failure to comply with, or an interference with, the order or decree.
   (C)   (1)   In any contempt action initiated pursuant to division (B) above,
the accused shall appear upon the summons and order to appear that is issued by
the court.
      (2)   The summons shall include all of the following:
         (a)   Notice that failure to appear may result in the issuance of an
order of arrest, and in cases involving alleged failure to pay support, the
issuance of an order for the payment of support by withholding an amount from
the personal earnings of the accused or by withholding or deducting an amount
from some other asset of the accused;
         (b)   Notice that the accused has a right to counsel, and that if
indigent, the accused must apply for a public defender or court appointed
counsel within three business days after receipt of the summons;
         (c)   Notice that the court may refuse to grant a continuance at the
time of the hearing for the purposes of the accused obtaining counsel if the
accused fails to make a good faith effort to retain counsel or to obtain a
public defender;
         (d)   Notice of the potential penalties that could be imposed upon the
accused if the accused is found guilty of contempt for failure to pay support
or for a failure to comply with, or an interference with, a parenting time or
visitation order or decree; and
         (e)   Notice that the court may grant limited driving privileges under
R.C. § 4510.021 pursuant to a request made by the accused, if the driver’s
license was suspended based on a notice issued pursuant to R.C. § 3123.54 by
the child support enforcement agency and if the request is accompanied by a
recent non-certified copy of a driver’s abstract from the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles.
   (D)   If the accused is served as required by the Rules of Civil Procedure
or by any special statutory proceedings that are relevant to the case, the
court may order the attachment of the person of the accused upon failure to
appear as ordered by the court.
   (E)   The imposition of any penalty under §
33.25 shall not eliminate any obligation of the accused to pay any past,
present, or future support obligation or any obligation of the accused to
comply with or refrain from interfering with the parenting time or visitation
order or decree. The court shall have jurisdiction to make a finding of
contempt for the failure to pay support and to impose the penalties set forth
in §
33.25 in all cases in which past due support is at issue even if the duty to
pay support has terminated, and shall have jurisdiction to make a finding of
contempt for a failure to comply with, or an interference with, a parenting
time or visitation order or decree and to impose the penalties set forth in §
33.25 in all cases in which the failure or interference is at issue even if the
parenting time or visitation order or decree is no longer in effect.
(R.C. § 2705.031) (2000 Code, § 33.35)
§ 33.24 RIGHT OF ACCUSED TO BAIL.
   (A)   In proceedings under §
33.21, if the writ is not returnable forthwith, the court may fix the amount of
a bond to be given by the accused, with surety to the satisfaction of the
sheriff. Upon the return of a writ, when it is not convenient to hear the
charge without delay, the court shall fix the amount of a bond to be given,
with surety to the satisfaction of the Clerk of the court, for the appearance
of the accused to answer the charge.
   (B)   On the execution of such bond, the accused shall be released from
custody.
(R.C. § 2705.04) (2000 Code, § 33.24)
§ 33.25 HEARING ON CONTEMPT; PENALTIES; SUPPORT ORDERS; FAILURE TO WITHHOLD OR
DEDUCT MONEY PURSUANT TO SUPPORT ORDER.
   (A)   In all contempt proceedings, the court shall conduct a hearing. At the
hearing, the court shall investigate the charge and hear any answer or
testimony that the accused makes or offers and shall determine whether the
accused is guilty of the contempt charge.
   (B)   In all contempt proceedings initiated pursuant to §
33.23 against an employer, the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, an employer
that is paying workers’ compensation benefits, a board, board of trustees, or
other governing entity of a retirement system, person paying or distributing
income to an obligor under a support order, or financial institution that is
ordered to withhold or deduct an amount of money from the income or other
assets of a person required to pay support and that fails to withhold or deduct
the amount of money as ordered by the support order, the court may also require
the employer, the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, an employer that is paying
workers’ compensation benefits, a board, board of trustees, or other governing
entity of a retirement system, person paying or distributing income to an
obligor under a support order, or financial institution to pay the accumulated
support arrearages.
(R.C. § 2705.05) (2000 Code, § 33.25)
§ 33.26 IMPRISONMENT UNTIL ORDER OBEYED.
   When the contempt consists of the omission to do an act which the accused
yet can perform, he or she may be imprisoned until he or she performs it.
(R.C. § 2705.06) (2000 Code, § 33.26)
§ 33.27 PROCEEDINGS WHEN PARTY RELEASED ON BAIL FAILS TO APPEAR.
   (A)   If the party released on bail under §
33.24 fails to appear upon the day named, the court may issue another order or
arrest, or order the bond for his or her appearance to be prosecuted, or both.
   (B)   If the bond is prosecuted, the measure of damages in the action is the
extent of loss or injury sustained by the aggrieved party by reason of the
misconduct for which the contempt was prosecuted, and the costs of the
proceeding.
   (C)   Such recovery is for the benefit of the party injured.
(R.C. § 2705.07) (2000 Code, § 33.27)
§ 33.28 RELEASE OF PRISONER COMMITTED FOR CONTEMPT.
   When a person is committed to jail for contempt, the court or judge who made
the order may discharge him or her from imprisonment when it appears that the
public interest will not suffer thereby.
(R.C. § 2705.08) (2000 Code, § 33.28)
§ 33.29 JUDGMENT FINAL.
   (A)   The judgment and orders of a court or officer made in cases of
contempt may be reviewed on appeal.
   (B)   Appeal proceedings shall not suspend execution of the order or
judgment until the person in contempt files a bond in the court rendering the
judgment, or in the court or before the officer making the order, payable to
the state, with sureties to the acceptance of the Clerk of that court, in an
amount fixed by the reviewing court, or a judge thereof, conditioned that if
judgment is rendered against such person, he or she will abide by and perform
the order or judgment.
(R.C. § 2705.09) (2000 Code, § 33.29)
§ 33.30 ALTERNATIVE REMEDY.
   This subchapter furnishes a remedy in cases not provided for by another
section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2705.10) (2000 Code, § 33.30)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   If the accused is found guilty pursuant to §
33.25, the court may impose any of the following penalties:
      (1)   For a first offense, a fine of not more than $250, a definite term
of imprisonment of not more than 30 days in jail, or both;
      (2)   For a second offense, a fine of not more than $500, a definite term
of imprisonment of not more than 60 days in jail, or both; or
      (3)   For a third or subsequent offense, a fine of not more than $1,000,
a definite term of imprisonment of not more than 90 days in jail, or both.
(2000 Code, § 33.25)
CHAPTER 34: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
34.01   Marshal and Police Chief synonymous
   
34.02   Appointment of Marshal
   
34.03   Deputy marshals and police officers
   
34.04   Auxiliary police units
   
34.05   Offenses affecting employment of law enforcement officers; probationary
period; final appointment
   
34.06   Removal proceedings; suspension; appeals
   
34.07   General powers
   
34.08   Powers and duties of Marshal
   
34.09   Disposition of fines and penalties
   
34.10   Property recovered by police
   
34.11   Disposition to claimant
   
34.12   Sale of unclaimed property; disposition of proceeds
   
34.13   Expenses of storage and sale; notice
   
34.14   Deposit of stolen property; prohibition
   
34.15   Peace officer administering oaths; acknowledging complaints, summonses,
affidavits, and returns of court orders
Cross-reference:
   Assault of police dog or horse, see §
136.15
   Disposition of property held by Police Department, see §
130.17
   Offenses against justice and administration, see
Ch. 136
   Residency requirements for Police Chief, see §
31.004
   Traffic Code, see
Title VII
Statutory reference:
   Canine units: Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Ch. 109:2-7
    Canine registration, see R.C. § 955.012
   Motor vehicle pursuit policies to be adopted by municipality, see R.C. §
2935.031
   Peace officer training, see O.A.C. Ch. 109:2-1
   Power of municipality to establish a police department, see R.C. § 715.05
   Purchase of police dogs or horses by law enforcement officers, see R.C. §
9.62
§ 34.01 MARSHAL AND POLICE CHIEF SYNONYMOUS.
   The designation MARSHAL, wherever used in this code, is defined to include
the term POLICE CHIEF, and the designation POLICE CHIEF, wherever used in this
code, is defined to include the term MARSHAL.
(2000 Code, § 34.01)
§ 34.02 APPOINTMENT OF MARSHAL.
   (A)   Each municipality shall have a Marshal or designated Police Chief,
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the legislative
authority, who need not be an elector of the village or reside in village
unless the legislative authority would otherwise by ordinance so decree, and
who shall continue in office until removed therefrom as provided by §
34.06.
   (B)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section unless, not
more than 60 days prior to receiving an appointment, the person has passed a
physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician assistant, a
clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner, or a certified
nurse- midwife, showing that the person meets the physical requirements
necessary to perform the duties of Marshal as established by the legislative
authority. The appointing authority shall, prior to making any appointment,
file with the State Police and Fire Pension Fund a copy of the report or
findings of this licensed physician, physician assistant, clinical nurse
specialist, certified nurse practitioner, or certified nurse-midwife. The
professional fee for the physical examination shall be paid for by the
legislative authority.
(R.C. § 737.15) (2000 Code, § 34.01) (Ord. O-13-21, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 34.03 DEPUTY MARSHALS AND POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall, when provided for by the legislative authority, and
subject to its confirmation, appoint all deputy marshals, police officers,
night guards, and special police officers. All officers shall continue in
office until removed therefrom for the cause and in the manner provided by §
34.06.
   (B)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section unless the
person has, not more than 60 days prior to receiving appointment, passed a
physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician assistant, a
clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner, or a certified
nurse- midwife, showing that the person meets the physical requirements
necessary to perform the duties of the position to which the person is to be
appointed as established by the legislative authority. The appointing authority
shall, prior to making any appointment, file with the State Police and Fire
Pension Fund a copy of the report or findings of the licensed physician,
physician assistant, clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse practitioner,
or certified nurse-midwife. The professional fee for the physical examination
shall be paid for by the legislative authority.
(R.C. § 737.16) (2000 Code, § 34.03)
§ 34.04 AUXILIARY POLICE UNITS.
   (A)   The legislative authority may establish, by ordinance, an auxiliary
police unit within the Police Department, and provide for the regulation of
auxiliary police officers. The Mayor shall be the executive head of the
auxiliary police unit, shall make all appointments and removals of auxiliary
police officers, subject to any general rules prescribed by the legislative
authority by ordinance, and shall prescribe rules for the organization,
training, administration, control, and conduct of the auxiliary police unit.
The Marshal shall have exclusive control of the stationing and transferring of
all auxiliary police officers, under such general rules as the Mayor
prescribes.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   The legislative authority may establish, by ordinance, a
parking enforcement unit within the Police Department, and provide for the
regulation of parking enforcement officers. The Mayor shall be the executive
head of the parking enforcement unit, shall make all appointments and removals
of parking enforcement officers, subject to any general rules prescribed by the
legislative authority by ordinance, and shall prescribe rules for the
organization, training, administration, control, and conduct of the parking
enforcement unit.
         (b)   The Mayor may appoint parking enforcement officers who agree to
serve for nominal compensation, and persons with physical disabilities may
receive appointments as parking enforcement officers.
      (2)   The authority of the parking enforcement officers shall be limited
to the enforcement of ordinances governing parking in accessible parking
locations and fire lanes and any other parking ordinances specified in the
ordinance creating the parking enforcement unit. Parking enforcement officers
shall have no other powers.
      (3)   The training of parking enforcement officers shall include
instruction in general administrative rules and procedures governing the
parking enforcement unit, the role of the judicial system as it relates to
parking regulations and enforcement, proper techniques and methods relating to
the enforcement of parking ordinances, human interaction skills, and first aid.
(R.C. § 737.161) (2000 Code, § 34.04)
§ 34.05 OFFENSES AFFECTING EMPLOYMENT OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS; PROBATIONARY
PERIOD; FINAL APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   Offenses affecting employment.
      (1)   As used in this section, FELONY has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.511.
      (2)   (a)   The Mayor shall not appoint a person as a Marshal, a deputy
marshal, a police officer, a night security officer, a special police officer,
or an auxiliary police officer on a permanent basis, on a temporary basis, for
a probationary term, or on other than a permanent basis if the person
previously has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to a felony.
         (b)   1.   The Mayor shall terminate the employment of a Marshal,
deputy marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police officer,
or auxiliary police officer who does either of the following: pleads guilty to
a felony; or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor pursuant to a negotiated plea
agreement as provided in R.C. § 2929.43(D) in which the Marshal, deputy
marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police officer, or
auxiliary police officer agrees to surrender the certificate awarded to that
person under R.C. § 109.77.
            2.   The Mayor shall suspend from employment a Marshal, deputy
marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police officer, or
auxiliary police officer who is convicted, after trial, of a felony. If the
Marshal, deputy marshal, police officer, night security officer, special police
officer, or auxiliary police officer files an appeal from that conviction and
the conviction is upheld by the highest court to which the appeal is taken or
if that person does not file a timely appeal, the Mayor shall terminate that
person’s employment. If the Marshal, deputy marshal, police officer, night
security officer, special police officer, or auxiliary police officer files an
appeal that results in that person’s acquittal of the felony or conviction of a
misdemeanor, or in the dismissal of the felony charge against that person, the
Mayor shall reinstate that person. A Marshal, deputy marshal, police officer,
night security officer, special police officer, or auxiliary police officer who
is reinstated under this division (A) shall not receive any back pay unless
that person’s conviction of the felony was reversed on appeal, or the felony
charge was dismissed, because the court found insufficient evidence to convict
that person of the felony.
         (c)   This division (A)(2) does not apply regarding an offense that
was committed prior to January 1, 1997.
         (d)   The suspension from employment, or the termination of the
employment, of a Marshal, deputy marshal, police officer, night security
officer, special police officer, or auxiliary police officer under division (A)
(2)(b) above shall be in accordance with R.C. Ch. 119.
(R.C. § 737.162)
   (B)   Probationary period; final appointment. Any appointments made shall be
for a probationary period of one-year continuous service, and no appointments
shall be deemed finally made until the appointee has satisfactorily served his
or her probationary period. At the end of the probationary period, the Mayor
shall transmit to the legislative authority a record of the employee's service
with his or her recommendations thereon; and with the concurrence of the
legislative authority, the Mayor may remove or finally appoint the employee.
(2000 Code, § 34.05) (Ord. O-21-18, passed 7-23-2018)
§ 34.06 REMOVAL PROCEEDINGS; SUSPENSION; APPEALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
34.05(A), if the Mayor has reason to believe that a duly appointed Marshal of
the municipality has been guilty of incompetency, inefficiency, dishonesty,
drunkenness, immoral conduct, insubordination, discourteous treatment of the
public, neglect of duty, or any other acts of misfeasance, malfeasance, or
nonfeasance in the performance of his or her official duty, the Mayor shall
file with the legislative authority written charges against the person, setting
forth in detail the reason therefor and immediately shall serve a true copy
thereof upon the person against whom they are made.
   (B)   Charges filed under this section shall be heard at the next regular
meeting of the legislative authority occurring not less than five days after
the date the charges have been served on the person against whom they are made.
The person against whom charges are filed may appear in person and by counsel
at the hearing, examine all witnesses, and answer all charges against him or
her.
   (C)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the legislative authority may
dismiss the charges, suspend the accused from office for not more than 60 days,
or remove the accused from office.
   (D)   Action of the legislative authority removing or suspending the accused
from office shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all elected
members.
   (E)   In the case of removal from office, the person so removed may appeal
on questions of law and fact the decision of the legislative authority to the
Court of Common Pleas. The person shall take the appeal within ten days from
the date of the finding of the legislative authority.
(R.C. § 737.171) (2000 Code, § 34.06)
§ 34.07 GENERAL POWERS.
   (A)   The Marshal shall be the peace officer of the municipality and the
executive head, under the Mayor, of the police force. The Marshal, and the
deputy marshals, police officers, or night security officers under him or her
shall have the powers conferred by law upon police officers in all
municipalities of the state, and other powers not inconsistent with the nature
of their offices as are conferred by ordinance.
   (B)   A Marshal, Deputy Marshal, or police officer of a municipality may
participate, as the director of an organized crime task force established under
R.C. § 177.02 or as a member of the investigatory staff of such a task force,
in an investigation of organized criminal activity in any counties in this
state under R.C. §§ 177.01 through 177.03.
(R.C. § 737.18) (2000 Code, § 34.07)
§ 34.08 POWERS AND DUTIES OF MARSHAL.
   (A)   The Marshal has exclusive authority over the stationing and transfer
of all deputies, officers, and employees within the Police Department under the
general rules that the Mayor prescribes.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in §
34.05(A), the Marshal has the exclusive right to suspend any of the deputies,
officers, or employees in the Police Department who are under the management
and control of the Marshal for incompetence, gross neglect of duty, gross
immorality, habitual drunkenness, failure to obey orders given them by the
proper authority, or for any other reasonable or just cause.
      (2)   If an employee is suspended under this section, the Marshal
immediately shall certify this fact in writing, together with the cause for the
suspension, to the Mayor and immediately shall serve a true copy of the charge
upon the person against whom they are made. Within five days after receiving
this certification, the Mayor shall inquire into the cause of the suspension
and shall render a judgment on it. If the Mayor sustains the charges, the
judgment of the Mayor may be for the person’s suspension, reduction in rank, or
removal from the Department.
      (3)   Suspensions of more than three days, reduction in rank, or removal
from the Department under this section may be appealed to the legislative
authority within five days from the date of the Mayor’s judgment. The
legislative authority shall hear the appeal at its next regularly scheduled
meeting. The person against whom the judgment has been rendered may appear in
person and by counsel at the hearing, examine all witnesses and answer all
charges against him or her.
      (4)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the legislative authority may
dismiss the charges, uphold the Mayor’s judgment, or modify the judgment to one
of suspension for not more than 60 days, reduction in rank, or removal from the
Department.
      (5)   Action of the legislative authority removing or suspending the
accused from the Department requires the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all
members elected to it.
      (6)   In the case of removal from the Department, the person so removed
may appeal on questions of law and fact the decision of the legislative
authority to the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the municipality
is situated. The person shall take the appeal within ten days from the date of
the finding of the legislative authority.
   (C)   The Marshal shall suppress all riots, disturbances, and breaches of
the peace, and to that end may call upon the citizens to aid him or her. The
Marshal shall arrest all disorderly persons in the municipality, and pursue and
arrest any person fleeing from justice in any part of the state. The Marshal
shall arrest any person in the act of committing an offense against the laws of
the state or the ordinances of the municipality, and forthwith bring the person
before the Mayor or other competent authority for examination or trial. The
Marshal shall receive and execute proper authority for the arrest and detention
of criminals fleeing or escaping from other places or states.
   (D)   In the discharge of his or her duties, the Marshal shall have the
powers and be subject to the responsibilities of constables, and for services
performed by the Marshal or his or her deputies the same fees and expenses
shall be taxed as are allowed constables.
(R.C. § 737.19) (2000 Code, § 34.08)
§ 34.09 DISPOSITION OF FINES AND PENALTIES.
   All fees, costs, fines, and penalties collected by the Marshal shall
immediately be paid to the Mayor, who shall report to the legislative authority
monthly the amount thereof, from whom and for what purpose collected, and when
paid to the Mayor.
(R.C. § 737.20) (2000 Code, § 34.09)
§ 34.10 PROPERTY RECOVERED BY POLICE.
   (A)   (1)   Stolen or other property recovered by members of the police
force shall be deposited and kept in a place designated by the Mayor.
      (2)   Each article shall be entered in a book kept for that purpose, with
the name of the owner, if ascertained, the person from whom taken, the place
where found with general circumstances, the date of its receipt, and the name
of the officer recovering it.
   (B)   An inventory of all money or other property shall be given to the
party from whom taken, and, in case it is not claimed by some person within 30
days after arrest and seizure, it shall be delivered to the person from whom
taken, and to no other person, either attorney, agent, factor, or clerk, except
by special order of the Mayor.
(R.C. § 737.29) (2000 Code, § 34.10)
Cross-reference:
   Disposition of property held by Police Department-specific regulations, see
§
130.17
§ 34.11 DISPOSITION TO CLAIMANT.
   (A)   If, within 30 days, the money or property recovered under §
34.10 is claimed by any person other than the person from whom the property was
recovered, it shall be retained by the custodian thereof until after the
discharge or conviction of the person from whom it was taken, and so long as it
may be required as evidence in any case in court.
   (B)   If the claimant establishes to the satisfaction of the court that he
or she is the rightful owner, it shall be restored to him or her; otherwise, it
shall be returned to the accused person, personally, and not to any attorney,
agent, factor, or clerk of the accused person, except upon special order of the
Mayor after all liens and claims in favor of the municipality have first been
discharged and satisfied.
(R.C. § 737.31) (2000 Code, § 34.11)
Cross-reference:
   Disposition of property held by Police Department-specific regulations, see
§
130.17
§ 34.12 SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY; DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section and unless the property
involved is required to be disposed of pursuant to another section of the Ohio
Revised Code, property that is unclaimed for 90 days or more shall be sold by
the Marshal, Police Chief or licensed auctioneer at public auction, after
notice of the sale has been provided by publication once a week for three
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the county or as
provided in R.C. § 7.16. The proceeds of the sale shall be paid to the
Treasurer and shall be credited to the General Fund of the municipality.
   (B)   If authorized to do so by an ordinance adopted by the legislative
authority of the municipality and if the property involved is not required to
be disposed of pursuant to another section of the Ohio Revised Code, the Police
Chief or Marshal may contribute property that is unclaimed for 90 days or more
to one or more public agencies, to one or more nonprofit organizations no part
of the net income of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual and no substantial part of the activities of which consists of
carrying on propaganda or otherwise attempting to influence legislation, or to
one or more organizations satisfying I.R.C. § 501(c)(3) or (c)(19).
(R.C. § 737.32) (2000 Code, § 34.12)
Cross-reference:
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department;
regulations, see §
130.17
§ 34.13 EXPENSES OF STORAGE AND SALE; NOTICE.
   Upon the sale of any unclaimed or impounded property as provided in §
34.12, if any such unclaimed or impounded property was ordered removed to a
place of storage or stored, or both, by or under the direction of the Police
Chief or Marshal, any expenses or charges for such removal or storage, or both,
and costs of sale, provided the same are approved by such Police Chief or
Marshal, shall first be paid from the proceeds of such sale. Notice shall be
given by registered mail 30 days before the date of sale to the owner and
mortgagee, or other lien holder, at their last known address.
(R.C. § 737.33) (2000 Code, § 34.13)
§ 34.14 DEPOSIT OF STOLEN PROPERTY; PROHIBITION.
   (A)   No officer, or other member of an organized police department of a
township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the office of
a township constable shall neglect or refuse to deposit property taken or found
by the officer or other member in possession of a person arrested. Any
conviction for a violation of this section shall vacate the office of the
person so convicted.
(R.C. § 505.106)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above shall be fined not less than twice
the value of any property not deposited as provided by division (A) above, but
not more than $3,000, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 737.99)
(2000 Code, § 34.14)
§ 34.15 PEACE OFFICER ADMINISTERING OATHS; ACKNOWLEDGING COMPLAINTS, SUMMONSES,
AFFIDAVITS, AND RETURNS OF COURT ORDERS.
   (A)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01, except that PEACE OFFICER does not include, for any purpose, the
superintendent or any trooper of the State Highway Patrol.
   (B)   A peace officer who has completed a course of in-service training that
includes training in the administration of oaths and the acknowledgment of
documents and that is approved by the chief legal officer of the political
subdivision in which the peace officer is elected or of the political
subdivision or other entity in which or by which the peace officer is appointed
or employed may administer oaths and acknowledge criminal and juvenile
complaints, summonses, affidavits, and returns of court orders in matters
related to the peace officer’s official duties.
   (C)   A trooper of the State Highway Patrol who has completed a course of
in-service training that includes training in the administration of oaths and
the acknowledgment of documents and that is approved by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety may administer oaths and acknowledge criminal and juvenile court
complaints, summonses, affidavits, and returns of court orders in matters
related to the trooper’s official duties.
   (D)   Except as authorized by division (B) or (C) above, no peace officer or
trooper who has completed a course of in-service training of a type described
in division (B) or (C) of this section shall knowingly perform any act that is
specifically required of a notary public unless the peace officer or trooper
has complied with R.C. Ch. 147.
(R.C. § 2935.081) (2000 Code, § 34.15)
CHAPTER 35: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
35.01   Municipal fire regulations; Fire Department
   
35.02   Fire Chief; Deputy Fire Chief; employment of firefighters; criminal
records check for firefighters
   
35.03   Schooling of officers and firefighters of Fire Department
   
35.04   Legislative authority may purchase engines and equipment
   
35.05   Buildings for Department
   
35.06   Records
   
35.07   Maximum consecutive hours for firefighters on duty
   
35.08   Investigation of cause of fire
   
35.09   Right to examine buildings, premises, and vehicles
   
35.10   Burning buildings for firefighting instruction or research
   
35.11   Impersonating fire safety inspector
   
35.12   Standards for equipment
   
35.13   Persons entitled to be known as firefighters
   
35.14   Resignation
   
35.15   Rules and regulations
Cross-reference:
   Fire prevention, fireworks, and explosives, see Ch. 91
Statutory reference:
   Fire service training, see O.A.C. Ch. 1301:7-7-01 et seq.
   Power of municipality to establish a fire department, see R.C. § 715.05
§ 35.01 MUNICIPAL FIRE REGULATIONS; FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The legislative authority may establish all necessary regulations to guard
against the occurrence of fires and protect the property and lives of its
citizens against damage and accidents resulting therefrom, and for that purpose
may establish and maintain a fire department, provide for the establishment and
organization of fire engine and hose companies and rescue units, establish the
hours of labor of the members of its fire department who shall not be required
to be on duty continuously more than six days in every seven, and provide by-
laws and regulation for the government of companies and their members as is
necessary and proper.
(R.C. § 737.21) (2000 Code, § 35.01)
Cross-reference:
   Driving over fire hose, see §
72.121
   False alarms, see §
132.09
   Fireworks, explosives, fire prevention, see Ch. 91
§ 35.02 FIRE CHIEF; DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF; EMPLOYMENT OF FIREFIGHTERS; CRIMINAL
RECORDS CHECK FOR FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   Each municipality establishing a fire department shall have a Fire
Chief as the head thereof, appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the legislative authority, who shall continue in office until removed
therefrom as provided by R.C. §§ 733.35 through 733.39.
   (B)   There is created a position of Deputy Fire Chief to be filled by
appointment of the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council. The salary
shall be established by Council. The Deputy Fire Chief shall perform any duties
assigned him or her by the Fire Chief, and shall be in charge in the absence of
the Fire Chief, or if the Fire Chief is disabled or unable to perform his or
her duties for any reason, the Deputy Fire Chief shall be in charge of the
operation.
(1967 Code, § 33.16)
   (C)   The legislative authority may fix the compensation it considers best.
The appointee shall continue in office until removed from office as provided by
R.C. §§ 733.35 to 733.39. The provisions of §
35.03 shall extend to the Deputy Fire Chief.
   (D)   The legislative authority may provide for the appointment of permanent
full-time paid firefighters as it considers best and fix their compensation, or
for the services of volunteer firefighters, who shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the legislative authority, and shall continue in
office until removed from office.
   (E)   No person shall be appointed as a permanent full-time paid firefighter
of the municipality unless either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person has received a certificate issued under former R.C. §
3303.07 or R.C. §§ 4765.55(C)(1) or 4765.55(C)(2) evidencing satisfactory
completion of a firefighter training program; and
      (2)   The person began serving as a permanent full-time paid firefighter
with the municipality prior to July 2, 1970, and receives a certificate issued
under R.C. § 4765.55(C)(3).
   (F)   No person who is appointed as a volunteer firefighter of the
municipality shall remain in that position unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   Within one year of the appointment, the person has received a
certificate issued under former R.C. § 3303.07 or R.C. § 4765.55 evidencing
satisfactory completion of a firefighter training program; and
      (2)   The person has served as a permanent full-time paid firefighter
with the municipality prior to July 2, 1970, or as a volunteer firefighter with
the municipality prior to July 2, 1979, and receives a certificate issued under
R.C. § 4765.55(C)(3).
   (G)   No person shall receive an appointment under this section unless the
person has, not more than 60 days prior to receiving the appointment, passed a
physical examination given by a licensed physician, a physician assistant, a
clinical nurse specialist, a certified nurse practitioner, or a certified
nurse- midwife, showing that the person meets the physical requirements
necessary to perform the duties of the position to which the person is to be
appointed as established by the legislative authority. The appointing authority
shall, prior to making an appointment, file with the State Police and Fire
Pension Fund or the Local Volunteer Firefighter’s Dependents Fund Board a copy
of the report or findings of that licensed physician, physician assistant,
clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse practitioner, or certified nurse-
midwife. The professional fee for the physical examination shall be paid for by
the legislative authority.
(R.C. § 737.22)
   (H)   Criminal records check for firefighters.
      (1)   The Fire Chief may request the Superintendent of the State Bureau
of Criminal Identification and Investigation (“BCII”) to conduct a criminal
records check with respect to any person who is under consideration for
appointment or employment as a permanent, full-time paid firefighter or any
person who is under consideration for appointment as a volunteer firefighter.
      (2)   (a)   The Fire Chief may request that the Superintendent of BCII
obtain information from the Federal Bureau of Investigation as a part of the
criminal records check requested pursuant to division (H)(1) above.
         (b)   The Fire Chief, authorized by division (H)(1) above to request a
criminal records check, shall provide to each person for whom the Fire Chief
intends to request a criminal records check a copy of the form prescribed
pursuant to R.C. § 109.578(C)(1) and a standard impression sheet to obtain
fingerprint impressions prescribed pursuant to R.C. § 109.578(C)(2), obtain the
completed form and impression sheet from the person, and forward the completed
form and impression sheet to the Superintendent of BCII at the time the
criminal records check is requested.
         (c)   Any person subject to a criminal records check who receives a
copy of the form and a copy of the impression sheet pursuant to division (H)(2)
(b) above and who is requested to complete the form and provide a set of
fingerprint impressions shall complete the form or provide all the information
necessary to complete the form and shall provide the impression sheet with the
impressions of the person’s fingerprints. If a person fails to provide the
information necessary to complete the form or fails to provide impressions of
the person’s fingerprints, the appointing authority shall not appoint or employ
the person as a permanent full-time paid firefighter or a volunteer
firefighter.
      (3)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(3)(b) below, an
appointing authority shall not appoint or employ a person as a permanent, full-
time paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter if the Fire Chief has
requested a criminal records check pursuant to division (H)(1) above and the
criminal records check indicates that the person previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to any of the following:
            1.   A felony;
            2.   A violation of R.C. § 2909.03; or
            3.   A violation of an existing or former law of this state, any
other state, or the United States that is substantially equivalent to any of
the offenses described in division (H)(3)(a)1. or (H)(3)(a)2. above.
         (b)   Notwithstanding division (H)(3)(a) above, an appointing
authority may appoint or employ a person as a permanent, full-time paid
firefighter or a volunteer firefighter if all of the following apply:
            1.   The Fire Chief has requested a criminal records check pursuant
to division (H)(1) above;
            2.   The criminal records check indicates that the person
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the offenses
described in division (H)(3)(a) above;
            3.   The person meets rehabilitation standards established in rules
adopted under division (H)(5) below; and
         (c)   If the Fire Chief requests a criminal records check pursuant to
division (H)(1) above, an appointing authority may appoint or employ a person
as a permanent, full-time paid firefighter or volunteer firefighter
conditionally until the criminal records check is completed and the Fire Chief
receives the results. If the results of the criminal records check indicate
that, pursuant to division (H)(3)(a) above, the person subject to the criminal
records check is disqualified from appointment or employment, the Fire Chief
shall release the person from appointment or employment.
      (4)   The Fire Chief shall pay to the BCII the fee prescribed pursuant to
R.C. § 109.578(C)(3) for each criminal records check conducted in accordance
with that section. The Fire Chief may charge the applicant who is subject to
the criminal records check a fee for the costs the Fire Chief incurs in
obtaining the criminal records check. A fee charged under this division (H)
shall not exceed the amount of fees the Fire Chief pays for the criminal
records check. If a fee is charged under this division (H), the Fire Chief
shall notify the applicant at the time of the applicant’s initial application
for appointment or employment of the amount of the fee and that, unless the fee
is paid, the applicant will not be considered for appointment or employment.
      (5)   (a)   The appointing authority shall adopt rules in accordance with
R.C. Ch. 119 to implement this division (H).
         (b)   The rules shall include rehabilitation standards a person who
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense listed in division (H)(3)
(a) above must meet for the appointing authority to appoint or employ the
person as a permanent, full-time paid firefighter or a volunteer firefighter.
      (6)   The Fire Chief requesting a criminal records check for an applicant
shall inform each applicant, at the time of the person’s initial application
for appointment or employment, that the applicant is required to provide a set
of impressions of the person’s fingerprints and that the Fire Chief requires a
criminal records check to be conducted and satisfactorily completed in
accordance with R.C. § 109.578.
      (7)   As used in this section:
         APPOINTING AUTHORITY. Any person or body that has the authority to
hire, appoint, or employ permanent, full-time paid firefighters and volunteer
firefighters under R.C. § 737.22.
         CRIMINAL RECORDS CHECK. The same meaning as in R.C. § 109.578.
         SUPERINTENDENT OF BCII. The same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.86.
(R.C. § 737.221) (2000 Code, § 35.02) (Ord. O-23-60, passed 9-12-1960)
§ 35.03 SCHOOLING OF OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The legislative authority may send any of the officers and firefighters of
its Fire Department to schools of instruction designed to promote the
efficiency of firefighters, and, if authorized in advance, may pay their
necessary expenses from the funds used for the maintenance and operation of the
Fire Department.
(R.C. § 737.23) (2000 Code, § 35.03)
§ 35.04 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY MAY PURCHASE ENGINES AND EQUIPMENT.
   The legislative authority may purchase the necessary fire engines and other
equipment as is necessary for the extinguishment of fires and the saving of
lives, and may establish lines of fire alarm telegraph within the limits of the
municipality.
(R.C. § 737.24) (2000 Code, § 35.04)
§ 35.05 BUILDINGS FOR DEPARTMENT.
   The legislative authority may provide or erect necessary and suitable
buildings containing rooms for fire engines and other equipment, and provide
for the meetings of the fire and hose companies.
(R.C. § 737.25) (2000 Code, § 35.05)
§ 35.06 RECORDS.
   The Fire Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires.
The record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of fire
(if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose for which
occupied, value of building and contents, members of the Department responding
to the alarm, and other information as he or she may deem advisable, or as may
be required from time to time by the legislative authority.
(2000 Code, § 35.06)
§ 35.07 MAXIMUM CONSECUTIVE HOURS FOR FIREFIGHTERS ON DUTY.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever the municipality employs three or more full-time paid
firefighters, the Fire Chief shall divide the uniform force into not less than
two platoons, and where the uniform force is so divided into two platoons, the
Chief shall keep a platoon of the uniform force on duty 24 hours after which
the platoon serving 24 consecutive hours shall be allowed to remain off duty
for at least 24 consecutive hours, except in cases of extraordinary emergency.
      (2)   Each individual member of the platoons, in addition to receiving a
minimum of 24 hours off duty in each period of 48 hours, shall receive an
additional period of 24 consecutive hours off duty in each period of eight
days, so that no individual member shall be on duty more than a total of 72
hours in any period of eight days. The Chief shall arrange the schedule of
working hours to comply with this section.
      (3)   The Chief may, however, in cases of sickness, death, or on other
necessary occasions, permit the exchange of working hours between members of
the Department. All employees of the Fire Department shall be given not less
than two weeks’ leave of absence annually, with full pay. This section, insofar
as it relates to off duty periods, does not apply to the municipality if it
adopts a 40-hour week, or if it has a three platoon system, the members of
which work 24 consecutive hours, immediately followed by 48 consecutive hours
off duty, but the provisions relating to the two weeks’ leave of absence do
apply.
   (B)   FULL-TIME PAID FIREFIGHTERS, as used in this section, does not include
volunteer firefighters, or firefighters who work part time.
(R.C. § 4115.02) (2000 Code, § 35.07)
§ 35.08 INVESTIGATION OF CAUSE OF FIRE.
   (A)   Investigation of fires generally.
      (1)   The legislative authority may invest any officer of the Fire or
Police Department with the power, and impose on him or her the duty, to be
present at all fires, investigate the cause thereof, examine witnesses, compel
the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers, and to do
and perform all other acts necessary to the effective discharge of such duties.
      (2)   (a)   Such officer may administer oaths, make arrests, and enter
for the purpose of examination any building which, in his or her opinion, is in
danger from fire.
         (b)   The officer shall report his or her proceedings to the
legislative authority at such times as are required.
(R.C. § 737.27)
   (B)   Investigation of major fires.
      (1)   The Fire Chief, or the Fire Prevention Officer, shall investigate
the cause, origin, and circumstances of each major fire, as determined by the
rules of the State Fire Marshal, occurring in the municipality by which
property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall make an investigation to
determine whether the fire was the result of carelessness or design. The
investigation shall be commenced within two days, not including Sunday, if the
fire occurred on that day. The State Fire Marshal may superintend the
investigation.
      (2)   An officer making an investigation of a fire occurring in the
municipality shall notify the State Fire Marshal, and within one week of the
occurrence of the fire shall furnish him or her a written statement of all
facts relating to its cause and origin, and other information as is required by
forms provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (3)   In the performance of the duties imposed by this chapter, the Fire
Chief or Fire Prevention Officer, at any time of day or night, may enter upon
and examine any building or premises where a fire has occurred, and other
buildings and premises adjoining or near thereto.
(R.C. § 3737.24)
(2000 Code, § 35.08)
§ 35.09 RIGHT TO EXAMINE BUILDINGS, PREMISES, AND VEHICLES.
   The Fire Chief, other members of the Department as may be designated by the
Chief, and the Fire Prevention Officer may at all reasonable hours enter into
all buildings and upon all premises and vehicles within their jurisdiction for
the purpose of examination.
(R.C. § 3737.14(A)) (2000 Code, § 35.09)
§ 35.10 BURNING BUILDINGS FOR FIREFIGHTING INSTRUCTION OR RESEARCH.
   No building that contains asbestos shall be burned for the purpose of
instruction in the methods of firefighting or research in the control of fires.
(R.C. § 3737.14(B)) (2000 Code, § 35.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Notification requirements, see R.C. § 3737.14(C) and (D)
§ 35.11 IMPERSONATING FIRE SAFETY INSPECTOR.
   (A)   No person who is not a certified fire safety inspector shall act as
such or hold himself or herself out to be such, unless prior to commencing any
inspection function, he or she discloses the purpose for which he or she is
making such inspection and the fact that he or she is not employed by any state
or local fire service or agency, and that he or she is not acting in an
official capacity for any governmental subdivision or agency.
(R.C. § 3737.64)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(D))
(2000 Code, § 35.11)
§ 35.12 STANDARDS FOR EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or use any fire protection or
firefighting equipment that does not meet the minimum standards established by
the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code, being O.A.C. §§ 1301:7-7-01 et
seq.
   (B)   Except for public and private mobile fire trucks, no person shall
service, test, repair, or install for profit any fire protection or
firefighting equipment without a certificate or a provisional certificate
issued by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3737.65.
(R.C. § 3737.65(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates divisions (A) or (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(E))
(2000 Code, § 35.12)
§ 35.13 PERSONS ENTITLED TO BE KNOWN AS FIREFIGHTERS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.60.
      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.60.
   (B)   No person shall claim to the public to be or act as a firefighter,
volunteer firefighter, member of a fire department, Fire Chief, or Fire
Prevention Officer unless the person is recognized as a firefighter, volunteer
firefighter, member of a fire department, member of a private fire company,
Fire Chief, or Fire Prevention Officer by the State Fire Marshal or has
received a certificate issued under R.C. § 4765.55 or former R.C. § 3303.07
evidencing satisfactory completion of a firefighter training program and has
been appointed by the governing board of a firefighting agency or, in the case
of a volunteer firefighter, receives such a certificate within one year after
appointment by the governing board of a firefighting agency.
(R.C. § 3737.66)
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(G))
(2000 Code, § 35.13)
§ 35.14 RESIGNATION.
   Whenever any firefighter or apprentice firefighter has knowledge that he or
she is going to be unable to continue his or her connection with the Fire
Department because of moving from the community, illness, or any other reason,
he or she shall forward a written communication to the Mayor advising the Mayor
of the fact. The regulation badge of the Department must be turned in with the
resignation.
(1967 Code, § 33.18) (Ord. O-14-43, passed 6-14-1943; Ord. O-15-45, passed 9-
10-1945)
§ 35.15 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Personnel. The Fire Department of the village shall be administered by
the Mayor, as chief executive officer of the village.
      (1)   There shall be two Fire Captains, who shall have the duties and
responsibilities hereinafter set forth.
      (2)   Council shall authorize the maximum number of volunteer
firefighters who may be appointed, and who shall be designated as firefighters
or apprentice firefighters.
      (3)   The Fire Captains and volunteer firefighters shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of Council in accordance with R.C. §
737.22.
   (B)   Fire Captains. Fire Captains shall alternate in the performance of
their duties as Fire Captains, and shall be charged with the responsibility of:
      (1)   The operation of fire equipment and apparatus;
      (2)   The prevention of fires by fire inspection;
      (3)   Directing firefighting and combating fires and saving lives;
      (4)   Making and keeping an accurate record of attendance at fires;
      (5)   Making a full and complete report of all fires and of injuries to
personnel;
      (6)   Making and keeping a daily record of names of firefighters and
apprentices reporting for duty;
      (7)   One of the Fire Captains may be designated by the Fire Chief as
instructor, and shall be charged with the additional responsibility of:
         (a)   Instructing and drilling of apprentice firefighters;
         (b)   Drilling of firefighters; and
         (c)   Keeping an accurate record of attendance of apprentices at all
instruction periods.
      (8)   Each Fire Captain shall assign firefighters under his or her
command to all duties at fires and lead the firefighters in saving lives and
property and in extinguishing fires. He or she shall also assign firefighters,
or apprentices under firefighters, in removing ashes from the premises or to
any other help that may be needed.
   (C)   Firefighters and apprentices. Volunteer firefighters who have
demonstrated their proficiency as firefighters through previous experience or
by examination, whether such examination be given by the instructor of the
state, or by the instructor of the village, and who have been previously
appointed by the Mayor are designated as firefighters. Volunteer firefighters
who have likewise been appointed by the Mayor, but have not demonstrated their
proficiency or passed the examination, are designated apprentices.
   (D)   Drills. In order to maintain a high degree of efficiency and
manipulative skill, all firefighters shall attend a period of drills not less
than once each calendar month to receive instructions and drill in the
practical and modern methods in the use and handling of all tools and
appliances used in the extinguishing of fires, and the saving of lives, and
shall be so instructed that they shall become thoroughly familiar with the
special duties of all positions, and may be called to demonstrate their skill
and knowledge in handling such tools, equipment, or apparatus. Times for drills
shall be specified by the instructor. Drill evolutions with the apparatus shall
be conducted in front of the fire station or at a conveniently near location
where it will be possible to train the fire force in speedy and safe operation
and driving, hydrant connecting, raising serial or portable ladders for the
purpose of rescuing persons, and elevating or advancing hose and equipment.
   (E)   Instruction of apprentice firefighters. All apprentices are required
to fulfill the necessary instruction requirements and show their proficiency by
examination. Instructions shall be given by the instructor and be based on a
curriculum including instructions in the practical and modern methods in the
use and handling of all tools and appliances used in extinguishing fires,
saving lives, approved salvage methods and first aid, and shall demonstrate
their efficiency and manipulative skill by examination.
      (1)   On completion of an approved instruction course, and satisfactorily
passing an examination, they shall be graded as firefighters.
      (2)   During the period of instruction, and the time he or she deems an
apprentice advanced to the proper degree, the instructor may direct the
apprentices to report for fire duty.
   (F)   Injuries to personnel. Any firefighter or apprentice who suffers any
injury to himself or herself in the performance of fire duty or during drills
shall immediately report the injury to the fire officer in charge.
   (G)   Responding to alarms.
      (1)   When responding to an alarm, the driver of the apparatus shall
proceed through stop lights and red traffic lights with due caution. Ringing of
the bell or sounding the siren is not sufficient to hold blameless the driver
in the event of an accident unless extreme caution is observed and the
apparatus is under absolute control. All traffic laws, speed limits, and
traffic-control signs and signals shall be observed and obeyed on returning
from a fire or alarm.
      (2)   It is desirable that firefighters and apprentices on duty attend
fires by riding on the apparatus if possible, but firefighters and apprentices
on duty using their own cars in attending fires are to proceed in a cautious
manner, observe all traffic signs and signals and obey traffic officers who may
be on duty in the vicinity of the fire, and shall park their cars at a distance
from the fire, so as not to interfere with the operation of the apparatus or
the fighting of the fire itself and as to avoid blocking the steady flow of
traffic.
      (3)   Fire Captains and firefighters shall see that no persons other than
members of the Department or authorized officials ride on the fire apparatus
either going to or returning from a fire.
   (H)   Equipment. It is the duty of firefighters and apprentices to keep all
equipment in good condition and working order at all times and to use diligence
to see that no equipment is taken from the apparatus but that necessary for the
work at hand and shall prevent unauthorized persons from taking or handling
fire equipment. Before leaving the scene of a fire, a check shall be made to
see that all equipment is accounted for and in its proper place on the
apparatus.
   (I)   Fire hydrants. Firefighters and apprentices must note carefully the
location of hydrants within the village, study their operation, exercise great
care in opening and closing them, and see that all cups and covers are properly
adjusted after use.
   (J)   Badges. All firefighters shall be provided with a badge to be known as
the regulations badge of the Department, which shall be worn in a conspicuous
place during the time they are on duty. The badges shall not be loaned and
shall at all times remain village property.
   (K)   Suggestions and recommendations. Fire- fighters and apprentices are
urged to submit written recommendations for increasing the efficiency of the
Department. Recommendation of suitable appointees as firefighters or apprentice
firefighters shall be made to the Fire Chief.
(1967 Code, § 33.17) (Ord. O-14-43, passed 6- 14-1943; Ord. O-15-45, passed 9-
10-1945)
CHAPTER 36: CIVIL ACTIONS AGAINST THE MUNICIPALITY
Section
   
36.01   Definitions
   
36.02   Non-liability of municipality; exceptions
   
36.03   Defenses and immunities
   
36.04   Limitation of actions
   
36.05   Damages
   
36.06   Satisfaction of judgments
   
36.07   Defending and indemnifying employees
   
36.08   Liability insurance
   
36.09   Certain actions unaffected
§ 36.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY CALL. A call to duty including, but not limited to, communications
from citizens, police dispatches, and personal observations by peace officers
of inherently dangerous situations that demand an immediate response on the
part of a peace officer.
   EMPLOYEE. An officer, agent, employee, or servant, whether or not
compensated or full-time or part-time, who is authorized to act and is acting
within the scope of his or her employment for a political subdivision. The term
does not include an independent contractor and does not include any individual
engaged by a school district pursuant to R.C. § 3319.301. The term includes any
elected or appointed official of a political subdivision. The term also
includes a person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a criminal
offense and who has been sentenced to perform community service work in a
political subdivision whether pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02 or otherwise, and a
child who is found to be a delinquent child and who is ordered by a juvenile
court pursuant to R.C. §§ 2152.19 or 2152.20 to perform community service or
community work in a political subdivision.
   GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.
      (1)   A function of a political subdivision that is specified in division
(2) of this definition or that satisfies any of the following:
         (a)   A function that is imposed upon the state as an obligation of
sovereignty and that is performed by a political subdivision voluntarily or
pursuant to legislative requirement;
         (b)   A function that is for the common good of all citizens of the
state; or
         (c)   A function that promotes or preserves the public peace, health,
safety, or welfare, that involves activities that are not engaged in or not
customarily engaged in by non-governmental persons, and that is not specified
in this section as a proprietary function.
      (2)   The term includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The provision or non-provision of police, fire, emergency
medical, ambulance, and rescue services or protection;
         (b)   The power to preserve the peace; to prevent and suppress riots,
disturbances, and disorderly assemblages; to prevent, mitigate, and clean up
releases of oil and hazardous and extremely hazardous substances as defined in
R.C. § 3750.01; and to protect persons and property;
         (c)   The provision of a system of public education;
         (d)   The provision of a free public library system;
         (e)   The regulation of the use of, and the maintenance and repair of,
roads, highways, streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, aqueducts,
viaducts, and public grounds;
         (f)   Judicial, quasi-judicial, prosecutorial, legislative, and quasi-
legislative functions;
         (g)   The construction, reconstruction, repair, renovation,
maintenance, and operation of buildings that are used in connection with the
performance of a governmental function, including, but not limited to, office
buildings and courthouses;
         (h)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
maintenance, and operation of jails, places of juvenile detention, workhouses,
or any other detention facility, as defined in R.C. § 2921.01;
         (i)   The enforcement or nonperformance of any law;
         (j)   The regulation of traffic, and the erection or non-erection of
traffic signs, signals, or control devices;
         (k)   The collection and disposal of solid wastes, as defined in R.C.
§ 3734.01 including, but not limited to, the operation of solid waste disposal
facilities as “facilities” is defined in that section, and the collection and
management of hazardous waste generated by households. As used in this
subsection, HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATED BY HOUSEHOLDS means solid waste
originally generated by individual households that is listed specifically as
hazardous waste in or exhibits one or more characteristics of hazardous waste
as defined by rules adopted under R.C. § 3734.12, but that is excluded from
regulation as a hazardous waste by those rules;
         (1)   The provision or non-provision, planning or design,
construction, or reconstruction of a public improvement, including, but not
limited to, a sewer system;
         (m)   The operation of a job and family services department or agency,
including, but not limited to, the provision of assistance to aged and infirm
persons and to persons who are indigent;
         (n)   The operation of a health board, department, or agency,
including, but not limited to, any statutorily required or permissive program
for the provision of immunizations or other inoculations to all or some members
of the public; provided, that a governmental function does not include the
supply, manufacture, distribution, or development of any drug or vaccine
employed in any such immunization or inoculation program by any supplier,
manufacturer, distributor, or developer of the drug or vaccine;
         (o)   The operation of mental health facilities, developmental
disabilities facilities, alcohol treatment and control centers, and children’s
homes or agencies;
         (p)   The provision or non-provision of inspection services of all
types, including, but not limited to, inspections in connection with building,
zoning, sanitation, fire, plumbing, and electrical codes, and the taking of
actions in connection with those types of codes, including, but not limited to,
the approval of plans for the construction of buildings or structures and the
issuance or revocation of building permits or stop work orders in connection
with buildings or structures;
         (q)   Urban renewal projects and the elimination of slum conditions,
including the performance of any activity that a County Land Reutilization
Corporation is authorized to perform under R.C. Ch. 1724 or R.C. Ch. 5722;
         (r)   Flood control measures;
         (s)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, operation,
care, repair, and maintenance of a township cemetery;
         (t)   The issuance of revenue obligations under R.C. § 140.06;
         (u)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
maintenance, and operation of any school athletic facility, school auditorium,
or gymnasium or any recreation area or facility, including, but not limited to,
any of the following:
            1.   A park, playground, or playfield;
            2.   An indoor recreational facility;
            3.   A zoo or zoological park;
            4.   A bath, swimming pool, pond, water park, wading pool, wave
pool, water slide, or other type of aquatic facility;
            5.   A golf course;
            6.   A bicycle motocross facility or other type of recreational
area or facility in which bicycling, skating, skate boarding, or scooter riding
is engaged;
            7.   A rope course or climbing walls; and
            8.   An all-purpose vehicle facility in which all-purpose vehicles,
as defined in R.C. § 4519.01, are contained, maintained, or operated for
recreational activities;
         (v)   The provision of public defender services by a county or joint
county public defender’s office pursuant to R.C. Ch. 120;
         (w)   1.   At any time before regulations prescribed pursuant to 49
U.S.C. § 20153 become effective, the designation, establishment, design,
construction, implementation, operation, repair, or maintenance of a public
road rail crossing in a zone within a municipal corporation in which, by
ordinance, the legislative authority of the municipal corporation regulates the
sounding of locomotive horns, whistles, or bells;
            2.   On and after the effective date of regulations prescribed
pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 20153, the designation, establishment, design,
construction, implementation, operation, repair, or maintenance of a public
road rail crossing in such a zone or of a supplementary safety measure, as
defined in 49 U.S.C. §
         (x)   A function that the General Assembly mandates a political
subdivision to perform.
   LAW. Any provision of the Constitution, statutes, or rules of the United
States or of this state, provisions of charters, ordinances, resolutions, and
rules of political subdivisions, and written policies adopted by boards of
education. When used in connection with the “common law”, this definition does
not apply.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION or SUBDIVISION. A municipal corporation, township,
county, school district, or other body corporate and politic responsible for
governmental activities in a geographic area smaller than that of the state.
The term includes, but is not limited to, a county hospital commission
appointed under R.C. § 339.14, board of hospital commissioners appointed for a
municipal hospital under R.C. § 749.04, board of hospital trustees appointed
for a municipal hospital under R.C. § 749.22, regional planning commission
created pursuant to R.C. § 713.21, county planning commission created pursuant
to R.C. § 713.22, joint planning council created pursuant to R.C. § 713.231,
interstate regional planning commission created pursuant to R.C. § 713.30, port
authority created pursuant to R.C. §§ 4582.02 or 4582.26 or in existence on
December 16, 1964, regional council established by political subdivisions
pursuant to R.C. Ch. 167, emergency planning district and joint emergency
planning district designated under R.C. § 3750.03, joint emergency medical
services district created pursuant to R.C. § 307.052, a fire and ambulance
district created pursuant to R.C. § 505.375, joint interstate emergency
planning district established by an agreement entered into under that section,
and a county solid waste management district and joint solid waste management
district established under R.C. §§ 343.01 or 343.012, a community school
established under R.C. Ch. 3314, county land reutilization corporation
organized under R.C. Ch. 1724, the county or counties served by a community-
based correctional facility and program or district community-based correction
facility and program established and operated under R.C. §§ 2301.51 through
2301.58, a community-based correctional facility and program or district
community-based correctional facility and program that is so established and
operated, and the facility governing board of a community-based correctional
facility and program or district community-based correctional facility and
program that is so established and operated.
   PROPRIETARY FUNCTION.
      (1)   A function of a political subdivision that is specified in division
(2) of this definition or that satisfies both of the following:
         (a)   The function is not one described in divisions (1)(a) or (1)(b)
of the definition of “governmental function” contained in this section, and is
not one specified in division (2) of the definition of “governmental function”
contained in this section; and
         (b)   The function is one that promotes or preserves the public peace,
health, safety, or welfare and that involves activities that are customarily
engaged in by non-governmental persons.
      (2)   The term includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The operation of a hospital by one or more political
subdivisions;
         (b)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
maintenance, and operation of a public cemetery other than a township cemetery;
         (c)   The establishment, maintenance, and operation of a utility,
including, but not limited to, a light, gas, power, or heat plant, a railroad,
a busline or other transit company, an airport, and a municipal water supply
system;
         (d)   The maintenance, destruction, operation, and upkeep of a sewer
system; and
         (e)   The operation and control of a public stadium, auditorium, civic
or social center, exhibition hall, arts and crafts center, band or orchestra,
or off-street parking facility.
   PUBLIC ROADS. Public roads, highways, streets, avenues, alleys, and bridges
within a political subdivision. The term does not include berms, shoulders,
rights-of-way, or traffic control devices unless the traffic control devices
are mandated by the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   STATE. The State of Ohio, including, but not limited to, the General
Assembly, the Supreme Court, the offices of all elected state officers, and all
departments, boards, offices, commissions, agencies, colleges, and
universities, institutions, and other instrumentalities of the State of Ohio.
The term does not include political subdivisions.
(R.C. § 2744.01)
(2000 Code, § 36.01)
§ 36.02 NON-LIABILITY OF MUNICIPALITY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Classifications of functions; non-liability; jurisdiction of the
courts.
      (1)   For the purposes of this chapter, the functions of political
subdivisions are classified as governmental functions and proprietary
functions. Except as provided in division (B) below, a political subdivision is
not liable in damages in a civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or
property allegedly caused by any act or omission of the political subdivision
or an employee of the political subdivision in connection with a governmental
or proprietary function.
      (2)   The defenses and immunities conferred under this chapter and R.C.
Ch. 2744 apply in connection with all governmental and proprietary functions
performed by the political subdivision and its employees, whether performed on
behalf of the political subdivision or on behalf of another political
subdivision.
      (3)   Subject to statutory limitations upon their monetary jurisdiction,
the Courts of Common Pleas, the Municipal Courts, and the County Courts have
jurisdiction to hear and determine civil actions governed by or brought
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Exceptions. Subject to §
36.03 and R.C. §§ 2744.03 and 2744.05, a political subdivision is liable in
damages in a civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property
allegedly caused by an act or omission of the political subdivision or of any
of its employees in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, as
follows:
      (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), political
subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or property caused
by the negligent operation of any motor vehicle by their employees when the
employees are engaged within the scope of their employment and authority.
         (b)   The following are full defenses to that liability:
            1.   A member of a municipal police department or any other police
agency was operating a motor vehicle while responding to an emergency call and
the operation of the vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct;
            2.   A member of a municipal fire department or any other
firefighting agency was operating a motor vehicle while engaged in duty at a
fire, proceeding toward a place where a fire is in progress or is believed to
be in progress, or answering any other emergency alarm and the operation of the
vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct; and
            3.   A member of an emergency medical service owned or operated by
a political subdivision was operating a motor vehicle while responding to or
completing a call for emergency medical care or treatment, the member was
holding a valid commercial driver’s license issued pursuant to R.C. Ch. 4506 or
a driver’s license issued pursuant to R.C. Ch. 4507, the operation of the
vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct, and the operation
complies with the precautions of R.C. § 4511.03.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 3314.07 and 3746.24,
political subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or
property caused by the negligent performance of acts by their employees with
respect to proprietary functions of the political subdivisions.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3746.24, political
subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or property caused
by their negligent failure to keep public roads in repair and other negligent
failure to remove obstructions from public roads, except that it is a full
defense to that liability, when a bridge within a municipality is involved,
that the municipality does not have the responsibility for maintaining or
inspecting the bridge.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3746.24, political
subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or property that
is caused by the negligence of their employees and that occurs within or on the
grounds of, and is due to physical defects within or on the grounds of,
buildings that are used in connection with the performance of a governmental
function, including, but not limited to, office buildings and courthouses, but
not including jails, places of juvenile detention, workhouses, or any other
detention facility, as defined in R.C. § 2921.01.
      (5)   In addition to the circumstances described in divisions (B)(1)
through (B)(4) above, a political subdivision is liable for injury, death, or
loss to person or property when civil liability is expressly imposed upon the
political subdivision by a section of the Ohio Revised Code, including, but not
limited to, R.C. §§ 2743.02 and 5591.37. Civil liability shall not be construed
to exist under another section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code merely
because that section imposes a responsibility or mandatory duty upon a
political subdivision, because that section provides for a criminal penalty,
because of a general authorization in that section that a political subdivision
may sue and be sued, or because that section uses the term “shall” in a
provision pertaining to a political subdivision.
   (C)   An order that denies a political subdivision or an employee of a
political subdivision the benefit of an alleged immunity from liability as
provided in this chapter or any other provision of the law is a final order.
(R.C. § 2744.02) (2000 Code, § 36.02)
§ 36.03 DEFENSES AND IMMUNITIES.
   (A)   In a civil action brought against a political subdivision or an
employee of a political subdivision to recover damages for injury, death, or
loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or omission in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the following defenses
or immunities may be asserted to establish non-liability.
      (1)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the employee
involved was engaged in the performance of a judicial, quasi-judicial,
prosecutorial, legislative, or quasi-legislative function.
      (2)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the conduct
of the employee involved, other than negligent conduct, that gave rise to the
claim of liability was required by law or authorized by law, or if the conduct
of the employee involved that gave rise to the claim of liability was necessary
or essential to the exercise of powers of the political subdivision or
employee.
      (3)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the action or
failure to act by the employee involved that gave rise to the claim of
liability was within the discretion of the employee with respect to policy
making, planning, or enforcement powers by virtue of the duties and
responsibilities of the office or position of the employee.
      (4)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the action or
failure to act by the political subdivision or employee involved that gave rise
to the claim of liability, resulted in injury or death to a person who had been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a criminal offense and who, at the time of
the injury or death, was serving any portion of his or her sentence by
performing community service work for or in the political subdivision whether
pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02 or otherwise, or resulted in injury or death to a
child who was found to be a delinquent child and who, at the time of the injury
or death, was performing community service or community work for or in a
political subdivision in accordance with the order of a juvenile court entered
pursuant to R.C. § 2152.19 or 2152.20, and if, at the time of that person’s or
child’s injury or death, the person or child was covered for purposes of R.C.
Ch. 4123 in connection with the community service or community work for or in
the political subdivision.
      (5)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the injury,
death, or loss to person or property resulted from the exercise of judgment or
discretion in determining whether to acquire, or how to use, equipment,
supplies, materials, personnel, facilities, and other resources, unless the
judgment or discretion was exercised with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or
in a wanton or reckless manner.
      (6)   In addition to any immunity or defense referred to in divisions (A)
(7) below and in circumstances not covered by that division or R.C. §§ 3314.07
and 3746.24, the employee is immune from liability unless one of the following
applies:
         (a)   His or her acts or omissions were manifestly outside the scope
of his or her employment or official responsibilities;
         (b)   His or her acts or omissions were with malicious purpose, in bad
faith, or in a wanton or reckless manner; or
         (c)   Civil liability is expressly imposed upon the employee by a
section of the Ohio Revised Code. Civil liability shall not be construed to
exist under another section of the Ohio Revised Code merely because that
section imposes a responsibility or mandatory duty upon an employee, because
that section provides for a criminal penalty, because of a general
authorization in that section that an employee may sue and be sued, or because
the section uses the term “shall” in a provision pertaining to an employee.
      (7)   The political subdivision, and an employee who is the Chief Legal
Officer of a political subdivision, an assistant of any such person, or a judge
of a court of this state, is entitled to any defense or immunity available at
common law or established by the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   Any immunity or defense conferred upon, or referred to in connection
with, an employee by divisions (A)(6) or (A)(7) above does not affect or limit
any liability of a political subdivision for an act or omission of the employee
as provided in §
36.02.
(R.C. § 2744.03) (2000 Code, § 36.03)
§ 36.04 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   (A)   An action against a political subdivision to recover damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or
omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, whether
brought as an original action, cross- claim, counterclaim, third-party claim,
or claim for subrogation, shall be brought within two years after the cause of
action accrues, or within any applicable shorter period of time for bringing
the action provided by the Ohio Revised Code. The period of limitation
contained in this division (A) shall be tolled pursuant to R.C. § 2305.16. This
section applies to actions brought against political subdivisions by all
persons, governmental entities, and the state.
   (B)   In the complaint filed in a civil action against a political
subdivision or an employee of a political subdivision to recover damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property allegedly caused by an act or
omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, whether
filed in an original action, cross-claim, counterclaim, third-party claim, or
claim for subrogation, the complainant shall include a demand for a judgment
for the damages that the judge in a non-jury trial or the jury in a jury trial
finds that the complainant is entitled to be awarded, but shall not specify in
that demand any monetary amount for damages sought.
(R.C. § 2744.04) (2000 Code, § 36.04)
§ 36.05 DAMAGES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or rules
of a court to the contrary, in an action against a political subdivision to
recover damages for injury, death, or loss to person or property caused by an
act or omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function,
punitive or exemplary damages shall not be awarded.
   (B)   (1)   If a claimant receives or is entitled to receive benefits for
injuries or loss allegedly incurred from a policy or policies of insurance or
any other source, the benefits shall be disclosed to the court, and the amount
of the benefits shall be deducted from any award against a political
subdivision recovered by the claimant. No insurer or other person is entitled
to bring an action under a subrogation provision in an insurance or other
contract against a political subdivision with respect to those benefits. The
amount of the benefits shall be deducted from an award against a political
subdivision under this division (B)(1) regardless of whether the claimant may
be under an obligation to pay back the benefits upon recovery, in whole or in
part, for the claim. A claimant whose benefits have been deducted from an award
under this division (B)(1) is not considered fully compensated and shall not be
required to reimburse a subrogated claim for benefits deducted from an award
pursuant to this division (B)(1).
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) above shall be construed to do either of
the following:
         (a)   Limit the rights of a beneficiary under a life insurance policy
or the rights of sureties under fidelity or surety bonds; or
         (b)   Prohibit the Department of Medicaid from recovering from the
political subdivision, pursuant to R.C. § 5160.37, the cost of medical
assistance under a medical assistance program.
   (C)   (1)   There shall not be any limitation on compensatory damages that
represent the actual loss of the person who is awarded the damages; however,
except in wrongful death actions brought pursuant to R.C. Ch. 2125, damages
that arise from the same cause of action, transaction, or occurrence, or series
of transactions or occurrences and that do not represent the actual loss of the
person who is awarded the damages shall not exceed $250,000 in favor of any one
person. The limitation on damages that do not represent the actual loss of the
person who is awarded the damages provided in this section does not apply to
court costs that are awarded to a plaintiff, or to interest on a judgment
rendered in favor of a plaintiff, in an action against a political subdivision.
      (2)   (a)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS
AWARDED THE DAMAGES includes all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost by the person
injured as a result of the injury, including wages, salaries, or other
compensation lost as of the date of a judgment and future expected lost
earnings of the person injured;
            2.   All expenditures of the person injured or another person on
behalf of the person injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation
services, or for other care, treatment, services, products, or accommodations
that were necessary because of the injury;
            3.   All expenditures to be incurred in the future, as determined
by the court, by the person injured or another person on behalf of the person
injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation services, or for
other care, treatment, service, products, or accommodations that will be
necessary because of the injury;
            4.   All expenditures of a person whose property was injured or
destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person whose property was
injured or destroyed in order to repair or replace the property that was
injured or destroyed;
            5.   All expenditures of the person injured or of the person whose
property was injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person
injured or of the person whose property was injured or destroyed in relation to
the actual preparation or presentation of the claim involved; and
            6.   Any other expenditures of the person injured or of the person
whose property was injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the
person injured or of the person whose property was injured or destroyed that
the court determines represent an actual loss experienced because of the
personal or property injury or property loss.
         (b)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS
AWARDED THE DAMAGES does not include any fees paid or owed to an attorney for
any services rendered in relation to a personal or property injury or property
loss, and does not include any damages awarded for pain and suffering, for the
loss of society, consortium, companionship, care, assistance, attention,
protection, advice, guidance, counsel, instruction, training, or education of
the person injured, for mental anguish, or for any other intangible loss.
(R.C. § 2744.05) (2000 Code, § 36.05)
§ 36.06 SATISFACTION OF JUDGMENTS.
   (A)   Real or personal property, and monies, accounts, deposits, or
investments of a political subdivision are not subject to execution, judicial
sale, garnishment, or attachment to satisfy a judgment rendered against a
political subdivision in a civil action to recover damages for injury, death,
or loss to person or property caused by an act or omission of the political
subdivision or any of its employees in connection with a governmental or
proprietary function. Those judgments shall be paid from funds of the political
subdivisions that have been appropriated for that purpose, but, if sufficient
funds are not currently appropriated for the payment of judgments, the fiscal
officer of a political subdivision shall certify the amount of any unpaid
judgments to the taxing authority of the political subdivision for inclusion in
the next succeeding budget and annual appropriation measure and payment in the
next succeeding fiscal year as provided by R.C. § 5705.08, unless any judgment
of that nature is to be paid from the proceeds of bonds issued pursuant to R.C.
§ 133.14 or pursuant to annual installments authorized by divisions (B) or (C)
below.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO
IS AWARDED THE DAMAGES includes all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost by the person
injured as a result of the injury, as of the date of judgment;
            2.   All expenditures of the person injured or of another person on
behalf of the person injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation
services, or for other care, treatment, services, products, or accommodations
that were necessary because of the injury;
            3.   All expenditures of a person whose property was injured or
destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person whose property was
injured or destroyed in order to repair or replace the property that was
injured or destroyed;
            4.   All expenditures of the person injured or whose property was
injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person injured whose
property was injured or destroyed in relation to the actual preparation or
presentation of the claim involved; and
            5.   Any other expenditure of the person injured or whose property
was injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person injured
or of the person whose property was injured or destroyed that the court
determines represent an actual loss experienced because of the personal or
property injury or property loss.
         (b)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS
AWARDED THE DAMAGES does not include any of the following:
            1.   Wages, salaries, or other compensation lost by the person
injured as a result of the injury that are future expected earnings of that
person;
            2.   Expenditures to be incurred in the future, as determined by
the court, by the person injured or by another person on behalf of the person
injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation services, or for
other care, treatment, services, products, or accommodations that will be
necessary because of the injury;
            3.   Any fees paid or owed to an attorney for any services rendered
in relation to a personal or property injury or property loss; or
            4.   Any damages awarded for pain and suffering, for the loss of
society, consortium, companionship, care, assistance, attention, protection,
advice, guidance, counsel, instruction, training, or education of the person
injured, for mental anguish, or for any other intangible loss.
      (2)   (a)   Except as specifically provided to the contrary in this
section, a court that renders a judgment against a political subdivision as
described in division (A) above and that is not in favor of the state may
authorize the political subdivision, upon the motion of the political
subdivision, to pay the judgment or a specified portion of the judgment in
annual installments over a period not to exceed ten years, subject to the
payment of interest at the rate specified in R.C. § 1343.03(A). A court shall
not authorize the payment in installments under this division (B) of any
portion of a judgment or entire judgment that represents the actual loss of the
person who is awarded the damages.
         (b)   Additionally, a court shall not authorize the payment in
installments under this division (B) of any portion of a judgment or entire
judgment that does not represent the actual loss of the person who is awarded
the damages unless the court, after balancing the interests of the political
subdivision and of the person in whose favor the judgment was rendered,
determines that installment payments would be appropriate under the
circumstances and would not be unjust to the person in whose favor the judgment
was rendered. If a court makes that determination, it shall fix the amount of
the installment payments in a manner that achieves for the person in whose
favor the judgment was rendered the same economic result over the period as
that person would have received if the judgment or portion of the judgment
subject to the installment payments had been paid in a lump sum payment.
   (C)   At the option of a political subdivision, a judgment as described in
division (A) above and that is rendered in favor of the state may be paid in
equal annual installments over a period not to exceed ten years, without the
payment of interest.
(R.C. § 2744.06) (2000 Code, § 36.06)
§ 36.07 DEFENDING AND INDEMNIFYING EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) of this section,
a political subdivision shall provide for the defense of an employee, in any
state or federal court, in any civil action or proceeding which contains an
allegation for damages for injury, death, or loss to person or property caused
by an act or omission of the employee in connection with a governmental or
proprietary function. Amounts expended by a political subdivision in the
defense of its employees shall be from funds appropriated for this purpose or
from proceeds of insurance.
      (2)   A political subdivision does not have the duty to provide for the
defense of an employee under division (A)(1) of this section if any of the
following apply:
         (a)   The act or omission occurred while the employee was not acting
in good faith.
         (b)   The act or omission occurred while the employee was acting
manifestly outside the scope of the employee’s employment or official
responsibilities.
         (c)   The civil action or proceeding is commenced by or on behalf of a
political subdivision.
         (d)   The employee is an employee of a regional council of governments
established under R.C. Chapter 167 and both of the following apply:
            1.   The employee is not also an employee of a political
subdivision that is a member of the council.
            2.   The act or omission, if proven, would constitute a violation
of R.C. Chapter 102 or R.C. Chapter 2921.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
a political subdivision shall indemnify and hold harmless an employee in the
amount of any judgment, other than a judgment for punitive or exemplary
damages, that is obtained against the employee in a state or federal court or
as a result of a law of a foreign jurisdiction and that is for damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property caused by an act or omission in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function.
      (2)   A political subdivision is not required to indemnify and hold
harmless an employee under division (B)(1) of this section if any of the
following apply:
         (a)   At the time of the act or omission, the employee was not acting
in good faith.
         (b)   At the time of the act or omission, the employee was not acting
within the scope of the employee’s employment or official responsibilities.
         (c)   The employee is an employee of a regional council of governments
established under R.C. Chapter 167 and both of the following apply:
            1.   The employee is not also an employee of a political
subdivision that is a member of the council.
            2.   The act or omission constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter
102 or R.C. Chapter 2921.
   (C)   (1)   A political subdivision may enter into a consent judgment or
settlement and may secure releases from liability for itself or an employee,
with respect to any claim for injury, death, or loss to person or property
caused by an act or omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary
function.
      (2)   No action or appeal of any kind shall be brought by any person,
including any employee or a taxpayer, with respect to the decision of a
political subdivision pursuant to division (C)(1) of this section whether to
enter into a consent judgment or settlement or to secure releases, or
concerning the amount and circumstances of a consent judgment or settlement.
Amounts expended for any settlement shall be from funds appropriated for this
purpose.
   (D)   (1)   If a political subdivision refuses to provide an employee with a
defense in a civil action or proceeding as described in division (A) of this
section, upon the motion of the political subdivision, the court shall conduct
a hearing regarding the political subdivision’s duty to defend the employee in
that civil action. The political subdivision shall file the motion within 30
days of the close of discovery in the action. After the motion is filed, the
employee shall have not less than 30 days to respond to the motion.
      (2)   At the request of the political subdivision or the employee, the
court shall order the motion to be heard at an oral hearing. At the hearing on
the motion, the court shall consider all evidence and arguments submitted by
the parties. The court shall determine whether the political subdivision has
the duty to defend the employee under division (A) of this section. The
pleadings shall not be determinative of whether the employee acted in good
faith or was manifestly outside the scope of employment or official
responsibilities.
      (3)   If the court determines that the political subdivision has the duty
to defend the employee under division (A) of this section, the court shall
order the political subdivision to defend the employee in the action.
(R.C. § 2744.07) (2000 Code, § 36.07)
§ 36.08 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   (1)   A political subdivision may use public funds to secure insurance
with respect to its and its employees’ potential liability in damages in civil
actions for injury, death, or loss to persons or property allegedly caused by
an act or omission of the political subdivision or any of its employees in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function. The insurance may be at
the limits, for the circumstances, and subject to the terms and conditions,
that are determined by the political subdivision in its discretion. The
insurance may be for the period of time that is set forth in specifications for
competitive bids or, when competitive bidding is not required, for the period
of time that is mutually agreed upon by the political subdivision and insurance
company. The period of time does not have to be, but can be, limited to the
fiscal cycle under which the political subdivision is funded and operated.
      (2)   (a)   Regardless of whether a political subdivision procures a
policy of liability insurance pursuant to division (A)(1) above or otherwise,
the political subdivision may establish and maintain a self- insurance program
relative to its and its employees’ potential liability in damages in civil
actions for injury, death, or loss to persons or property allegedly caused by
an act or omission of the political subdivision or any of its employees in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function. The political
subdivision may reserve such funds as it deems appropriate in a special fund
that may be established pursuant to an ordinance or resolution of the political
subdivision and not subject to R.C. § 5705.12. The political subdivision may
allocate the costs of insurance of a self-insurance program, or both, among the
funds or accounts in the subdivision’s treasury on the basis of relative
exposure and loss experience. The political subdivision may require any
deductibles under an insurance or self-insurance program, or both, to be paid
from funds or accounts in the subdivision’s treasury from which a loss was
directly attributable. If it so chooses, the political subdivision may contract
with any person, other political subdivision, or regional council of
governments for purposes of the administration of the program.
         (b)   Political subdivisions that have established self-insurance
programs relative to their and their employees’ potential liability as
described in division (A)(2)(a) above may mutually agree that their self-
insurance programs will be jointly administered in a specific manner.
   (B)   The purchase of liability insurance, or the establishment and
maintenance of a self-insurance program, by a political subdivision does not
constitute a waiver of any immunity or defense of the political subdivision or
its employees, except that the political subdivision may specifically waive any
immunity or defense to which it or its employees may be entitled if a provision
to that effect is specifically included in the policy of insurance or in a
written plan of operation of the self-insurance program, or if any, the
legislative enactment of the political subdivision authorizing the purchase of
the insurance or the establishment and maintenance of the self-insurance
program. Such a specific waiver shall be only to the extent of the insurance or
self-insurance program coverage.
   (C)   The authorizations for political subdivisions to secure insurance and
to establish and maintain self- insurance programs in this section are in
addition to any other authority to secure insurance or to establish and
maintain self-insurance programs that is granted pursuant to the Ohio Revised
Code or the Ohio Constitution, and they are not in derogation of any other
authorization.
(R.C. § 2744.08)
   (D)   If a political subdivision, pursuant to division (A)(2)(a) above or a
joint self-insurance pool pursuant to R.C. § 2744.081, has allocated costs to,
or required the payment of deductibles from, funds or accounts in the
subdivision’s treasury, the subdivisions’s fiscal officer, pursuant to
ordinance or resolution of the legislative authority, shall transfer amounts
equal to those costs or deductibles from the funds or accounts of the
subdivision’s General Fund if both of the following occur:
      (1)   The subdivision requests payment from the employee responsible for
the funds or accounts for those costs or deductibles; and
      (2)   The employee receiving the request fails to remit payment within 45
days after the date of receipt of the request.
   (E)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 5705.14, 5705.15, and 5705.16 do not apply
to transfers made pursuant to division (D) above.
(R.C. § 2744.082)
(2000 Code, § 36.08)
Statutory reference:
   Joint municipal self-insurance pools, see R.C. § 2744.081
§ 36.09 CERTAIN ACTIONS UNAFFECTED.
   This chapter does not apply to, and shall not be construed to apply to, the
following:
   (A)   Civil actions that seek to recover damages from a political
subdivision or any of its employees for contractual liability;
   (B)   Civil actions by an employee, or the collective bargaining
representative of an employee, against his or her political subdivision
relative to any matter that arises out of the employment relationship between
the employee and the political subdivision;
   (C)   Civil actions by an employee of a political subdivision against the
political subdivision relative to wages, hours, conditions, or other terms of
his or her employment;
   (D)   Civil actions by sureties, and the rights of sureties, under fidelity
or surety bonds; or
   (E)   Civil claims based upon alleged violations of the Constitution or
statutes of the United States, except that the provisions of §
36.07 shall apply to such claims or related civil actions.
(R.C. § 2744.09) (2000 Code, § 36.09)
CHAPTER 37: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Departments, Boards, and Commissions Generally
   
37.01   Planning Commission
   
37.02   Recreation Department
   
37.03   Parks Advisory Board
   
37.04   Audit Committee
   
37.05   Swim Pool Commission
   
37.06   Tree Advisory Board
   
37.07   Native American Cultural Center Advisory Board
   
37.08   Mariemont Racquet Club Board
Cross-reference:
   Board of Architectural Review, see §
151.025
DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY
§ 37.01 PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   A Planning Commission is created and shall consist of seven members;
the Mayor, one member of Council to be selected by the Council and five
citizens of the village to be appointed by the Mayor for the term as prescribed
by law. It is recommended that one of the five citizens be an architect.
   (B)   The powers and duties of the Planning Commission shall be to frame and
adopt a plan to district the village into zones and to control and regulate the
height, design, and location of buildings and other structures and the uses
thereof in those zones or districts.
(1967 Code, § 34.01) (Res. 7-47, passed 8-18-1941; Ord. O-6-78, passed 4-10-
1978; Ord. O-20-16, passed 10-24-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Planning Commission, see R.C. Ch. 713
§ 37.02 RECREATION DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Recreation Director shall have the following duties.
      (1)   The Recreation Director is authorized and empowered, with the
advice and consent of the Mayor, to select and employ personnel needed to
operate and maintain village recreational facilities in the classifications
established in division (B) below.
      (2)   The Director will be in charge of the care, maintenance, and
control of all recreation facilities and equipment related thereto in the
village.
      (3)   The Director will be in charge of staffing and supervising the
employees in the Recreation Department.
      (4)   The Director shall maintain order in the recreation areas.
      (5)   The Director will be responsible for ordering all supplies
necessary for use at these facilities. Orders amounting to $100 or more require
a purchase order signed by the Mayor.
      (6)   The Director shall, prior to November 1 of each year, submit
proposed recreation programs for the ensuing year and estimated costs for the
operation of each program to Council for approval.
      (7)   The Director shall maintain and provide monthly records and provide
reports to Council of receipts or income from any program and the number of
participants in each program. Reports shall be filed the fifth working day
after the last day in the month.
      (8)   In addition to the above, the Director shall perform any and all
other duties that may from time to time be assigned by the Mayor in order that
the recreation program shall be carried into effect.
   (B)   The following chart sets forth the swimming pool and tennis court
salary schedule:*
 lst  2nd  3rd Year 4th Year 5th Year 6th Year 7th Year 8th Year 9th Year 10th
 Year Year                                                                Year
             lst    2nd    3rd    4th    5th    6th    7th    8th    9th    10th
             Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year   Year
Assistant    $8.80  $10.01 $9.26  $9.68  $10.0  $10.6  $11.22 $11.93 $12.75 $13.6
Coach                                    9      0                           8
Assistant    $9.60  $10.00 $10.20 $10.51 $10.92 $11.43 $12.05 $12.76 $13.58 $14.5
Manager                                                                     1
Head Coach   $9.60  $10.00 $10.20 $10.51 $10.92 $11.43 $12.05 $12.76 $13.58 $14.5
                                                                            1
Instructor   $9.60  $10.00 $10.20 $10.51 $10.92 $11.43 $12.05 $12.76 $13.58 $14.5
                                                                            1
Lifeguard/
Gener al
Recreational $8.80  $8.90  $9.11  $9.41  $9.82  $10.34 $10.95 $11.67 $12.49 $13.4
Employees/                                                                  1
Tennis
Attendants
Lifeguard    $8.90  $9.00  $9.21  $9.52  $9.93  $10.4  $11.05 $11.77 $12.59 $13.7
(with WSI)                                      4                           2
Pool         $16.29 $16.39 $16.60 $17.28 $17.32 $17.83 $18.44 $19.16 $19.98 $20.9
Facilitator                                                                 0
*Tennis Pro/Instructor: Wage range of $190.84 to $400.00 per week
 
   (C)   Any employee who is required to handle funds belonging to the village
as part of his or her duties shall be bonded in the amount of $2,500.
   (D)   All full-time recreation employees shall be village residents and be
high school graduates and shall not be permitted to work more than 44 hours per
week, except in case of emergency.
   (E)   All part-time recreation employees shall be village residents and at
least 16 years of age.
   (F)   Any former employee in the Recreation Department may be re-employed
each season, although not a village resident.
   (G)   In the event the Recreation Director is unable to employ a village
resident in grades two, three, or four, the Recreation Director, with the
advice and consent of the Mayor, shall select and hire qualified personnel in
this grade who shall carry out the Village Recreation Program.
   (H)   The Recreation Director, with the advice and consent of the Mayor,
shall select and hire all other necessary personnel to carry out the Village
Recreation Program and the Director shall grade and determine the amount to be
paid those employees in their classifications.
(1967 Code, § 35.04) (Ord. O-4-65, passed 3-22-1965; Ord. O-3-76, passed 1-26-
1976; Ord. O-16-80, passed 4-28-1980; Ord. O-18-80, passed 5-12-1980; Ord. O-8-
86, passed 5-12-1986; Ord. O-10-89, passed 4-10-1989; Ord. O-12-90, passed 5-
29-1990; Ord. O-20-93, passed 5-24-1993; Ord. O-16-97, passed 5-12-1997; Ord.
O-22-98, passed 6-8-1998; Ord. O-6-02, passed 3-25-2002; Ord. O-8-04, passed 4-
12-2004; Ord. O-9-13, passed 4-8-2013; Ord. O-14-15, passed 5-26-2015; Ord. O-
18-21, passed 3-8-2021)
§ 37.03 PARKS ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   (1)   There shall be a Parks Advisory Board whose mission will be to
oversee, plan, and make recommendations to the Mayor and Village Council
regarding conservation, management, and development as necessary of the
numerous parks and green spaces for the benefit of the entire village except
for the South 80 Acres. (See §
37.03(B))
      (2)   The Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent
of Council for two-year terms. Mid-term appointees shall serve the remaining
portion of the term vacated and must be reappointed at the end of the original
two-year term in order to remain on the Board. Two of the members will start
out with one-year terms, producing staggered terms, followed thereafter by two-
year terms.
      (3)   The Parks Advisory Board shall consist of nine Board members.
      (4)   Each January the Board shall meet and elect a Chairperson and a
Secretary. Thereafter the Board shall meet regularly throughout the year to
conduct its business. Minimally, the Board shall meet quarterly.
      (5)   Actions taken by the Board shall require a simple majority vote of
the Board members.
      (6)   (a)   The Board shall adopt from time to time such general rules
and regulations relating to its procedure as it may deem necessary. These shall
be kept on file in the Village Office.
         (b)   Concise minutes and records shall be kept as to all official
acts of the Board. These shall be provided to the Village Council and be kept
on file in the Village Office.
      (7)   Recommendations from the Board shall be submitted to the Mayor who
may present them to Council.
(2000 Code, § 37.25)
   (B)   (1)   (a)   The South 80 Trails, Gardens, and Park Advisory Board
shall be established from the current South 80 Trails Ad Hoc Committee, whose
mission will be to oversee, plan, and make recommendations to the Mayor and the
Village Council regarding conservation, management, and development, as
necessary, of the South 80 Park.
         (b)   The Advisory Board shall also develop policies and processes for
all activities on the South 80 as well as implement and/or coordinate approved
policies and procedures.
      (2)   The South 80 Trails, Gardens, and Park Advisory Board members shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of Council for an initial one-year
term. Beginning in 2020, three Board member terms shall be moved to two-year
terms. In 2021, the remaining two Board members will also move to two-year
terms, creating staggered terms. Mid-term appointees shall serve the remaining
portion of the term vacated and must be reappointed by the end of the original
two-year term in order to remain on the Board.
      (3)   The South 80 Trails, Gardens, and Park Advisory Board shall consist
of five members.
      (4)   Each January the Board shall meet and elect a Chairperson and
Secretary. Thereafter, the Board shall meet regularly throughout the year to
conduct it business. Minimally, the Board shall meet quarterly.
      (5)   Actions taken by the Board shall require a simple majority vote of
the Board members.
      (6)   (a)   The Board shall adopt from time to time such general rules
and regulations relating to its procedure as it may deem necessary. These shall
be kept on file in the Village Office.
         (b)   Concise minutes and records shall be kept as to all official
acts of the Board. These shall be provided to the Village Council and be kept
on file in the Village Office.
      (7)   Any recommendations made by the Advisory Board shall be submitted
to the Mayor who may present it to Council. These shall be kept on file in the
Village Office.
(Ord. O-6-94, passed 3-14-1994; Ord. O-11-96, passed 6-24-1996; Ord. O-5-04,
passed 3-22-2004; Ord. O-3-12, passed 2-13-2012; Ord. O-25-13, passed 11-11-
2013; Ord. O-3-20, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 37.04 AUDIT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Audit Committee shall be comprised of three residents, appointed
by the Mayor and approved by Council. For the initial appointment, one
individual will serve a one-year term, and the other two members two years.
After that, all terms will be for two years. The Committee shall include
professionals knowledgeable in financial matters, such as attorneys, auditors,
accountants, financial managers or bankers.
   (B)   The Audit Committee shall be actively involved in:
      (1)   Evaluating the results of the financial and compliance audit;
      (2)   Ensuring that the internal control and legal compliance issues
identified in the audit are promptly and effectively remedied;
      (3)   Reviewing the village's financial statements at the end of year
calendar year.
   (C)   The Audit Committee shall meet at least once a year, after the
village's financial statements are available. In the years when the village is
audited, the Committee will also meet after the audit is complete to review the
results.
   (D)   After meeting to review the village's financial statements or the
audit results, the Audit Committee will provide a report to Council, sharing
their thoughts on the results and any recommendations they may have.
(2000 Code, § 37.30) (Ord. O-5-00, passed 3-27-2000; Ord. O-8-21, passed 2-8-
2021)
§ 37.05 SWIM POOL COMMISSION.
   (A)   A Swim Pool Commission shall be established whose mission will be to
oversee, plan, and make recommendations to the Swim Pool Manager regarding
daily operations of the Swim Pool, capital needs of the pool, and otherwise
assist the Pool Manager as necessary.
   (B)   The Swim Pool Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the consent of Council for two-year terms. If a member is appointed mid-term,
that appointee shall serve the remaining portion of the term vacated and must
be reappointed at the end of the original two-year term in order to remain on
the Commission. Three of the members shall start out with one-year terms,
producing staggered terms, followed thereafter by two-year terms.
   (C)   The Swim Pool Commission shall consist of seven members.
   (D)   Each year before the pool opens, the Board shall meet and elect a
Chairperson and a Secretary. Thereafter the Board shall meet regularly
throughout the pool season to conduct its business. Minimally, the Board shall
meet once before the pool opens, monthly in June, July, and August, and once
after the pool closes for the season.
   (E)   Any actions taken by the Commission shall require a simple majority
vote of the Commission members.
   (F)   The Commission shall adopt from time to time such general rules and
regulations relating to its procedures as it may deem necessary. Concise
minutes and records shall be kept as to all official acts of the Commission.
   (G)   Concise minutes and records shall be kept as to all official acts of
the Board. These shall be provided to the Village Council and be kept on file
in the Village Office.
   (H)   Any recommendations or proposals by the Swim Pool Commission shall be
presented by the Swim Pool Manager to the Mayor and the Chairperson of the
Health and Recreation Committee.
   (I)   This section shall go into effect at the earliest date allowed by law.
(Ord. O-2-12, passed 2-13-2012; Ord. O-5-20, passed 2-10-2020; Ord. O-28-22,
passed 12-19- 2022)
§ 37.06 TREE ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Membership. There is hereby created and established a Village Tree
Advisory Board which shall consist of five voting and a maximum of nine non-
voting members that are recommended by the Mayor and approved by Village
Council.
   (B)   Term of office/compensation.
      (1)   The term of the five-person to 14-person Village Tree Advisory
Board shall be two staggered terms. In the first year of the Tree Advisory
Board, at least one-half of the Board will be appointed for a one-year term.
The other members shall be appointed for a two-year term. If a vacancy shall
occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be recommended by the
Mayor and approved by Council.
      (2)   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
   (C)   Officers. The Board shall annually select one of the members to serve
as Chair, may appoint a second member to serve as Vice-Chair, and appoint a
third member to serve as Secretary.
   (D)   Meetings. The Board shall meet a minimum of six times each year. All
meetings shall be open to the public. The Board chair may schedule additional
meetings as needed. Minutes of all meetings shall be made available to the
Mayor and all members of Village Council.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the
Mayor and shall:
      (1)   Assist in the development of a "Street Tree" Master Plan that:
         (a)   Updates the schedule of recommended "Street Trees" for planting
with adequate consideration given to the Nolen and Christie plans, and develop
a list of prohibited species.
         (b)   Provides an inventory and assessment of existing "Street Trees."
      (2)   Assist in the development of a near-term plan (1 to 5 years) for
the planting, pruning and/or removal of "Street Trees."
      (3)   Monitor village spending on "Street Trees" and make recommendations
for changes in annual spending levels as appropriate.
      (4)   Assist village obtaining grants or contributions for "Street
Trees."
      (5)   Assist in the coordination and promotion of Arbor Day activities.
      (6)   Review contractual agreements for "Street Trees" with the Village
Maintenance Department and make recommendations for changes to Mayor, as
needed.
      (7)   Support public awareness and education programs relating to trees.
      (8)   Review and address concerns, safety issues and other issues
relating to "Street Trees." Safety issues requiring immediate attention may
still be addressed by the Village Maintenance Department without review by the
Board.
      (9)   Assist Village Council in developing changes to sections of the
Mariemont Code of Ordinances relating to "Street Trees."
      (10)   Development and maintenance of bylaws regarding the operation of
the Board.
      (11)   Assist with the annual application to renew the Tree City USA
designation.
      (12)   Other duties that may be assigned by village Council.
   (F)   Education. Members of the Board that lack specific relevant education
or training in the management of Urban Trees will be expected to participate in
some form of relevant formal education or training during their term on the
Board.
   (G)   Operation of Board. The Village Tree Advisory Board shall choose its
own officers, make its own rules and regulations, and keep minutes of its
proceedings. A majority for the members shall be a quorum for the transaction
of its business.
   (H)   Interference with Board prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to prevent, delay, or interfere with the Village Tree Advisory Board, or
any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating,
mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees, park trees, or
trees on private grounds, as authorized in this chapter.
   (I)   Review by Village Council. The Village Council shall have the right to
review the conduct, acts, and decisions of the Village Tree Advisory Board. Any
person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Board to the Village Council
who may hear the matter and make a final decision.
(Ord. O-9-21, passed 2-8-2021; Ord. O-20-21, passed 3-22-2021; Ord. O-13-22,
passed 5-9-2022)
§ 37.07 NATIVE AMERICAN CULTURAL CENTER ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   The Native American Cultural Center Advisory Ad Hoc Board, consisting
of eight members, shall be established to create plans for the property type
and location of display cases within the Cultural Center and to secure,
identify, and prepare artifacts for display.
   (B)   The Native American Cultural Center Advisory Ad Hoc Board members
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of Council for an initial one-
year term. Additional policies for staggered terms and appointments for vacated
positions will be developed by the Ad Hoc Board and the Mayor and presented to
Council for consent.
   (C)   Any actions taken by the Ad Hoc Board shall be submitted to the Mayor
who may present said actions to Council for the Village of Mariemont.
(Ord. O-13-18, passed 3-26-2018)
§ 37.08 MARIEMONT RACQUET CLUB BOARD.
   (A)   There shall be a Mariemont Racquet Club Board, whose mission will be
to oversee, plan, and make recommendations to the Mayor and Village Council
regarding the conservation, maintenance, management, and development as
necessary of the Mariemont racquet sports facilities; to establish policies
concerning the use of the facilities; and to manage activities that encourage
the optimal use of the facilities.
   (B)   The Board members shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the consent of
Council, for two-year terms. Mid-term appointees shall serve the remaining
portion of the term vacated and must be reappointed at the end of the original
two-year term in order to remain on the Board. Two of the members will start
out with one-year terms, producing staggered terms, followed thereafter by two-
year terms.
   (C)   The Mariemont Racquet Club Board shall consist of five Board members.
   (D)   Each January the Board shall meet and elect a Chairperson and a
Secretary. Thereafter the Board shall meet regularly throughout the year to
conduct its business. Minimally, the Board shall meet bi-annually.
   (E)   Actions taken by the Board shall require a simple majority vote of the
Board members.
   (F)   (1)   The Board shall adopt from time to time such general rules and
regulations relating to its procedure as it may deem necessary. These shall be
kept on file in the Village Office.
      (2)   Concise minutes and records shall be kept as to all official acts
of the Board. These shall be provided to the Village Council and be kept on
file in the Village Office.
   (G)   Recommendations from the Board shall be submitted to the Health and
Recreation Committee, who will present them to Council.
(Ord. O-5-24, passed 3-11-2024)
CHAPTER 38: SALE OR LEASE OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY
Section
   
38.01   Approval of Council required
   
38.02   Sale or lease to government or not- for-profit organizations
   
38.03   Competitive bidding eliminated if in the best interest of the village
§ 38.01 APPROVAL OF COUNCIL REQUIRED.
   The village may sell, lease, exchange or option any real property or
personal property belonging to it pursuant to an ordinance or resolution
approved by the affirmative vote of not less than five members of Council, and
including an opinion by the officer, board, or department having supervision or
management of such property, that it is no longer needed for any municipal
purposes. In those cases, in which such property is offered for lease, the
finding shall be that it will not be needed for any municipal purposes during
the term of the proposed lease.
(Ord. O-29-21, passed 10-28-2021)
§ 38.02 SALE OR LEASE TO GOVERNMENT OR NOT-FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   The village may sell, lease, exchange or option any real property or
personal property belonging to it, without advertisement and without the
receipt of competitive bids, pursuant to legislation approved by the
affirmative vote of not less than five members of Council, and including an
opinion by the officer, board or department having supervision or management of
such property that it is no longer needed for any municipal purpose, to the
United States of America, to the state, to any subdivision, agency or
department of the United States or any state, or to any not-for-profit
corporation or entity organized and operated for a public or charitable
purpose, upon such terms and conditions as Council may decide.
(Ord. O-29-21, passed 10-28-2021)
§ 38.03 COMPETITIVE BIDDING ELIMINATED IF IN THE BEST INTEREST OF VILLAGE.
   The village may sell, lease, exchange or option any real property or
personal property belonging to it, without advertisement and without the
receipt of competitive bids, pursuant to legislation approved by the
affirmative vote of not less than five members of Council, and including an
opinion by the officer, board or department having supervision or management of
such property that it is no longer needed or any municipal purpose, upon
determination by Council that it is in the best interest of the village to do
so and upon such terms and conditions as Council may decide. The fact that such
advertising and competitive bidding are being eliminated, and the reason why it
is in the best interest of the village to do so, shall be stated in the
legislation authorizing such action.
(Ord. O-29-21, passed 10-28-2021)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
      
51.   WASTE DISPOSAL
      
52.   PUBLIC UTILITY EQUIPMENT
      
53.   STREET ENCROACHMENTS AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
      
54.   MAINTENANCE AND ESTABLISHMENT OF STREETS; REGULATING USE THEREOF
      
55.   SIDEWALKS
      56.   DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
      57.   COMPREHENSIVE RIGHT-OF-WAY ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 50: SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
Section
Installation and Maintenance of
Sewers, Wells, and Drains
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Sewer connections without permit
   
50.03   Property outside village not to be connected to sewers
   
50.04   Permit fee
   
50.05   Application for permit
   
50.06   Licensed sewer tappers
   
50.07   Permission to do work in village
   
50.08   Permits issued only to licensed sewer tappers
   
50.09   Fraudulent use of name
   
50.10   Street restoration fee
   
50.11   Permit conditions
   
50.12   Notice for inspection
   
50.13   Private sewer connection
   
50.14   Breaking or removing sewers
   
50.15   Depositing obstructive refuse in sewers
   
50.16   Obstructing drainage by dumping
   
50.17   Notice to remove drainage obstructions
   
50.18   Elimination of obstructions
   
50.19   Permits for dumping
   
50.20   Sewer assessments to be paid before permit issuance
   
50.21   Statutory assessments
   
50.22   Deferred assessments
   
50.23   Collection of equivalent charge
   
50.24   Permits for commercial wells
   
50.25   Plans and specifications
   
50.26   Piping and fitting
   
50.27   Abandoned wells
   
50.28   Disposal of water from commercial wells
   
50.29   Deposits in sewers from commercial wells
   
50.30   Sewerage service charges
Cross-reference:
   Public utility equipment, see
Ch. 53
INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF
SEWERS, WELLS, AND DRAINS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMERCIAL WELL. Any well used to obtain water for business or industrial
purposes, not including wells used exclusively for private homes, for watering
stock, or for farm or agricultural purposes.
   GOVERNING AUTHORITY.
      (1)   For all sanitary sewers and combination sewers: the Metropolitan
Sewer District of Greater Cincinnati, Hamilton County, Ohio;
      (2)   For storm sewers owned by Hamilton County, Ohio: Sewer Department,
Hamilton County, Ohio; and
      (3)   For all other storm sewers: Building Department, Village of
Mariemont, Ohio.
   LICENSED SEWER TAPPER. A person authorized, in accordance with §
50.06, to engage in the business of making sewer connections.
   SEWER. Storm sewers, sanitary sewers, combination sewers, catchbasins,
inlets, and any kind of pipe or conduit for the carrying away of water or
water-borne wastes.
   STREET. Every public way set apart for travel, by whatever word designated,
including the area from property line to property line.
(1967 Code, § 50.01) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.02 SEWER CONNECTIONS WITHOUT PERMIT.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation, directly or indirectly, shall cause
or permit any connection to be made with a sewer without a permit from the
governing authority.
   (B)   Each ten days’ use of a sewer connection unlawfully made shall
constitute a separate offense.
(1967 Code, § 50.02) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 PROPERTY OUTSIDE VILLAGE NOT TO BE CONNECTED TO SEWERS.
   No permit shall be issued to connect property outside the village limits
with a village sewer except in accordance with a special ordinance of Council
defining the terms and conditions for granting permission for that connection.
(1967 Code, § 50.03) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.04 PERMIT FEE.
   Where a sewer connection is made with a street sewer, a permit fee in
accordance with the fee schedule of the governing authority shall be paid by
the applicant.
(1967 Code, § 50.04) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.05 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Applications for permits to tap sewer shall be made to the proper governing
authority.
(1967 Code, § 50.05) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.06 LICENSED SEWER TAPPERS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of making connections with
sewers owned by the village or drains or lateral connections, unless he or she
shall have been duly licensed by the village and has filed with the Building
Department a bond in favor of the village in such sum not less than $1,000, as
shall be prescribed by the Mayor. This bond shall be executed by a surety
company authorized to do business in the state.
   (B)   This bond shall be approved by the Fiscal Officer as to sufficiency
and by the Village Solicitor as to form. The condition of the bond shall be
that the applicant will indemnify and save harmless the village from all loss
and damage which may be occasioned in any wise, by accident or the want of care
or skill on his or her part, in the prosecution of the work of making sewer
connections, or that may be occasioned by reason of any surface or subsurface
opening or openings made or caused to be made by him or her in connection with
that work.
(1967 Code, § 50.06) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.07 PERMISSION TO DO WORK IN VILLAGE.
   If any licensed sewer tapper shall violate any of the ordinances relating to
the making of sewer connections, or shall fail or refuse to perform any of the
duties imposed on him or her by this subchapter, the Mayor shall be authorized
to refuse permission for the sewer tapper to do work within the village.
(1967 Code, § 50.07) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.08 PERMITS ISSUED ONLY TO LICENSED SEWER TAPPERS.
   No permit for making sewer connections shall be issued to any person other
than a licensed sewer tapper.
(1967 Code, § 50.08) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.09 FRAUDULENT USE OF NAME.
   No person shall obtain a sewer permit under a name other than his or her own
and no licensed sewer tapper shall permit his or her name to be used in
obtaining a permit for the benefit of an unauthorized person.
(1967 Code, § 50.09) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.10 STREET RESTORATION FEE.
   (A)   Before entering or undertaking work on a sewer connection for the
benefit of any premises, the permittee shall deposit a street restoration fee
in a sum sufficient to restore streets and sidewalks over any opening made, in
accordance with street and sidewalk restoration provisions.
   (B)   Any portion of the deposit not used to repair the opening made in
streets or sidewalks shall be returned to the depositor at the end of six
months.
(1967 Code, § 50.10) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.11 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   Every permit for making a connection with a village sewer shall show, on its
face, that it is granted subject to the express condition that the owner of the
premises for whose benefit the connection is made for the benefit of a lessee
and every succeeding owner or lessee, shall, in consideration of the privilege
thereby granted, save and hold the village harmless of any loss or damage which
may result from, or be occasioned by, the installation or maintenance of the
sewer connection.
(1967 Code, § 50.11) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.12 NOTICE FOR INSPECTION.
   Not less than 12 hours previous to making a village sewer connection, the
sewer tapper shall notify the Building Commissioner or Village Engineer as to
the time the work will be ready for inspection. The sewer tapper shall keep the
work uncovered, free and clear until inspected and approved by the Building
Commissioner, Village Engineer, or other person, as designated by the Mayor.
(1967 Code, § 50.12) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.13 PRIVATE SEWER CONNECTION.
   Every property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and good
condition of any lateral sewer branch connecting his or her premises with a
village sewer. Where part of the lateral branch, within the limits of a
dedicated street, has been laid under public contract in connection with a
street paving improvement under village supervision and inspection, and is
later found to have been improperly constructed, the village shall, at its own
expense, make the necessary repair or reconstruction of the lateral branch or
part thereof and correct the condition caused by the improper construction. In
the event that, by reason of a defective private sewer connection, damage shall
be occasioned to a village street, or to street or sidewalk paving, the Mayor
shall notify the property owner to repair the defect and damage. On receipt of
notice, the property owner or a representative shall apply at the Mayor’s
office for the necessary permit and shall make the required deposit for the
street opening. If the property owner fails, within seven days after the issue
of notice, to make the required application for a street opening permit, the
village shall begin repairing the sewer connection and restoring the street and
pavement, and shall charge the cost thereof, including permit fee, to the
owner. Notice required by this section may be served on the property owner
personally, by mail, or by delivery to any occupying lessee or tenant, if the
owner does not reside on the premises.
(1967 Code, § 50.13) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.14 BREAKING OR REMOVING SEWERS.
   No person shall break or remove any part of any receiving basin, covering
plate, manhole cover, or any part of any sewer or appurtenance thereto, except
as duly authorized in the course of making an improvement, repair, or sewer
connection.
(1967 Code, § 50.14) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.15 DEPOSITING OBSTRUCTIVE REFUSE IN SEWERS.
   No person shall deposit the carcass of a dead animal, butcher’s offal, or
refuse of any kind liable to become an obstruction in any sewer, receiving
basin, tributary watercourse, or other place from which it may be carried or
washed into a village sewer, or cause or permit such refuse matter to be so
deposited. No one shall deposit refuse in any place where it will obstruct the
mouth of a sewer or a drain or deposit it in any other place in violation of
instructions duly posted prohibiting the deposit.
(1967 Code, § 50.15) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.16 OBSTRUCTING DRAINAGE BY DUMPING.
   No person shall dump, or allow to be dumped thereon, material of any kind in
a manner which interferes with existing drains, sewers, or natural
watercourses. Nothing in this section shall prohibit filling abandoned cellars,
cisterns, or other cavities not involving sewerage or drainage.
(1967 Code, § 50.16) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.17 NOTICE TO REMOVE DRAINAGE OBSTRUCTIONS.
   Whenever the Mayor finds, by reason of the making of a fill or partial fill
thereon, a tract of land is inadequately drained, or that the fill obstructs or
interferes with lawfully existing sewerage or drainage, the Mayor shall notify
the owner of the tract to remove the fill or provide necessary sewerage to
eliminate the obstruction. Notice may be served on the owner by personal
delivery, by mail at his or her last known place of residence, or by posting on
the premises. Whoever violates this section, exceeding a ten-day period, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(1967 Code, § 50.17) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.18 ELIMINATION OF OBSTRUCTIONS.
   In case of an emergency or in any case where an obstruction caused by a fill
or partial fill has continued for more than 30 days after the serving of notice
in accordance with §
50.17, the Mayor shall be authorized to cause necessary measures to be taken to
protect existing drainage systems and to charge the expense thereof to the
owner of property on which the obstructing fill was made. This section shall
not be construed to relieve the owner of any penalties prescribed by other
sections of this subchapter.
(1967 Code, § 50.18) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.19 PERMITS FOR DUMPING.
   Any property owner desiring to fill or partially fill a tract of land owned
by him or her may, before making the fill, apply to the Mayor for a permit
authorizing the same to be made, stating in the application the location of the
tract and the nature and dimension of the fill proposed. If the Mayor is
satisfied the proposed fill will not interfere with adequate drainage for the
area to be filled, and will not obstruct or interfere with lawfully existing
sewerage or drainage, public or private, or cause ponds of stagnant water to
form, the Mayor shall issue a permit authorizing the fill. No fee shall be
charged for the permit.
(1967 Code, § 50.19) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.20 SEWER ASSESSMENTS TO BE PAID BEFORE PERMIT ISSUANCE.
   Whenever a permit application is made for connection of private premises
with a village sewer, the Mayor shall ascertain whether the installation of the
sewer was financed, in whole or in part, by an assessment or other system of
public charges on abutting property or on a benefitted district. If the sewer
has been so financed, no permit shall be issued to connect any premises
therewith, unless all sewer assessments or charges, assessed against the
premises, or equivalent charges, have been paid or secured to be paid as
provided in §§
50.21 through
50.23.
(1967 Code, § 50.20) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.21 STATUTORY ASSESSMENTS.
   When an assessment has been duly levied against the premises applied for, in
accordance with state statutes, no permit shall be issued unless the owner of
the premises, as a condition of receiving the permit, waives in writing all
objections to the validity and amount of the assessment.
(1967 Code, § 50.21) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.22 DEFERRED ASSESSMENTS.
   If Council has imposed a deferred assessment for a sewer improvement,
payable only if a sewer permit is applied for, no permit for sewer connection
shall be issued until a deferred assessment has been paid in full or payment
has otherwise been made or provided for in accordance with this subchapter’s
provisions. If full payment is not made, the permittee shall waive all
objections to the validity and amount of the assessment.
(1967 Code, § 50.22) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.23 COLLECTION OF EQUIVALENT CHARGE.
   (A)   If Council has imposed neither regular assessment nor deferred
assessment or other charge against a tract abutting a sewer improvement or
included in a benefitted sewer district, or claim the sewer would not be
available for or benefit to the tract, or for any other reason, and an
application to connect premises so exempted is made, the Mayor, with the
approval of the Solicitor, shall determine the amount which would have been
payable for the premises had they been duly assessed according to the front
foot rate or other rate used.
   (B)   The equivalent charge, when determined, shall have the same status as
the deferred charge referred to in §
50.22 and no permit shall be issued until paid in full. The property owner
shall have the right to appeal to Council as to the amount of the charge so
fixed. The appeal shall be taken within 20 days from the date on which
notification issues from the office of the Fiscal Officer as to that amount.
(1967 Code, § 50.23) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.24 PERMITS FOR COMMERCIAL WELLS.
   No person shall install, maintain, or cause to be installed or maintained a
commercial well unless a certified copy of a permit issued for a private water
system or construction of a well as issued under R.C. Chs. 3734 or 6111 is
submitted.
(1967 Code, § 50.24) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.25 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Plans and specifications for the well and surrounding foundations shall be
submitted bearing approval stamp of §
50.24.
(1967 Code, § 50.25) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
§ 50.26 PIPING AND FITTING.
   All piping, fitting, and connections for conveying and disposing of water
from commercial wells shall be reviewed and approved by the Plumbing Division
of the county.
(1967 Code, § 50.26) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.27 ABANDONED WELLS.
   Whenever any commercial well is abandoned or no longer used, it shall be
solidly filled with compact material.
(1967 Code, § 50.27) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.28 DISPOSAL OF WATER FROM COMMERCIAL WELLS.
   No person, firm, or corporation hereafter installing a commercial well shall
permit the water taken therefrom to be discharged into public sewers. This
water shall be disposed of as directed by the State Environmental Protection
Agency, after a copy of an approved method has been submitted to the village.
(1967 Code, § 50.28) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.29 DEPOSITS IN SEWERS FROM COMMERCIAL WELLS.
   Wherever, in the case of commercial wells heretofore installed, the water
taken from it is discharged into public sewers, the owner of the premises on
which or for which such well is maintained shall pay the village any expenses
incurred by it for the removal of sand, gravel, or other material deposited in
village sewers from any such well. No contaminated water or water containing
anything other than water shall be discharged into sewers.
(1967 Code, § 50.29) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.30 SEWERAGE SERVICE CHARGES.
   If the village levies charges for the use of public sewers, based on
consumption of water, the owner of any premises from which water is discharged
from commercial wells into village sewers shall meter the flow of the well
water and pay sewer service charges to the village on the basis of such
measured use, or, alternately, shall pay the charges on the basis of the
quantity of well water flow as estimated by the proper village official.
(1967 Code, § 50.30) (Ord. O-4-72, passed 2-14-1972)
CHAPTER 51: WASTE DISPOSAL
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Separate containers
   
51.03   Container requirements
   
51.04   Garbage to be wrapped
   
51.05   Garbage to be placed in proper containers
   
51.06   Illegal depositing of garbage
   
51.07   Upsetting waste containers
   
51.08   Removing waste from containers
   
51.09   Scattering trash
   
51.10   Street waste receptacles
   
51.11   Charge for removal of commercial waste
   
51.12   Transporting and unloading waste
   
51.13   Discharging noisome substances
   
51.14   Escaping hot water or steam
   
51.15   Private incinerators
   
51.16   Rules for garbage collection
   
51.17   Fees for garbage and refuse pick up
   
51.18   Condominium associations waiver for village trash service
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. Combustible residue of such fuel as wood, coal, coke, charcoal, and
the like.
   COMBUSTIBLE WASTE. All waste substance capable of incineration or burning,
including garbage, paper, rags, excelsior, wood, grass, leaves, and the like.
   COMMERCIAL WASTE. All combustible and noncombustible waste, arising out of
operations of business and industry, and all other wastes not resulting from
the ordinary operations of private residences or households.
   GARBAGE. All purtrescible wastes, including vegetable and animal offal,
carcasses of dead animals, and the like, excluding recognized industrial by-
products.
   NONCOMBUSTIBLE WASTE. All waste substance incapable of incineration or
burning, including tin cans, tinware, and other metallic substances, bottles,
glassware, earthenware, ashes, and the like, and also discarded articles the
greater part of which is incapable of incineration or burning, such as asphalt
roofing material and electric batteries.
   WASTE.
      (1)   All trash, rubbish, garbage, offal, and other refuse or discarded
matter required to be removed from private and public places.
      (2)   It shall not include recognized by- products of any business or
industry having commercial value and handled in the ordinary course of
business, unless the by-products, or handling of them, become nuisances or
menaces to the public health.
(1967 Code, § 51.01) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941)
§ 51.02 SEPARATE CONTAINERS.
   Separate containers for garbage shall be required for all other combustible
and noncombustible waste for collection and disposal purposes, and garbage
shall be deposited as in a matter set forth in §
51.04.
(1967 Code, § 51.02) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.03 CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.
   Containers for garbage and other waste materials shall be of non-rusting
material, of substantial construction, with water-tight fitting lids of a size
easily handled by one person.
(1967 Code, § 51.03) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941; Ord. O-29-87, passed 12-
28-1987; Ord. O-21-10, passed 10-11-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.04 GARBAGE TO BE WRAPPED.
   All containers used for garbage shall be kept clean and disinfected.
(1967 Code, § 51.04) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941; Ord. O-21-10, passed 10-
11-2010) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.05 GARBAGE TO BE PLACED IN PROPER CONTAINERS.
   No garbage shall be allowed to remain exposed in any building or on any
premises a longer time than is reasonably necessary to remove and deposit the
same in proper waste containers.
(1967 Code, § 51.05) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.06 ILLEGAL DEPOSITING OF GARBAGE.
   No person shall throw, place, or deposit garbage in any street or other
public place or on any public or private property, except in proper waste
container, and no person shall remove the lid from any waste container without
replacing it.
(1967 Code, § 51.06) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.07 UPSETTING WASTE CONTAINERS.
   No person shall turn over or upset the contents of any waste container on
any street, sidewalk, or other public place.
(1967 Code, § 51.07) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.08 REMOVING WASTE FROM CONTAINERS.
   (A)   When waste has been placed in containers on a public street or alley
for collection by waste collectors, no person shall remove any waste from any
container. When waste has been placed in containers on private premises, no
person shall remove any waste therefrom except with the consent of the owner or
lessee of the premises.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any law enforcement officer or other
federal, state, or local official or agent thereof acting within the scope of
his or her duties.
(1967 Code, § 51.08) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.09 SCATTERING TRASH.
   No person shall throw or scatter any trash, refuse, or other waste or cause
the same to be thrown or scattered in any street or other place.
(1967 Code, § 51.09) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.10 STREET WASTE RECEPTACLES.
   Waste receptacles placed on the sidewalks and streets shall be used only for
waste material that persons may dispose of while passing along streets.
Receptacles shall in no case be used for the disposal of garbage, trash,
refuse, or other waste material accumulated in residences or places of
business.
(1967 Code, § 51.10) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.11 CHARGE FOR REMOVAL OF COMMERCIAL WASTES.
   Council is authorized to establish service charges for the removal by the
village of commercial waste.
(1967 Code, § 51.11) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.12 TRANSPORTING AND UNLOADING WASTES.
   (A)   All loose waste paper, rags, and other waste material of such kind as
to be blown about by wind, or otherwise scattered, must be hauled in a manner
as not to litter streets.
   (B)   Materials shall not be unloaded along public streets or sidewalks
except in bags, boxes, bales, or other suitable containers.
(1967 Code, § 51.12) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.13 DISCHARGING NOISOME SUBSTANCES.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall discharge or cause to be discharged
from a house, factory, or premises into any street, alley, or other public
place, any noisome or offensive liquid or any substance harmful to the property
or health of persons residing in or near the street, alley, or other public
place, or suffer, or permit any noisome or offensive steam, gas, vapors, or
fumes harmful to property or health to escape or be discharged from any
chimney, pipe, or other vent on its premises.
(1967 Code, § 51.13) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.14 ESCAPING HOT WATER OR STEAM.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall suffer or permit steam or hot water
from any boiler on its premises to be discharged into or on any street or
alley.
(1967 Code, § 51.14) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.15 PRIVATE INCINERATORS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of private incinerators for
the incineration of combustible waste provided the incinerators conform to all
provisions of law and are operated without causing offensive odors or other
nuisances.
(1967 Code, § 51.15) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.16 RULES FOR GARBAGE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Council shall prepare and publish rules for effective administration
and enforcement of provisions of this chapter. Any rules published shall have
the force of law, and a violation of any rule intended to effect the purpose of
any section of this chapter shall be punished in the same manner as a violation
of that section.
   (B)   Garbage must be placed in separate containers.
   (C)   Hedge and shrubbery trimmings, leaves, parts of trees, or paper in
quantities will be assembled for collection in bales or bundles.
   (D)   The contractor shall not be required to collect commercial wastes or
wastes resulting from repairs or remodeling of buildings, sidewalks, or to
collect bulky materials such as furnishings or fixtures of buildings.
   (E)   Containers shall be placed on private premises at sufficient distance
from streets or other public areas, and from adjoining premises, to prevent
public annoyance or annoyance of occupants of adjoining premises from odors or
dust. Occupants of premises shall prevent their receptacles, and space near
receptacles, from becoming unsightly or noisome to passersby or the occupants
of nearby premises. Waste shall not be accumulated over a lengthy period of
time or in large quantities.
   (F)   Containers and household trash shall not be placed at the curb before
6:00 p.m. on the evening prior to collection day. All containers shall be
promptly removed when empty.
   (G)   Containers must be left by the waste collector in the same location
where placed by the householder. Containers shall not be roughly or noisily
handled.
   (H)   The existing municipal contract for waste collection and disposal and
each new contract shall be incorporated by reference and made a part hereof as
fully as if set out at length herein.
   (I)   The contractor will comply with all laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations, and orders of district boards of health with respect to the
collection, hauling, and disposal of all waste and dead animals, and will
provide for workers’ compensation when required by law. The contractor will
obtain all necessary licenses or permits in order to carry out his or her
contract obligations. The contractor will hold the village harmless from any
liability for the acts of the contractor and his, her, or its agents and
employees incident to performing the services of collecting, hauling, and
disposing of materials referred to herein.
(1967 Code, § 51.16) (Ord. O-6-41, passed 10-27-1941; Ord. O-11-81, passed 5-
11-1981; Ord. O-17-81, passed 9-28-1981; Ord. O-29-87, passed 12-28-1987)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.17 FEES FOR GARBAGE AND REFUSE PICK UP.
   (A)   There shall be an annual service fee of $273.24 for the collection and
disposal of garbage and refuse from each householder occupying a house or
townhouse and a $207.24 service fee for each householder occupying a unit in a
building which has multiple dwelling units that are serviced at a common
collection point for garbage and refuse. The above referenced annual fees shall
be paid monthly by the residents via a charge collected through Greater
Cincinnati Water Works ("GCWW") monthly billing. Accordingly, the fee for
garbage and for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse for each
householder occupying a house or townhouse shall be $22.77 per month and $17.30
per month for each householder occupying a unit in a building which has
multiple dwelling units that are serviced in a common collection point for
garbage and refuse.
   (B)   HOUSEHOLDER as defined for this section is a head of family or one
maintaining his or her separate living room or quarters in the village and
shall include owners, tenants, and occupants of all premises upon which garbage
or refuse or both are created. GARBAGE is defined in §
51.01. REFUSE shall be defined as waste as that term is defined in §
51.01.
   (C)   The entity which the village has contracted for the collection of
garbage and refuse shall be the exclusive agency for garbage and refuse
collection for householders in the village.
(2000 Code, § 51.17) (Ord. O-19-93, passed 5-24-1993; Ord. O-47-93, passed 12-
27-1993; Ord. O-14-97, passed 5-12-1997; Ord. O-17-02, passed 12-9-2002; Ord.
O-21-10, passed 10-11-2010; Ord. O-14-19, passed 4-22-2019; Ord. O-19-21,
passed 3-22-21; Ord. O-27-21, passed 10-28-2021; Ord. O-16-23, passed 10-23-
2023; Ord. O-3-25, passed 1-27-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.18 CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATIONS WAIVER FOR VILLAGE TRASH SERVICE.
   (A)   All legally recognized condominium associations within the village who
contract for their own trash services directly shall be allowed to apply for a
waiver of the village trash services and the related fees.
   (B)   Said application for such waiver shall be submitted as follows.
      (1)   The waiver must be a written request and it must be accompanied by
written proof of the valid existence of the condominium association and written
proof of the trash service contract already in effect which would include a
request for both trash and recycling services.
      (2)   Said request shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved by a
majority of Village Council members. Any such waiver that previously has been
granted by Village Council may be revoked at any time Council determines that
the condominium association’s trash service is not equal to or greater than the
village contracted services.
      (3)   Any trash service payments which have been paid by valid
condominium association members, once a waiver is granted, shall be refunded.
   (C)   This section shall take effect at the earliest date allowed by law.
(Ord. O-17-11, passed 9-12-2011)
CHAPTER 52: PUBLIC UTILITY EQUIPMENT
Section
   
52.01   Utility service providers
   
52.02   Cable, digital, and other television or information services
   
52.03   Cellular or wireless communications towers and facilities for the
provision of personal wireless services
§ 52.01 UTILITY SERVICE PROVIDERS.
   (A)   Definition. Corporation or firm furnishing the following services
within the village:
      (1)   Supplier of electricity for light, heat or power purposes to
consumers in the village, including village street lighting;
      (2)   Supplier of natural gas for lighting, power, or heating purposes to
consumers in the village;
      (3)   Water works company engaged in supplying water through pipes to
consumers within the village;
      (4)   Sewage and storm water disposal system company providing disposal
services through pipes within the village; or
      (5)   Telephone company engaged in transmitting telephone or
informational messages to, from, through, or in the village.
   (B)   Responsibilities. Utility service companies shall be responsible for:
      (1)   Inspection of services in the rights-of- way;
      (2)   Repair/replacement of such services;
      (3)   Branches to property line of users;
      (4)   Meter installations, if applicable; or
      (5)   Permits are required for such work:
         (a)   Work by utility company employees: No fee; or
         (b)   Work by private contractor: Fees will be charged.
   (C)   Location of piping, wires, and other conduits of utilities. All work
shall be underground in all locations, public or private, except where above-
ground wiring was in place prior to June 27, 1941.
   (D)   Location of transformers and units for wiring interconnections for
utilities. All equipment shall be underground in all locations, public or
private, except where above-ground wiring was in place prior to June 27, 1941.
   (E)   Compliance. All utility services shall comply with contracts/
agreements made a part hereof and attached herewith, and with any special
zoning requirements set forth in Ch. 151.
(2000 Code, § 53.01) (Ord. O-15-98, passed 2-23-1998)
§ 52.02 CABLE, DIGITAL, AND OTHER TELEVISION OR INFORMATION SERVICES.
   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CABLE, DIGITAL, OR OTHER TELEVISION OR INFORMATION COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS.
A nonbroadcast facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and
associated signals, general, reception, and control equipment, such as cable,
digital or other, under common ownership and control, that distributes or is
designed to distribute to subscribers the signals of one or more television or
information broadcast stations.
   CABLE, DIGITAL, OR OTHER TELEVISION OR INFORMATION COMMUNICATION COMPANY.
Any person owning, controlling, operating, or managing or proposing to
establish, control, operate, or manage a wireless communications system,
including cable, digital, or other television or information system.
   (B)   Cable, digital, or other television or information communication
companies shall be responsible for:
      (1)   Inspection of services in the rights-of- way and on private
property;
      (2)   Repair/replacement of such services;
      (3)   Branches to property line of users; ad
      (4)   Permits are required for all work; fees will be charged.
   (C)   (1)   Location of wires and units for use as junction boxes.
      (1)   All wiring, whether on public-rights-of- way or on private
properties, shall be installed underground.
   (D)   All services shall comply with contracts/ agreements made a part
hereof and attached herewith, and with any special zoning requirements set
forth in Ch. 151.
(2000 Code, § 53.02) (Ord. O-15-1998, passed 2-23-1998)
§ 52.03 CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND FACILITIES FOR THE
PROVISION OF PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES.
   Cellular or wireless communications towers and facilities for the provision
of “personal wireless services” shall be as defined and regulated in §
151.093.
(2000 Code, § 53.03) (Ord. O-15-98, passed 2-3-1998)
CHAPTER 53: STREET ENCROACHMENTS AND MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Section
   
53.01   Relation to the State Building Code
   
53.02   Projection of footings of buildings
   
53.03   Use of space under sidewalks
   
53.04   Street sidewalk openings
   
53.05   Alley sidewalk openings
   
53.06   Prohibited projections
   
53.07   Projections of bases, columns, pilasters, and the like
   
53.08   Projection of oriels, balconies, bays, and the like
   
53.09   Awnings and marquees over sidewalks
   
53.10   Limitations of rights
   
53.11   Driveway ceilings
   
53.12   Bays and balconies
§ 53.01 RELATION TO THE STATE BUILDING CODE.
   Applicable sections of the State Basic Building Code pertaining to the
design and construction of the items mentioned within this chapter apply to all
work hereunder. Where more restrictive requirements relating to structural or
fire-resistant construction are a part of the OBBC (State Building Code), they
shall take precedence over requirements herein.
(2000 Code, § 54.01) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 53.02 PROJECTION OF FOOTINGS OF BUILDINGS.
   On all streets or alleys, footings of buildings may project beyond the
street property line, in accordance with the following conditions:
   (A)   No part of such footing shall project beyond the vertical plane of the
curb line, or if there is no curb, no part of such footing shall project more
than three feet beyond the abutting lot line; and
   (B)   No such projection shall be less than five feet below the established
grade.
(2000 Code, § 54.02) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.03 USE OF SPACE UNDER SIDEWALKS.
   With the approval of the Building Commissioner, any property owner may be
permitted, in connection with an existing or proposed improvement on his or her
property, to utilize space abutting his or her property under a street sidewalk
as far as the vertical plane parallel with, and three feet from, the vertical
plane of the curb line. The private use of sidewalk space shall in every case
be subordinate to the village’s use of the same for public purposes, including
lawful use by public utility corporations, and shall at all times be subject to
modification or control by the village and to termination or revocation as set
forth in §
53.10.
(2000 Code, § 54.03) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 53.04 STREET SIDEWALK OPENINGS.
   Openings in street sidewalks shall not extend more than four feet, six
inches from the property line, except that openings not exceeding four feet in
any dimension may be located not less than three feet nor more than seven feet
from the curb. No opening shall be placed within 15 feet of any other opening
nor within five feet of any side lot line extended. Each opening shall have an
incombustible structural cover of pattern approved by the Building Commissioner
and designed to carry not less than 250 pounds per square foot. Covers shall be
flush with the paving surface. When a cover is removed, it shall be the duty of
the person for whose use it was opened to protect the public by approved guards
or barricades. Sidewalk openings shall be covered at all times except when open
for delivery or receiving purposes, at which times they shall be kept open no
longer than reasonably necessary. Street sidewalk openings shall be located so
as to allow not less than three and one- half feet of clear sidewalk space for
pedestrian traffic when openings are uncovered.
(2000 Code, § 54.04) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 53.05 ALLEY SIDEWALK OPENINGS.
   All alley sidewalk openings shall have their own enclosing walls. No part of
the construction of any such opening shall extend nearer than four feet and
four and one-half inches to the center line of the alley nor within six inches
of the curb line nor, in any event, under the traveled roadway. Every alley
sidewalk opening shall have an incombustible structural cover of pattern
approved by the Building Commissioner and designed to carry not less than 500
pounds per square foot or 8,000 pounds concentrated, whichever gives the larger
moment and/or shear. Covers shall be flush with the paving. When a cover is
removed, it shall be the duty of the person for whose use it was opened to
protect the public by approved guards or barricades. Alley sidewalk openings
shall be closed at all times except when used for delivery or receiving
purposes, at which times they shall be kept open no loner than reasonably
necessary.
(2000 Code, § 54.05) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 53.06 PROHIBITED PROJECTIONS.
   Except as permitted by §
53.07, no open area, railing, steps, show window, or other portion of any
building or structure shall project over any street or alley at a height less
than 12 feet above the level of the curb opposite the center of the projecting
appendage.
(2000 Code, § 54.06) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.07 PROJECTIONS OF BASES, COLUMNS, PILASTERS, AND THE LIKE.
   Below the 12-foot height as defined in §
53.06, bases, columns, pilasters, capitals, corbels, moldings, sculpture, and
other decorative features which are part of the construction may project not
more than eight inches beyond the street property line. Awning winding devices
may project not more than eight inches beyond the street property line, but
must be either less than three feet or more than seven feet above the level of
the curb directly opposite.
(2000 Code, § 54.07) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 53.08 PROJECTIONS OF ORIELS, BALCONIES, BAYS, AND THE LIKE.
   Above the 12-foot height as defined in §
53.06, oriels, balconies, turrets, towers, pilasters, cornices, moldings, and
similar appendages may be permitted to project from buildings or structures,
subject to the following.
   (A)   In the case of appendages other than pilasters, cornices, and
moldings, the projection shall begin not less than three feet from the nearest
side lot line and no part shall extend beyond lines drawn from the
intersections of the side lot lines with the street property line at angles of
22 and one-half degrees with the latter.
   (B)   No appendage shall, in any case, project more than three feet nor more
than one-fourth the width of the street sidewalk.
   (C)   Where a building or structure contains two or more projecting
appendages, they shall be separated by intervening spaces of not less than five
feet.
   (D)   No projection, other than a cornice or molding, shall exceed 20 feet
in length, measured along the street line.
(2000 Code, § 54.08) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.09 AWNINGS AND MARQUEES OVER SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   A suspended awning of winding or other movable type projecting not
more than two-thirds the width of the sidewalk nor more than eight feet, and a
temporary pipe standard awning may be erected on approval of the Building
Commissioner. The rigid frame part of all temporary awnings shall have a
clearance over the sidewalk of not less than seven and one-half feet at all
points; provided, however, that an approved, unweighted canvas valance may
extend not more than ten inches below this height on the front end and sides of
such awnings. In no case shall any part of the awning covering or valance have
less clearance than six feet eight inches above the sidewalk at all points.
   (B)   A permanently suspended awning or marquee extending across the
sidewalk may be erected under the conditions as follows.
      (1)   The main frame and supports shall be constructed of approved
incombustible materials. The panels shall be constructed of approved
incombustible materials or approved reinforced thermosetting plastics having
approved flame-proofing treatment, or may be constructed of wood joists
provided they are completely enclosed with incombustible materials. All glazing
shall be with wired glass.
      (2)   Every permanent awning or marquee of any kind shall have a
clearance of 12 feet above the sidewalk; provided, that where the permanent
awning or marquee does not extend more than two-thirds the width of the
sidewalk, nor more than eight feet, a clearance of seven and one-half feet
above the sidewalk at all points will be permitted.
      (3)   The outer edge of a permanent awning or marquee having a clearance
of 12 feet above the sidewalk may extend over the sidewalk to a line not beyond
the vertical plane of the curb. Provisions shall be made that a marquee shall
not interfere with the present or future public utility poles or street
lighting system.
      (4)   Within a straight line drawn between the maximum projections
permitted in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) above for minimum heights indicated,
the width of a marquee may vary according to height variation provided no
marquee may project closer than 18 inches to the vertical plane of the curb at
a height less than 12 feet.
      (5)   No marquee over a street sidewalk on streets less than 30 feet in
width may project closer than 18 inches to the vertical plane of the curb at a
height of less than 12 feet.
      (6)   No permanent awning or marquee shall be closer than five feet to a
side property line.
(2000 Code, § 54.09) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 53.10 LIMITATIONS OF RIGHTS.
   (A)   No private use of space in, under, or above any street or alley, other
than as authorized by the Building Code and other ordinances of the village
pertaining to the same subject matter, shall be permitted except by special
ordinance defining the terms and conditions of such use.
   (B)   The right of private occupancy of any part of a village street or
alley is permissive only and may be withdrawn or revoked at any time.
   (C)   When the right is withdrawn or revoked, the occupancy shall be
terminated and all necessary construction for such street or sidewalk
restorations shall be made at the expense of the property owner.
   (D)   Every property owner using space in, under or above any street or
alley for private purposes shall be liable to the public and to the village for
any loss or damage from nuisance arising out of such use.
(2000 Code, § 54.10) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 53.11 DRIVEWAY CEILINGS.
   Where any projection over an automobile driveway is of wood construction,
the same shall be noncombustible or protected on the underside with fire
resistive materials, and the roof of canopies shall be covered with fire
retardant roofing.
(2000 Code, § 54.11) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 53.12 BAYS AND BALCONIES.
   (A)   The construction of walls and floors of bays and balconies shall
conform to the required type of construction based on area and number of
stories, and the construction of exterior walls based on exposure.
   (B)   All exterior balconies attached to or supported by masonry walls shall
have brackets or beams constructed of steel, concrete, or other noncombustible
material. All railings for balconies or porches shall be not less than three
feet six inches in height above the floor of such balcony or porch. Balconies
shall be designed to support in addition to their own weight a live load of not
less than 100 pounds per square foot. Railings designed in accordance with §
709.4 of the State Basic Building Code, being O.A.C. 4101:1-7-709.4.
(2000 Code, § 54.12) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
CHAPTER 54: MAINTENANCE AND ESTABLISHMENT OF STREETS;
REGULATING USE THEREOF
Section
   
54.01   Establishment and maintenance
   
54.02   Definitions
   
54.03   Street lines
   
54.04   Hearing
   
54.05   Approval or modification
   
54.06   Recording
   
54.07   Removal of unlawful construction
   
54.08   Scope of provisions
   
54.09   Grades of streets
   
54.10   Roadway and sidewalk widths
   
54.11   Undedicated streets; improvements forbidden
   
54.12   Sale of land on private or undedicated streets
   
54.13   Street openings; applications for permit
   
54.14   Street openings by village, county, or state departments
   
54.15   Openings by public utility corporations
   
54.16   Restoration of pavement
   
54.17   Rules and schedules
   
54.18   Notices to property owners
   
54.19   Excavations near street
   
54.20   Settling of streets due to building operation
   
54.21   Street Restoration Fund
   
54.22   Undedicated streets, construction under public supervision
   
54.23   Fund for Inspection of Streets and Sewers privately constructed
   
54.24   Taking material from streets
   
54.25   Warning lights, barriers
   
54.26   Gutter crossings
   
54.27   Obstructing gutters
   
54.28   Interfering encroachments in village streets
   
54.29   Form of notice
   
54.30   Termination of privilege
   
54.31   Removal of encroachment
   
54.32   Defect caused by encroachment
   
54.33   Removing subsurface encroachments when building is wrecked
   
54.34   Street obstructions
   
54.35   Unauthorized wires, and the like, in streets
   
54.36   Encumbering streets
   
54.37   Soil and debris on street
   
54.38   Expense of removal of debris, and the like
   
54.39   Unloading heavy material on streets
   
54.40   Street name signs
   
54.41   House numbering
   
54.42   Displaying of house numbers
   
54.43   Change of house numbers
   
54.44   Removing house numbers
   
54.45   Driving on sidewalk area
§ 54.01 ESTABLISHMENT AND MAINTENANCE.
   The laying out, construction, repair, and maintenance of streets and curbs
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 55.01) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.02 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter the terms defined in the subordinate sections
hereunder shall have the meanings wherein assigned, unless a different meaning
is clearly indicated. Derivative expressions shall have the corresponding
derivative meanings.
   COMMISSIONER. The Building Commissioner of the village.
   CURB. Granite and/or concrete raised pavement edging.
   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the village.
   ROADWAY or STREET PAVEMENT. The portion of a street between curbs or the
portion devoted to vehicular traffic.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street lying between the established or
presumable curb line and the adjacent property line; the portion set aside for
pedestrian use. The curb shall be considered a part of the SIDEWALK.
   STREET. Every public way set apart for travel, by whatever word designated,
including the area from property line to property line.
(2000 Code, § 55.02) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.03 STREET LINES.
   (A)   The Village Planning Commission is empowered to make from time to time
plans for the location of the proposed lines of a street or streets in any
portion of the village, and to make from time to time plats of the areas or
districts thus planned, showing the location of such lines.
   (B)   The Commission may transmit to Council any such plat, together with
estimate of the period or periods within which the land shown on the plat as
street location or locations should, in its opinion, be acquired for street
purposes.
(2000 Code, § 55.03) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.04 HEARING.
   Before passing upon any such plat, transmitted by the Village Planning
Commission, Council shall hold a hearing thereon at a time and place specified.
Notice of such time and place with a general description of the district or
area covered by the plat shall be given by the Village Fiscal Officer not less
than 30 days previous to the time fixed therefor by mailing such notice to the
owner of each lot or parcel of land included within or abutting upon the
proposed future street lines as shown on the plat, at the address of such owner
as known to the Fiscal Officer, and by one publication in a newspaper of
general circulation.
(2000 Code, § 55.04) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.05 APPROVAL OR MODIFICATION.
   After such hearing, Council may adopt or reject such plat or may modify it
with the approval of the Planning Commission or, in the event of disapproval by
the Commission, may by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership
modify such plat and adopt the modified plat. When a plat is adopted, the
adopting ordinance shall fix the time limit period for effectuation, which
shall not be in excess of 20 years.
(2000 Code, § 55.05) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.06 RECORDING.
   (A)   After adoption of any such plat, the Clerk of Council shall transmit a
certified copy thereof to the County Recorder; also a certified copy to the
Building Commissioner.
   (B)   The adoption of any such plat shall not, however, be deemed the
opening or establishment of any street, nor the taking of any land for street
purposes or for public use.
(2000 Code, § 55.06) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.07 REMOVAL OF UNLAWFUL CONSTRUCTION.
   The Mayor, Building Commissioner, and other officers of the village may
abate or remove or prevent the continuance or occupancy of any unlawfully
erected building, structure or part thereof in the manner provided in the
Building Code relative to buildings erected without a building permit. The
Village Solicitor shall be authorized to bring appropriate proceedings to
enjoin the erection of any such building, structure, or part.
(2000 Code, § 55.07) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.08 SCOPE OF PROVISIONS.
   The provisions of §§
54.03 to
54.08 inclusive, shall apply to platted street widenings and street extensions
as well as to new streets.
(2000 Code, § 55.08) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.09 GRADES OF STREETS.
   The grades of all streets, landings, and other places having, or to have,
curbs shall be established on the top or upper surface of their curbs; and in
all cases where the grade is the same on both sides of the street, the
ordinance shall so declare; and in all cases where the grade of the curb on one
side differs from the grade of the curb on the other side, a grade shall be
established for each curb, both to be embodied in the same ordinance.
(2000 Code, § 55.09) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.10 ROADWAY AND SIDEWALK WIDTHS.
   (A)   (1)   Where the roadway lines of a street have not been definitely
marked by curbing or have not been otherwise specially established by Council,
the parts allotted to roadways and sidewalks shall be determined as herein
provided. The sidewalk spaces on each side shall be equal to each other. The
Village Engineer shall classify streets or parts of streets as major, secondary
or lanes in accordance with traffic requirements.
      (2)   Roadway widths of such classes shall be as follows:
         (a)   Major highways:
            1.   Total width, 80 feet or more, roadway 60 feet;
            2.   Total width less than 80, not less than 75 feet, roadway 56
feet;
            3.   Total width less than 75, not less than 70 feet, roadway 54
feet;
            4.   Total width less than 70, not less than 60 feet, roadway 40
feet; and
            5.   Total width less than 60, not less than 50 feet, roadway 36
feet
         (b)   Secondary streets:
            1.   Total width not less than 66 feet, roadway 40 feet;
            2.   Total width less than 66, not less than 60 feet, roadway 36
feet;
            3.   Total width less than 60, not less than 50 feet, roadway 34
feet;
            4.   Total width less than 50, not less than 40 feet, roadway 27
feet; and
            5.   Total width not less than 40 feet, roadway 24 feet.
         (c)   Lanes:
            1.   Total width less than 40, not less than 30 feet, roadway 20
feet;
            2.   Total width less than 30, not less than 25 feet, roadway 18
feet; and
            3.   Total width less than 25, not less than 20 feet, roadway 16
feet.
   (B)   No street shall be less than 40 feet and no lane shall be less than 20
feet.
   (C)   In the case of proposed streets in new subdivisions, the rules and
regulations of the Planning Commission shall apply.
(2000 Code, § 55.10) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.11 UNDEDICATED STREETS; IMPROVEMENTS FORBIDDEN.
   No officer or employee of the village shall grade, pave, curb, repair,
clean, or light any street, or authorize the laying of any water main, sewer,
or connection for a water main or sewer or other service connection in any
street, or authorize or make any other improvement therein, unless:
   (A)   Such street is an established street, duly accepted or opened as a
public street or way;
   (B)   Such street corresponds in location and extent with a street shown on
a recorded plat approved by the Planning Commission; or
   (C)   The location and extent of such street has received the approval of
the Planning Commission or, in case of disapproval by the Commission, has been
approved by a two-thirds vote of Council according to law.
(2000 Code, § 55.11) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992; Ord. O-4-20, passed 2-10-
2020)
§ 54.12 SALE OF LAND ON PRIVATE OR UNDEDICATED STREETS.
   Whenever the owner, or any agent of the owner, of any tract of land abutting
on a street or way not lawfully accepted or established as a public street or
way shall sell or contract for the sale of such tract or part of such tract, he
or she shall, prior to the execution of such sale or contract of sale, furnish
the intending purchaser with a signed statement informing him or her whether or
not the location of such street or way has been approved by the Planning
Commission.
(2000 Code, § 55.12) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.13 STREET OPENINGS; APPLICATIONS FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Permits for making openings in village streets shall be issued only by
the Building Commissioner and only for some duly authorized purpose.
Applications for street opening permits shall be made on forms provided by the
village. The application shall give the size and location of the proposed
opening and shall state the kind of paving where the cut is to be made.
   (B)   (1)   The permit shall be issued only after ample security has been
given the village to ensure the proper restoration and subsequent maintenance
of the street pavement disturbed.
      (2)   Such security shall be furnished in either of four ways as follows:
         (a)   A cash deposit may be made with each application sufficient to
cover the cost of restoration;
         (b)   A general deposit may be made by an applicant to be replenished
from time to time and to constitute a running account against which permits may
be issued; provided, that no permit shall be issued when the net unencumbered
balance in the account becomes less than the estimated cost of the requisite
restoration;
         (c)   A bond in such sum as may be required by the Mayor or Building
Commissioner; or
         (d)   In the case of village contracts involving the cutting of street
pavements, permits may be issued without cash deposit, but in such cases
sufficient money to pay for the necessary street restoration shall be withheld
from the contract monies owing to the contractor until such street restoration
is completed by the contractor to the satisfaction of the Mayor or Building
Commissioner, or until such contractor shall have paid to the village the
requisite amount for the street restoration.
   (C)   Permit fees shall now be charged to utility companies digging through
village streets, sidewalks and lawns. The permit fee shall be $75 for a permit
for a cut-through in streets, sidewalks and yards and a $150 permit fee for any
horizontal bore to be done by said utility company.
(2000 Code, § 55.13) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992; Ord. O-3-17, passed 1-23-
2017)
§ 54.14 STREET OPENINGS BY VILLAGE, COUNTY, OR STATE DEPARTMENTS.
   (A)   When the village shall require the installation of underground
conduits or structures, it may obtain the necessary street opening permits
without making any cash deposits.
   (B)   No cash deposit shall be required from the county for street opening
permits. Where in any such case the work done greatly benefits the village, the
street restoration may, with the approval of the Village Council, upon the
recommendation of the Mayor and the Village Engineer, be made at the cost of
the village.
(2000 Code, § 55.14) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.15 OPENINGS BY PUBLIC UTILITY CORPORATIONS.
   (A)   Where the public utility corporation is authorized by a special
agreement with the village to do its own restoration work in connection with
the opening of streets for maintenance and construction work, the required
deposit or bond shall be sufficient to cover inspection costs, unless otherwise
provided by special agreement. If, however, in any case the restoration is to
be made by the village, the deposit or bond shall be increased accordingly.
   (B)   Any such public utility corporation shall be permitted to maintain
with the Village Fiscal Officer a general deposit account to be replenished
from time to time, against which permits may be issued. No permit shall be
issued when the net unencumbered balance is less than the amount necessary to
cover the estimated village costs for inspection and restoration.
(2000 Code, § 55.15) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.16 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
   (A)   Where openings have been or are to be made in a street, the Building
Commissioner shall provide for the restoration of the street pavement in one of
the following ways:
      (1)   The entire work of restoration, including both paving surface and
paving bases, may be performed directly by the village after the permittee has
completed the back fill;
      (2)   The paving surface may be installed by the village after the
permittee has made the back fill and installed the proper base;
      (3)   The work may be done either completely as in this division (A) or
as to paving surface only, as in division (B) below, by a village contractor or
County Engineer duly authorized by a contract with the village; or
      (4)   The entire work of restoration may be done by the permittee.
   (B)   In all cases, the entire work shall be carried out under the direction
of and to the satisfaction of the Mayor and Building Commissioner, and in
accordance with rules, regulations, and specifications approved by the Village
Engineer.
(2000 Code, § 55.16) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.17 RULES AND SCHEDULES.
   A complete set of rules and regulations shall be prepared by the Mayor and
approved by the Council describing in detail the procedure to be observed in
obtaining permits, and precautions to be taken in acting under the permits when
issued. Specifications shall also be similarly prepared by the Village Engineer
describing the manner in which restoration work shall be done. The rules and
regulations shall contain a schedule of prices to be charged for various size
openings in various kinds of paving, due regard being had to the kind of
service to be rendered by the village and prevailing prices in connection with
the restoration work. The Mayor shall recommend changes in the rules,
regulations, and specifications and revisions to the schedule of prices
whenever in his or her judgment the interests of the village require such
change or revision, and such recommendation shall be approved by Council.
(2000 Code, § 55.17) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.18 NOTICES TO PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   Prior to the installation of new paving, repaving, repair, or
resurfacing of any street when assessed against abutting owners, the Fiscal
Officer shall, under the direction of the Mayor, cause notices to be sent to
all abutting property owners requiring them to install any needed water or
sewer service branches.
   (B)   Notice shall also be sent to all public utility corporations and
village departments to install all necessary mains, conduits, service branches,
and structures. Property owners, public utility corporations, and water works
shall be allowed the necessary and legal time required for the aforesaid
installations before the new pavement is laid. Thereafter, during the period of
three years from the final completion and acceptance of the new pavement, no
permit for making an opening in such pavement shall be issued except by express
authority in each case from the Mayor, and he or she shall exercise this
special authority only for reasons of public necessity or of undue private
hardship where the necessity for the opening arises from causes over which the
applicant has no control. Lack of foresight in not installing service
connection prior to the laying of a new pavement shall not be considered as
adequate reason for abrogation of the three-year restriction. In all cases
where a street opening permit shall be issued during the restriction period, an
additional suitable charge in excess of the schedule rate shall be imposed on
the basis of 2% per month of the unelapsed period, in no event less than 10%.
(2000 Code, § 55.18) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.19 EXCAVATIONS NEAR STREET.
   In all cases in which the construction, repair, or alteration of any
building or other structure will require an excavation within three feet of the
curb line of any street, permits must be obtained from the Building
Commissioner before excavation is commenced. Such permits shall be similar to
those issued for street openings and applications therefor must be accompanied
by deposits based on the estimated cost of restoring the street openings. In
cases where the edge of the excavation is more than three feet from the curb
line, the Building Commissioner shall, at the first indication of any
settlement in the street surface or curbing, require the builder to obtain a
street opening permit from the Department and shall have the right to suspend
or cancel the building permit until the street opening permit has been issued.
(2000 Code, § 55.19) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.20 SETTLING OF STREETS DUE TO BUILDING OPERATION.
   Whenever it shall appear that a settlement has taken place in the paving of
any street because of building operations and that no permit deposit or other
provision has been made for the street restoration, the expense of the
necessary restoration shall be charged to the property owner as though a permit
had been issued, and, where necessary, suit shall be brought by the Village
Solicitor to collect the amount of the same, if not paid.
(2000 Code, § 55.20) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.21 STREET RESTORATION FUND.
   All monies received as deposits under the provision of §§
54.14,
54.16,
54.19, and this section shall be paid to the village and credited to a Fund to
be known as the Street Restoration Fund. The Mayor shall have the right to draw
vouchers from time to time against said Fund for the labor, material, services,
use of tools and equipment, payment of contractors, inspection, and supervision
furnished by the village restoration. The Mayor shall also, on demand, after
restoration has been completed, prepare vouchers in favor of depositors for
balances due such depositors after the charges of the village for its services
in connection with the restoration work have been paid.
(2000 Code, § 55.21) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.22 UNDEDICATED STREETS, CONSTRUCTION UNDER PUBLIC SUPERVISION.
   Whenever the owner of any undedicated street, which has been tentatively
approved by the Planning Commission for acceptance by the village, desires to
improve the same at his or her own expense, under public inspection and
supervision, by paving, setting curbs and gutters, laying sidewalks, sewering,
or otherwise improving the same, or desires to construct a sewer through
private property to connect with a public sewer, he or she shall deposit the
estimated cost of inspection and supervision and submit the plans and
specifications under which the work is to be executed. The Village Engineer
shall certify that all requirements of the village with respect thereto have
been complied with or issue a statement as to conditions and modifications
required. Upon certification by the Village Engineer and upon application by
the owner, the Mayor shall issue a permit which shall set forth the conditions
and modifications of such plans and specifications under which such inspections
and supervision will be given.
(2000 Code, § 55.22) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.23 FUND FOR INSPECTION OF STREETS AND SEWERS PRIVATELY CONSTRUCTED.
   All monies received as deposit or payment under the provisions of §
54.22 shall be paid to the village and credited to a Fund to be known as the
Fund for Inspection of Streets and Sewers. The Mayor shall have the right to
draw vouchers from time to time against said Fund for the cost of inspection
and supervision furnished in accordance with §
54.22. The Mayor shall also, on demand, prepare vouchers in favor of the
depositors for balance due them after the charges of the department for its
services have been paid and certification of satisfactory completion has been
made by the Village Engineer.
(2000 Code, § 55.23) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.24 TAKING MATERIAL FROM STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up or cause to be dug up, or in
any manner to destroy or injure any street, watercourse, or creek, or to take
or carry away from any such street, watercourse, or creek, any stone, rock,
dirt, or other material unlawfully taken therefrom.
(2000 Code, § 55.24) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.25 WARNING LIGHTS, BARRIERS.
   Every person who shall dig or cause to be dug in or adjoining any street any
excavation whatsoever, and every person who shall occupy or cause to be
occupied any portion of any street with building material or any obstruction,
shall provide sufficient red lights and barricades to adequately protect
pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Such person shall cause not less than two red
lights to be securely and conspicuously posted in or near such excavation,
building material, or obstruction, one or more at each end of the space so
excavated or occupied. If the space occupied by such obstruction or excavation
shall exceed ten feet in extent, then such person shall cause additional lights
to be posted for every additional ten feet in extent or portion thereof so
excavated or occupied, and shall keep such lights burning the entire night. The
Mayor or an authorized village police officer may, at his or her discretion,
require additional lights, in the case of any excavated area. In the case of
excavations, whether in or adjoining a street, and in the case of other open or
exposed places within the village suitable warning barriers shall be set up to
protect the public against accidents.
(2000 Code, § 55.25) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.26 GUTTER CROSSINGS.
   Except as herein provided, it shall be unlawful for any property owner to
construct or maintain, or permit to be constructed or maintained, on a street
abutting his or her premises, any gutter cover, bridge, plate, pipe, or other
kind of gutter crossing. In unimproved streets or in streets not improved with
curbs and gutters, the Building Commissioner may, at his or her discretion,
issue a special permit for the placing of a pipe, if such construction is, in
his or her opinion, necessary in order to provide vehicle access to the
abutting property. Such special permit shall specify the size, extent, and type
of construction permitted.
(2000 Code, § 55.26) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.27 OBSTRUCTING GUTTERS.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct or permit the obstruction of any gutter so
as to impede the passage of water flowing in such gutter in any village street.
Wherever a property owner maintains a pipe in the gutter of a street abutting
his or her premises, by virtue of a special permit issued in accordance with §
54.26, such owner shall at all times keep such pipe free and clear of
obstruction.
(2000 Code, § 55.27) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.28 INTERFERING ENCROACHMENTS IN VILLAGE STREETS.
   Whenever, in connection with the construction, repair, or reconstruction of
a street or sidewalk improvement, or in connection with the laying of sewers,
water pipes, or other municipal utility equipment, it shall become necessary
for a property owner to remove, repair, or readjust, in whole or in part, a
building encroachment or other private street privilege, to conform to such
improvement, the Mayor shall notify the owner of the property to which the
encroachment or street privilege is appurtenant to make such removal or change
as shall conform to the proposed improvement and comply with the laws of the
state and the ordinances of the village.
(2000 Code, § 55.28) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.29 FORM OF NOTICE.
   The notice required in §
54.28 shall be sufficient if served on the owner or his or her agent personally
or by letter addressed to the place of business or last known residence of such
owner or agent. Where the property affected is owned by more than one person,
service on any one owner shall be sufficient. If no owner or agent can be
found, it shall be sufficient to post a notice on the premises for a period of
not less than 30 days.
(2000 Code, § 55.29) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.30 TERMINATION OF PRIVILEGE.
   If any owner shall, for the period of 30 days or more after the issuance of
the notice required by §
54.28, fail to make the removal or readjustment required by such notice, the
Mayor is hereby authorized and directed at any time to revoke and declare
terminated the right to maintain the encroachment or street privilege, as the
case may be. Notice of such revocation and termination shall be given in the
same manner provided in §
54.29.
(2000 Code, § 55.30) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.31 REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENT.
   Whenever the right to maintain an encroachment or street privilege in a
public street or sidewalk shall have been revoked or terminated in accordance
with the foregoing provisions, the Mayor shall be authorized and directed to
remove the encroaching construction, in whole or in part, and where necessary
to fill up, wall up, seal, or cover over any opening or cavity. The cost of
making such removal and performing such auxiliary work shall be charged against
the property owner. Where such removal and auxiliary work are necessary in
connection with sidewalk construction, such work shall be included as part of
the sidewalk construction and the cost thereof shall be assessed against the
abutting premises.
(2000 Code, § 55.31) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.32 DEFECT CAUSED BY ENCROACHMENT.
   Whenever any street or curb shall become defective by reason of the failure
of a property owner to properly maintain a private construction constituting an
encroachment or street privilege within such street or sidewalk area, the Mayor
shall be authorized and directed to require the removal of the encroachment and
the repair or reconstruction of the defect caused by such encroachment by the
owner, or to have the work done by the village in case of his or her default,
and to charge or assess against the owner any expense incurred by the village
in connection therewith, in the same manner as provided in the case of the
removal of interfering encroachments.
(2000 Code, § 55.32) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.33 REMOVING SUBSURFACE ENCROACHMENTS WHEN BUILDING IS WRECKED.
   Whenever a building with appurtenant facilities or encroachments within the
street right-of-way is wrecked or removed, the owner shall remove all such
appurtenant encroachments or facilities and fill in and restore the space
previously occupied by them, to conform to the adjacent street and pavement. In
case the owner shall fail to make such removal and restoration, the Mayor shall
be authorized and directed to cause the same to be done and to charge the cost
of the same against the owner in the same manner as provided in the case of the
removal of encroachments interfering with street construction.
(2000 Code, § 55.33) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.34 STREET OBSTRUCTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful to obstruct any street by erecting thereon any fence,
building, or other obstruction or by permitting any fence, building, or other
obstruction to remain thereon.
(2000 Code, § 55.34) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.35 UNAUTHORIZED WIRES, AND THE LIKE, IN STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, or for any agent
or servant of any person, firm, or corporation to lay, string, or maintain or
cause to be laid, strung or maintained any wire, pipe, subway, conduit, or
other appliance of construction on, under, or over the surface of any street or
public place, except as duly authorized according to law. Each day that any
such unauthorized appliance of construction is permitted to remain shall
constitute a separate offense.
(2000 Code, § 55.35) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.36 ENCUMBERING STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to encumber any street space with goods, wares,
merchandise, or other materials. This section shall not apply to the temporary
use of streets for lawful construction purposes.
(2000 Code, § 55.36) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.37 SOIL AND DEBRIS ON STREET.
   Whenever any debris, stone, or other material is deposited on the street by
reason of any slide, collapse, washing away, or crumbling of the owner’s land
or structures, the owner shall remove such debris, stone, or other material
within a reasonable time, and shall barricade and light such obstruction in the
street at once and continue to do so until complete removal of such debris,
stone or other material has been affected.
(2000 Code, § 55.37) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.38 EXPENSE OF REMOVAL OF DEBRIS, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   If the owner fails to barricade and light the obstruction at once, or
the owner fails to remove such debris, stone, or other material from the
street, the Mayor shall be authorized and directed to barricade and light such
obstruction and to remove the same. In each case the owner of the premises
shall be liable to the village for the expense thereof.
   (B)   In cases of immediate emergency, the Mayor shall be authorized to act
to remove such debris, stone, dirt, or other material at once.
(2000 Code, § 55.38) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.39 UNLOADING HEAVY MATERIAL ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to unload heavy material or to allow the same to fall
upon the pavement of a street without placing a sufficient protection over such
pavement.
(2000 Code, § 55.39) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.40 STREET NAME SIGNS.
   Wherever two streets intersect, there shall be placed on at least one corner
of such intersection the names of such streets, securely fastened to the sides
of the corner building, to a public service post or to an approved post
especially erected for the purpose.
(2000 Code, § 55.40) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.41 HOUSE NUMBERING.
   Buildings on streets shall be given a proper number by the Building
Commissioner.
(2000 Code, § 55.41) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.42 DISPLAYING OF HOUSE NUMBERS.
   Upon notification by the Building Commissioner of the proper number of a
building, the owner of such building shall cause such number to be placed and
continuously maintained in a conspicuous place on the front of such building.
If a building stands back more than 45 feet from the street line, the number
shall be conspicuously displayed at or near the walk, driveway, or common
entrance to such building at the street line on a gate post, fence, tree post,
or other appropriate place so as to be easily legible from the sidewalk.
(2000 Code, § 55.42) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 54.43 CHANGE OF HOUSE NUMBERS.
   The Building Commissioner shall, when authorized by Council, change the
house numbering of any street or part of a street or of any individual building
or buildings, when such change shall be necessary by reason of readjustment of
any kind, inaccuracy, or mistake, or for any other causes.
(2000 Code, § 55.43) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.44 REMOVING HOUSE NUMBERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, or deface any house
number, properly assigned and placed on or near a building, or to place or
retain on any building any other number than the one duly assigned by the
Building Commissioner.
(2000 Code, § 55.44) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 54.45 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK AREA.
   It shall be unlawful to drive or propel or park a vehicle, or to ride, lead,
or drive an animal of the horse or cattle kind within a sidewalk or park area
except at a permanent or temporary driveway.
(2000 Code, § 55.45) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 55: SIDEWALKS
Section
   
55.01   Definitions
   
55.02   Width and grade
   
55.03   Sidewalk openings; applications for permit
   
55.04   Sidewalk openings by village, county, or state
   
55.05   Sidewalk openings by public utility corporations
   
55.06   Restoration of sidewalks
   
55.07   Undedicated streets; construction required under public supervision
   
55.08   Warning lights and barrier
   
55.09   Sidewalk construction, replacement, repair, and supervision
   
55.10   Permits for sidewalk construction
   
55.11   Permit fees
   
55.12   Free permits
   
55.13   Deposit of materials
   
55.14   Sidewalk construction without lawful permit
   
55.15   Cement contractor’s licenses
   
55.16   Application and certificate for contractor’s license
   
55.17   Bond and contract of cement contractor
   
55.18   Sidewalk inspection
   
55.19   Revocation of license
   
55.20   Temporary driveway permits
   
55.21   Deposit against repairs
   
55.22   Interfering encroachments in village sidewalks
   
55.23   Form of notice
   
55.24   Termination of privilege
   
55.25   Removal of encroachment
   
55.26   Defect caused by encroachments
   
55.27   Flagpole sockets in sidewalks
   
55.28   General responsibility
   
55.29   Encumbering public rights-of-way
   
55.30   Temporary encumbrances
   
55.31   Authorization for use of sidewalks limited
   
55.32   Ground and debris on sidewalks
   
55.33   Expense of removal of debris, and the like
   
55.34   Inscribing names or advertising matter on sidewalk unlawful
   
55.35   Unloading heavy material on sidewalk
   
55.36   Removal of snow
   
55.37   Ice on sidewalk
   
55.38   Methods of collection, and the like
   
55.39   Criteria for condemning sidewalks and driveways
   
55.40   Sidewalks in need of repair or reconstruction
   
55.41   Notification of owner
   
55.42   Owner not a resident of village
   
55.43   Location of sidewalk and time for repair
   
55.44   Failure to reconstruct or repair within allotted time
   
55.45   Action by village
§ 55.01 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter, the terms defined in the subordinate sections
hereunder shall have the meanings herein assigned unless a different meaning is
clearly indicated. Derivative expressions shall have the corresponding
derivative meanings.
   COMMISSIONER. The Building Commissioner of the village.
   ENGINEER. The Village Engineer.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the village.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street lying between the established or
presumable curb line and the adjacent property line; the portion set aside for
pedestrian use. The curb shall be considered a part of the SIDEWALK.
(2000 Code, § 56.01) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.02 WIDTH AND GRADE.
   (A)   The normal width required for new construction is 10% of the dedicated
width of the right-of-way in which construction is to be made. In the event of
an existing walk within the block being wider or narrower than the required
width; then the Village Council may allow the original width to be replaced or
allow new construction to retain this width.
   (B)   The normal grade for new construction shall be parallel to the
existing street and/or curb grade or in the case of unimproved streets shall be
parallel to the established grade. The surface of all walks shall have a
transverse slope of one-quarter inch per foot of width with the low side
adjacent to the curb or roadway. In the event of hardship, the slope and grade
of the walk may be altered from these requirements. The Village Engineer will
set grades and slopes and where necessary place stakes to line and grade for
construction.
(2000 Code, § 56.02) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.03 SIDEWALK OPENINGS; APPLICATIONS FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Permits for making openings in village sidewalks shall be issued only
by the Building Commissioner and only for some duly authorized purpose.
Applications for sidewalk opening permits shall be made on forms provided by
the village. The application shall give the size and location of the proposed
opening and shall state the kind of material where the cut is to be made.
   (B)   The permit shall be issued only after ample security has been given
the village to ensure the proper restoration and subsequent maintenance of the
sidewalk material disturbed. Such security shall be in the form of a bond in
such sum as set by the Council of the village.
(2000 Code, § 56.03) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.04 SIDEWALK OPENINGS BY VILLAGE, COUNTY, OR STATE.
   When the village shall require the installation of underground conduits or
structures, it may obtain the necessary sidewalk opening permits without making
any cash deposits. No cash deposit shall be required from the county for
sidewalk opening permits. Where in any such case the work done greatly benefits
the village, the sidewalk restoration may, with the approval of the Village
Council, upon the recommendation of the Mayor, be made at the cost of the
village.
(2000 Code, § 56.04) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.05 SIDEWALK OPENINGS BY PUBLIC UTILITY CORPORATIONS.
   Where the public utility corporation is authorized by a special agreement
with the village to do its restoration work in connection with the opening of
sidewalks for maintenance and construction work, no cash deposit shall be
required.
(2000 Code, § 56.05) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.06 RESTORATION OF SIDEWALKS.
   Where openings have been or are to be made in a sidewalk, restoration of the
sidewalk shall be done by the permittee unless otherwise authorized as set
forth in §
55.04. In all cases, the entire work shall be carried out under the direction
of and to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer or the Building Commissioner
and in accordance with rules, regulations, and specifications as hereinafter
set out in §
55.09.
(2000 Code, § 56.06) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.07 UNDEDICATED STREETS: CONSTRUCTION REQUIRED UNDER PUBLIC SUPERVISION.
   Whenever the owner of an undedicated street, which has been tentatively
approved by the Planning Commission for acceptance by the village, desires to
improve the same at his or her own expense, under public inspection and
supervision, he or she shall provide sidewalks in accordance with the provision
of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 56.07) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.08 WARNING LIGHTS AND BARRIER.
   (A)   Any person who shall dig or cause to be dug in or adjoining the
sidewalk or mutilation whatsoever, and any person who shall occupy or cause to
be occupied any portion of sidewalk with building materials or any obstruction
shall provide sufficient red lights and barricades to adequately protect
pedestrians and vehicular traffic.
   (B)   Any such person shall cause not less than two red lights to be secured
and conspicuously placed in or near an excavation, building material, or other
obstructions, one or more at each end of a space so excavated or occupied.
   (C)   If the space occupied by such obstruction or excavation shall exceed
ten feet in extent, then such person shall cause additional lights to be posted
for every additional ten feet in extent or portion thereof so excavated or
occupied and shall keep such lights burning the entire night.
   (D)   The Mayor or any authorized village officer may, at his or her
discretion, require additional lights in case of any excavated area. In case of
excavations in or adjoining the sidewalk, and in case of other open or exposed
places within the village, suitable warning barriers shall be set out to
protect the public against accidents.
(2000 Code, § 56.08) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.09 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION, REPLACEMENT, REPAIR, AND SUPERVISION.
   (A)   Construction and replacement of public sidewalks. All sidewalks
constructed, repaired, and/or replaced shall be constructed of portland cement
concrete and shall be poured-in-place at the site.
   (B)   Repairs of existing sidewalks. Any existing sidewalks may be repaired
with the same type of material; provided, that more than 90% of the entire
front footage of the premises of one owner is in a condition acceptable to the
Building Commissioner, otherwise it shall be replaced by a portland cement
sidewalk.
   (C)   Sidewalk specifications. Portland cement concrete walks and portland
cement concrete handicap ramps shall be five inches thick and of one course
construction, being laid directly on the prepared subgrade. They shall be
composed of Class “C” concrete containing 6+ or - 2% of entrained air in
accordance with Item 499 of the Construction and Material Specifications, State
Department of Transportation. The width and grade of all new and replaced shall
be as provided in §
55.02.
      (1)   Excavation for the walk shall be made to a depth of five inches
below the proposed finished grade, and to a width of three inches more on each
side than the width of the proposed walk. All tree roots exposed by excavation
shall be cut off at least three inches outside the lines of the new walk and
three inches below the subgrade. After having been evenly fine graded, the
subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted with a five-ton roller. Where the use of
a roller is impracticable, the subgrade shall be compacted by heavy tamping. If
springs are encountered, drains shall be laid as directed by the Engineer.
      (2)   Forms may be either steel or sound two- inch plank and shall be
straight, true and clean. The forms shall be set true to line and grade and
firmly staked down. Where curved walks are required, thin strips or forms that
will produce a smooth, regular curve shall be used. The alignment, elevation,
and slope of all walks shall be subject to special directions from the
Engineer. Full width walk at its junction with the curb shall usually be one-
fourth inch above the curbing. Also, the slope of full width walk shall be
five-sixteenths inch per foot up from the curb to the building line. Any
variation from these details will be shown on the plans or as directed by the
Engineer.
      (3)   Concrete for portland cement concrete walks shall be of plastic
consistence and shall be placed on the prepared subgrade in one operation. It
shall be struck off and truly straightened, and neatly hand floated until all
coarse aggregate is entirely covered. Before the concrete sets, the surface of
the walk shall be cut into blocks with a jointer, and the edges tooled until
they are firm and smooth. The blocks shall be cut to straight lines generally
rectangular, measuring usually not less than two or more than five feet on the
side. The design of the blocking shall be subject to special direction of the
Engineer. After the walk has been blocked out, the concrete shall be carefully
floated to a smooth and uniform surface. The margin of each block shall then be
tooled with the edger or jointer to a smooth, dense finish. These final edger
or jointer marks shall not be floated out.
      (4)   Around street and stop sign posts, the walk shall be blocked out in
one-foot squares. Around utility poles, the walk shall be blocked out in two-
foot squares.
      (5)   Expansion joints shall be provided at such intervals, not exceeding
30 feet, as the Engineer may direct. Joints shall be made of preformed
material, one-half inch thick and five inches wide, meeting the requirements of
Item 451 of the Construction and Material Specifications.
      (6)   The same type of joint shall be constructed at all joints between
the new walk and the curb, between the new walk and all new entrance walks and
driveways, and between the curb and all new entrance walks. Also, the same kind
of material one-fourth inch thick and five inches wide shall be installed
around all poles, fire hydrants, cellar holes, inlets, and the like. Where
cement walks are laid along steel faced curbs, expansion joints shall be
installed in conformity with the joints in the curbs. The breaking or
displacement of curbs or the buckling of walks due to lack of proper expansion
joints shall be made good by the contractor at his or her own expense.
      (7)   It is understood that all work must connect with the adjoining work
in a reasonable manner, to the satisfaction of the Engineer.
      (8)   Portland cement concrete walks shall be cured in strict accordance
with the provisions of § 451.10, Construction and Material Specifications,
State of Ohio Department of Transportation, as follows.
      (9)   Immediately after the finishing operations have been completed and
after the free water has disappeared, all exposed surface of the concrete shall
be sealed by spraying thereon a uniform application of curing membrane in such
a manner as to provide a continuous uniform film without marring the surface of
the concrete. The material shall be applied with an approved self-propelled
mechanical sprayer. Wind protection to the spray fog shall be provided by an
adequate shield. A minimum of one gallon of material shall be used for each 150
square feet of surface treated. Curing material shall be thoroughly agitated
immediately prior to use.
         (a)   On small or irregular areas which are inaccessible to the
mechanical spray machine, the curing material may be applied by a hand spray.
         (b)   As soon as the forms have been removed, any honeycomb areas
shall be immediately corrected and the edges of the pavement coated with the
curing material. Any areas of pavement film that may have been damaged during
the sawing shall be resprayed during this operation.
         (c)   Concrete placed after October 31 and prior to April 1 shall be
cured by used of resin base curing compounds, or burlap mats, water-proof
paper, polyethylene sheeting or water-proofing curing blankets. Curing shall be
applied as soon after the finishing operations as possible without marring the
surface of the concrete. The entire surface of the top and sides of the newly
placed concrete shall be covered and maintained covered for seven days, unless
specimen beams have attained a modules of rupture of 600 psi.
         (d)   The contractor shall be responsible for protecting the concrete
from freezing until beams attain a strength of 600 psi.
         (e)   The above requirements for curing are minimum requirements only.
Any concrete showing injury or damage due to inadequate curing shall be
repaired or replaced by the contractor at no additional cost.
      (10)   (a)   When the temperature is below 40°F, or predicted to go below
36°F, in the next 24 hours, or predicted to go below 32°F in the next 72 hours,
no concrete pavement shall be poured without the express permission of the
Engineer. Permission so granted shall be for the day and location in question
only and must again be requested on subsequent days when the temperatures are
as above.
         (b)   When such permission is granted, the following requirements must
be met.
            1.   No concrete shall be poured until adequate covering material
is on the side and a sufficient number of workers are present to expedite the
finishing and covering to keep both as close behind spread as is practicable.
            2.   All forms shall be cleaned of all frost. In no case shall
concrete be poured on frozen ground or subgrade on which there is frost.
      (11)   The contractor shall, after removing the strips used in screening
the walk, fill the spaces left by the removal with fine earth well compacted.
When there is a lawn space between curb and walk, this shall also be neatly
dressed to conform to grade of walk and curb. The earth shall also be well
banked against the property line side of the walk.
   (D)   Concrete driveways across public sidewalks.
      (1)   The concrete for driveways shall be Class “C”. The driveways shall
be seven inches thick and of the length and width ordered by the Engineer. The
driveways shall be constructed in strict accordance with the standard drawings
on file in the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building which show the details
of construction along the various types of curbs.
      (2)   Excavation shall be made and the subgrade shall be evenly fine
graded and solidly compacted with a five-ton roller. Where the use of a roller
is impractical, the subgrade shall be compacted by heavy tamping. Forms may be
of either steel or sound two-inch plank, and they shall be straight, true and
clean. The forms shall be set true to line and grade firmly staked down and
well braced. Concrete shall be placed in accordance with the requirements for
sidewalks and shall be given an even and uniform float finish. Preformed
expansion joint filler one-half inch thick shall be placed on both sides
between the driveway and walk and the driveway and the curb. If the driveway is
over 30 feet long, the joint filler along the curb shall be one inch thick.
      (3)   Concrete driveways shall be cut into blocks, the same as a walk and
shall be cured in strict accordance with the requirements for sidewalks.
(2000 Code, § 56.09) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.10 PERMITS FOR SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall construct, lay, or repair a sidewalk
or a driveway across a sidewalk on any street without first securing a permit
from the Building Commissioner. The application for the permit shall contain a
statement showing the location of the proposed sidewalk or driveway, the exact
number of lineal feet of sidewalk or driveway involved, the name and address of
the owner of the abutting premises, and such other pertinent information as the
Building Commissioner may require. Separate permits shall be required for each
lot or parcel of real estate involved, except in cases of general street
improvement by contract in which case one permit shall be issued for all
construction.
(2000 Code, § 56.10) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.11 PERMIT FEES.
   The permit fees for construction, reconstruction, or repair of sidewalks
shall be as set forth in the current permit fee schedule of the village.
(2000 Code, § 56.11) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.12 FREE PERMITS.
   The Building Commissioner may, at his or her discretion, issue a free permit
to a property owner where repairs are made to a sidewalk abutting his or her
property; such repairs shall be to correct hazardous or unsightly conditions
caused by normal “wear and tear” or by root growth of village right-of- way
trees.
(2000 Code, § 56.12) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.13 DEPOSIT OF MATERIALS.
   The issuance of a permit shall authorize the necessary reasonable use of
sidewalk or street space for the temporary storage of materials and equipment
required for the construction or repair of sidewalks and driveways, subject to
any rules or regulations of the village governing such temporary storage.
(2000 Code, § 56.13) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.14 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION WITHOUT LAWFUL PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any persons, directly or indirectly as principal,
agent, or employee, to construct or repair or to attempt to construct or repair
any sidewalk without having obtained the required permit or permits for such
work. No charge for permit for two squares or less.
(2000 Code, § 56.14) (O-15-70, passed - -; Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.15 CEMENT CONTRACTOR’S LICENSES.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall undertake to construct, lay, or repair
a public sidewalk consisting of more than two squares unless he, she, or it
shall have previously secured a license as a cement contractor.
(2000 Code, § 56.15) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.16 APPLICATION AND CERTIFICATE FOR CONTRACTOR’S LICENSE.
   Application for cement contractor’s license shall be made to the Mayor who
shall issue a license to the applicant if deemed to be qualified to properly
lay and construct portland cement sidewalks, and driveways, and shall charge a
fee of $2 for the license which shall expire one year from date of issue.
(2000 Code, § 56.16) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.17 BOND AND CONTRACT OF CEMENT CONTRACTOR.
   Before any license is issued to any cement contractor, the contractor shall
file a bond in the sum of $2,500, conditioned to require the contractor to at
once relay any cement sidewalk or driveway not laid in accordance with this
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 56.17) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.18 SIDEWALK INSPECTION.
   (A)   During the sidewalk construction or repair, the Building Commissioner
shall make the inspections of work.
   (B)   If, in his or her judgment and opinion, the work is unsatisfactory, he
or she shall send certified mail or otherwise serve notice of such fact on the
contractor and property owner and order the contractor to relay or repair the
work according to specifications.
(2000 Code, § 56.18) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.19 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   In case any cement contractor shall fail to comply with the rules and
specifications governing any sidewalk construction or repair undertaken by him
or her, the Building Commissioner shall certify such fact to the Mayor who
shall revoke the license of such contractor, and the contractor’s bond shall be
forfeited.
(2000 Code, § 56.19) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.20 TEMPORARY DRIVEWAY PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any part of
a sidewalk for temporary driveway purposes without first securing a permit from
the Building Commissioner.
(2000 Code, § 56.20) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.21 DEPOSIT AGAINST REPAIRS.
   Before granting a temporary driveway permit, the Building Commissioner shall
require a sufficient deposit to cover the cost of repairing any damage that may
be caused to the sidewalk by reason of its use for temporary driveway purposes.
If no repairs shall be necessary, the deposit shall be refunded. If repairs are
made, the Mayor is authorized upon the presentation of satisfactory evidence to
reimburse the person making them for the cost thereof. Any balance remaining
shall be refunded to the person making the deposit.
(2000 Code, § 56.21) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.22 INTERFERING ENCROACHMENTS IN VILLAGE SIDEWALKS.
   Whenever reconstruction of a sidewalk shall be necessary for a property
owner to remove, repair, or readjust, in whole or in part, a building
encroachment, to conform to such improvement, the Mayor shall notify the owner
of the property to which the encroachment is appurtenant to make such removal
or changes as shall conform to the proposed improvement and comply with the
laws of the state and the ordinances of the village.
(2000 Code, § 56.22) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.23 FORM OF NOTICE.
   (A)   The notice required in this section be sufficient if served on the
owner or his or her agent personally or by letter addressed to the place of
business or last known address of such owner or agent.
   (B)   Where the property affected is owned by more than one person, service
on any one owner shall be sufficient. If no owner or agent can be found, it
shall be sufficient to post a notice on the premises for a period of not less
than 30 days.
(2000 Code, § 56.23) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.24 TERMINATION OF PRIVILEGE.
   (A)   If any owner shall, for a period of 30 days or more after the issuance
of the notice required by §
55.23, fail to make the removal or readjustment required by such notice, the
Mayor is hereby authorized and directed at any time to revoke and declare
terminated the right to maintain the encroachment.
   (B)   Notice of such revocation and termination shall be given in the same
manner provided in §
55.23.
(2000 Code, § 56.24) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.25 REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the right to maintain an encroachment in a public sidewalk
shall have been revoked or terminated in accordance with the foregoing
provisions, the Mayor is authorized and directed to remove the encroaching
construction, in whole or in part, and where necessary to fill up, wall up,
seal, or cover any opening or cavity.
   (B)   The cost of making such removal and performing such auxiliary work
shall be charged against the property owner. Where such removal and auxiliary
work are necessary in connection with sidewalk construction, such work shall be
included as part of sidewalk construction and the cost thereof shall be
assessed against the abutting premises.
(2000 Code, § 56.25) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.26 DEFECT CAUSED BY ENCROACHMENT.
   Whenever any sidewalk shall become defective by reason of the failure of a
property owner to properly maintain a private construction constituting an
encroachment on such sidewalk area, the Mayor shall be authorized and directed
to require the removal of the encroachment and the repair or reconstruction of
the defect caused by such encroachment by the owner, or to have the work done
by the village in case of his or her default, and to charge or assess against
the owner any expense incurred by the village in connection therewith, and in
the same manner as provided in the case of the removal of interfering
encroachments.
(2000 Code, § 56.26) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.27 FLAGPOLE SOCKETS IN SIDEWALKS.
   The Building Commissioner is authorized on application of any civic or
patriotic society, or of any property owner, to grant a permit or permits to
install one or more metal flagpole sockets in the sidewalk of any street. Such
flagpole sockets shall not be less than 12 inches from the curb line and not
less than 25 feet apart unless an obstruction or other difficulty renders such
restrictions impracticable. Installation of such flagpole sockets and the use
of the same after installation shall be under the direction and subject to the
approval of the Building Commissioner.
(2000 Code, § 56.27) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.28 GENERAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   In construction, repair, and maintenance of sidewalks and driveways of lots
or lands abutting any public ways within the village, shall be the
responsibility of and shall be done at the expense of the owner of the property
on which the sidewalk or driveway abuts wherein such improvements and
maintenance may be required to be made or done.
(2000 Code, § 56.28) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.29 ENCUMBERING PUBLIC RIGHTS- OF-WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to encumber any public right-of-way which
includes streets, green strips, sidewalk space, or other public areas with
goods, wares, merchandise, temporary signs, planting containers, or other items
or materials, unless authorized by the Mayor.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the temporary use of streets and
sidewalks for lawful construction purposes.
(2000 Code, § 56.29) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992; Ord. O-27-98, passed 8-
10-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.30 TEMPORARY ENCUMBRANCES.
   Where materials, equipment, or containers are being delivered to or removed
from a property, they may be placed on sidewalks temporarily as necessary
during the process of loading or unloading; provided, that a walk space not
less than four feet wide shall at all times be kept open for pedestrians in the
center of the sidewalks.
(2000 Code, § 56.30) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.31 AUTHORIZATION FOR USE OF SIDEWALKS LIMITED.
   Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing the use of sidewalks for
storage purposes nor as authorizing the encumbering of sidewalks.
(2000 Code, § 56.31) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.32 GROUND AND DEBRIS ON SIDEWALKS.
   Whenever any debris, stone, or other material is deposited on the sidewalk
by reason of any slide, collapse, washing away, or crumbling of the owner’s
lane or structures, the owner shall remove such debris, stone, or other
material within a reasonable time, and shall barricade and light such
obstruction in the sidewalk at once and continue to do so until complete
removal of such debris, stone, or other material has been effected.
(2000 Code, § 56.32) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.33 EXPENSE OF REMOVAL OF DEBRIS, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   If the owner fails to barricade and light the obstruction at once, or
the owner fails to remove such debris, stone, or other material from the
sidewalk, the Mayor is authorized and directed to barricade such obstruction
and to remove the same.
   (B)   In each case the owner of the premises shall be liable to the village
for the expense thereof. In cases of immediate emergency, the Mayor is
authorized to act to remove such debris, stone, dirt, or other material at
once.
(2000 Code, § 56.33) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.34 INSCRIBING NAMES OR ADVERTISING MATTER ON SIDEWALK UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, contractor, or other person to insert by
metal plate, tile, or casting, or to inscribe, paint, or otherwise imprint upon
any sidewalk any name, design, or other inscription.
(2000 Code, § 56.34) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.35 UNLOADING HEAVY MATERIAL ON SIDEWALK.
   It shall be unlawful to unload heavy material or to allow the same to fall
upon the sidewalk without placing a sufficient protection over such sidewalk.
(2000 Code, § 56.35) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.36 REMOVAL OF SNOW.
   The owner, occupant, or other person having the care of any building,
premises, or unimproved lot of land abutting any sidewalk where there is a
graded sidewalk, or a sidewalk graded and paved, shall within the first eight
hours after daylight, or within eight hours after the ceasing to fall of any
snow, cause the same to be removed from the paved or traveled part of such
sidewalk. The provisions of this section shall also apply to the falling of
snow or ice from any building onto a sidewalk. Snow or ice shall not be moved
into the gutter when the gutter has been previously cleaned, and in no event
shall snow or ice from any area other than the pedestrian walk be moved into
the gutter.
(2000 Code, § 56.36) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.37 ICE ON SIDEWALK.
   Whenever a sidewalk, or any part thereof along any building, premises, or
unimproved lot of land shall be encumbered with ice, the owner, occupant, or
other person having the care of such premises or lot shall cause such sidewalk
to be made safe and convenient by removing the ice therefrom or by covering the
same with sand or other suitable substance. Failure to comply with the
provisions of this section for a period of more than eight hours during the
daytime shall subject such owner, occupant, or person in charge to the penalty
provided for violation of this section.
(2000 Code, § 56.37) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.38 METHODS OF COLLECTION, AND THE LIKE.
   Where land abuts on a street where there is a paved sidewalk, the owner or
owners of such parcel of land shall be jointly and severally responsible for
causing the paved sidewalk, or sidewalk area (including driveways and the grass
strip) abutting such parcels of land to be kept in repair and free from
nuisance.
(2000 Code, § 56.38) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.39 CRITERIA FOR CONDEMNING SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   Criteria for condemning sidewalks. The following are criteria for
condemning sidewalks.
      (1)   Any block having a crack or cracks in it more than five-eighths of
an inch wide;
      (2)   Adjoining blocks or portions thereof whose edges differ vertically
by more than five- eighths of an inch;
      (3)   Blocks that have holes in them five- eighths of an inch or more in
diameter or are cracked and broken so that pieces are missing or loose;
      (4)   Blocks having depressions, reverse cross-slope, (sloping away from
the street) or below curb grade so as to impound mud or water;
      (5)   Blocks having a cross-slope in excess of three-fourths of an inch
vertical per one foot horizontal;
      (6)   Blocks that cause an abrupt change in the longitudinal grade of the
sidewalk.;
      (7)   Blocks that are ravelled; that is, the surface has spilled leaving
it very rough with the coarse aggregate protruding;
      (8)   Sidewalk material placed without prior approval through the
granting of a revokable minor street privilege;
      (9)   Sod area between the sidewalk and street that protrudes above the
sidewalk and impounds water or causes it to drain along the sidewalk, in such
cases the condition should be corrected by lowering the sod. In cases where the
sod area on either side of the sidewalk is below the grade of the sidewalk, a
fill should be made and the area either sodded or seeded;
      (10)   Stumps, stones, private sign posts, or any other unauthorized
obstruction in the sidewalk space;
      (11)   Trees, bushes, or shrubs that overhang the sidewalk. Tree limbs
should be trimmed to at least eight feet above the sidewalk after obtaining
permit from the Maintenance Superintendent. Bushes or shrubs should be trimmed
so as not to overhang the sidewalk even after a rain; or
      (12)   Water stop-boxes, gas stop-boxes, and the like, that are not to
proper grade.
   (B)   Criteria for condemning driveways. The following are criteria for
condemning driveways.
      (1)   Any driveway having a crack or cracks in it more than five-eighths
of an inch wide;
      (2)   Driveways that differ vertically by more than five-eighths of an
inch either above or below the sidewalk;
      (3)   Driveways that are cracked or broken or have holes larger than
five-eighths of an inch in diameter;
      (4)   Driveway entrances within the street right-of-way constructed of
materials other than concrete or bituminous concrete on an unimproved street
(streets not having curbs) that have been placed without prior approval through
the granting of a revokable minor street privilege;
      (5)   Driveways that are dipped across the sidewalk so as to create an
abrupt change of grade. This condition normally exists where the driveway at
street edge of the sidewalk has been held several inches below the grade of the
sidewalk and the transition from the driveway to sidewalk grade is accomplished
in a very short distance; or
      (6)   Curb to be restored only if sidewalk abuts curb or if abandoned or
unimproved driveway is being used illegally.
(2000 Code, § 56.39) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.40 SIDEWALKS IN NEED OF REPAIR OR RECONSTRUCTION.
   Whenever the Building Commissioner shall find any sidewalk should be
reconstructed or repaired within the village, or that any paved sidewalk,
sidewalk area, (including driveways and the grass strip) are not in repair, or
if not free from nuisance, the Building Commissioner shall notify the Village
Fiscal Officer in writing of his or her findings.
(2000 Code, § 56.40) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.41 NOTIFICATION OF OWNER.
   The Village Fiscal Officer, upon receiving notice from the Building
Commissioner, that any sidewalk should be reconstructed or repaired, or that
any paved sidewalk, or sidewalk area (including driveways and grass strips), is
not in repair or is not free from nuisance, shall notify the owner of the
abutting property in writing to have the necessary reconstruction or repairs
made as hereinbefore provided. Such notice shall be served upon the owner or
agent of the owner of each parcel of land abutting on such sidewalk who is a
resident of the county in the manner provided for the service of summons in
civil actions. For the purpose of such service, any person charged with the
collection of rents or the payment of taxes on the property or having general
control of it in any way shall make his or her return on a copy of such notice
within the time and manner of service endorsed thereon, signed by the Fiscal
Officer, which copy shall be filed in the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal
Building.
(2000 Code, § 56.41) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.42 OWNER NOT A RESIDENT OF VILLAGE.
   Where the owner is a nonresident of the county or where neither the owner
nor agent nor the place of residence of the owner can be found, the notice
shall be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village or the notice shall be posted
for a period of 14 days on the premises.
(2000 Code, § 56.42) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.43 LOCATION OF SIDEWALK AND TIME FOR REPAIR.
   (A)   The notice provided for in §
55.42 and this section shall identify the property by street number, Auditor’s
Plat Book, page, and parcel number, and shall give the location of the sidewalk
and the period of time allowed to have the work done by private contract.
   (B)   Such time shall be reasonable, but shall not be more than 30 days for
the new sidewalk or replacing the existing sidewalk and not more than 15 days
for repairs.
(2000 Code, § 56.43) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
§ 55.44 FAILURE TO RECONSTRUCT OR REPAIR WITHIN ALLOTTED TIME.
   If the sidewalks are not constructed or replaced within 30 days or repaired
within 15 days from the service of such notice or the completion of the
publication, the Building Commissioner shall report this fact to the Village
Fiscal Officer and he or she shall report the same to the Village Council. The
report shall contain a copy of all notices and record of proceedings conducted
by the Building Commissioner and the Fiscal Officer.
(2000 Code, § 56.44) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 55.45 ACTION BY VILLAGE.
   The Village Council, upon receipt of the report of the Village Fiscal
Officer, shall, within 21 days after receipt of such notice from the Village
Fiscal Officer, take such action as is provided by law to require the
reconstruction, replacements, and repair of the sidewalk in the municipal
corporation as it deems necessary and in conformity with R.C. §§ 729.01 et seq.
(including having the work done). The village shall charge and collect from the
property owner the cost of the work plus administrative charges incident
thereto.
(2000 Code, § 56.45) (Ord. O-31-92, passed 9-14-1992)
CHAPTER 56: DESIGN GUIDELINES FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Section
Background and Purpose
   
56.01   Background
   
56.02   Purpose
Wireless Communication Facility Standards
   
56.10   Generally
   
56.11   General wireless communication facilities standards
   
56.12   Visual impact minimization and screening standards
   
56.13   Permitted and preferred locations for wireless communication facilities
   
56.14   Right to reserve space
   
56.15   Installation type preferences
   
56.16   Power supply and fiber optic connections (all installation type
requests)
Permitted and Preferred Siting Standards
   
56.25   Residential buildings
   
56.26   School boundaries
   
56.27   Zones of exclusion
   
56.28   Intersection corners and driveway aprons
   
56.29   Residential property
   
56.30   Existing objects in the right-of-way
   
56.31   Minimum spacing
   
56.32   Trees
Objective Design and  Concealment Standards
   
56.40   Generally
   
56.41   Existing structure installations standards - building mounted
   
56.42   Existing structure installations standards - structure mounted
   
56.43   New support structure installations design specifications
   
56.44   Eligible facilities requests - colocation
   
56.45   Eligible facilities requests - "cell on wheels"
   
56.46   Antennas
   
56.47   Associated small cell equipment
Performance Standards for  Wireless Support Structures
   
56.60   Noise
   
56.61   Safety
Historic District Specific Standards
   
56.70   Generally
   
56.71   Defined terms
   
56.72   Permitted and preferred locations and siting standards for wireless
communication facilities
   
56.73   Objective design and concealment of wireless support structure
standards
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE
§ 56.01 BACKGROUND.
   (A)   Ohio House Bill 478 ("HB 478") modifies a previously adopted law
regarding wireless service and the placement of small cell facilities in city
rights-of-way. It was passed on April 11, 2018, signed by the governor on May
2, 2018 and is effective as of August 1, 2018. The law is intended to promote
the rapid deployment of small cell facility infrastructure within the right-of-
way by ensuring that municipalities grant or deny consent to install, operate,
modify, or replace wireless facilities in a timely manner. The law recognizes
the authority of a municipality to manage access to, and occupancy of, rights-
of-ways to the extent necessary with regard to matters of local concern. This
includes the protection of the integrity of historic areas and ensures that the
use of the rights-of-way in such districts is technologically and aesthetically
appropriate.
   (B)   Chapter 15 of the Village of Mariemont Ordinances has been written to
account for the provisions of HB 478 for the regulation of small cell
facilities and wireless support structures within city rights-of-way.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements of Title 15, these design guidelines
for wireless communications facilities ("design guidelines") provide guidance
to wireless communications carriers on the aesthetic requirements and
specifications that all small cell facilities and wireless support structures
must meet prior to installation in the Village of Mariemont right-of-way.
   (B)   The objective of the design guidelines is to strike a balance between
preserving the character of the village, architecturally and visually, through
careful design, siting, landscaping and camouflaging techniques to blend these
facilities into their environment, while enhancing the ability of wireless
communications carriers to deploy small cell facilities and wireless support
structures in the village quickly, effectively, and efficiently so that
residents, businesses, and visitors benefit from wireless service availability.
   (C)   The intent of the design guidelines is also to protect the public
health, safety and general welfare and to provide wireless communications
service to the community in a safe, effective and efficient manner.
   (D)   The design guidelines provide for the managed development of wireless
communications and are intended to allow sufficient flexibility to respond to
and integrate changes in safety regulations, future advances in small cell
facilities technology as well as innovations that improve the ability for these
facilities to integrate into the surrounding environment. Due to the rapid
advances in wireless technology, the design guidelines will be evaluated
periodically to ensure that the provisions respond and adapt accordingly to
these evolving technologies.
   (E)   These guidelines apply to requests to locate small cell facilities and
wireless support structures in the right-of-way and are administered by the
village Building Department. That office can be reached at 513-271-3315.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY STANDARDS
§ 56.10 GENERALLY.
   The following development and design standards shall be used to review any
wireless communication facility permit application pursuant to this chapter.
Unless otherwise specified, all wireless communication facilities shall be
planned, designed, located, erected, operated, and maintained in accordance
with the following standards.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.11 GENERAL WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES STANDARDS.
   (A)   Wireless communication facilities shall comply with all development
standards within the applicable zoning district of the subject site, except
minimum site size, maximum site coverage, building setbacks, parking and
landscape coverage.
   (B)   Height limits for all wireless communication facilities shall be in
accordance with the design guidelines and federal law.
   (C)   All wireless communication facilities and accessory wireless equipment
shall comply with the applicable provisions of the village's noise ordinance §
132.15 and design guidelines. Note that such facilities located in parks or
playgrounds where the noise ordinance does not normally apply will be subject
to the limitations of the noise ordinance.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.12 VISUAL IMPACT MINIMIZATION AND SCREENING STANDARDS.
   (A)   All wireless communications facilities shall employ camouflage design
techniques to minimize visual impacts and provide appropriate screening. Such
techniques shall be employed to make the installation, operation and appearance
of the facility as visually inconspicuous as possible, to prevent the facility
from visually dominating the surrounding area, and to hide the installation
from predominant views from surrounding properties.
   (B)   Depending on the proposed site and surroundings, certain camouflage
design techniques may be deemed by the village as ineffective or inappropriate
and alternative techniques may be recommended. Sections
56.40 through
56.47 provides standards for potential camouflage design techniques that should
be considered based on different installation situations.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.13 PERMITTED AND PREFERRED LOCATIONS FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATION
FACILITIES.
   (A)   Placement is permitted in non-residential zoning districts. The
preference is to not place them directly adjacent to residential districts.
   (B)   Placement in parks is discouraged.
   (C)   Residential roadways. If placement within residential districts is
required to provide adequate cellular service, the following are the order of
roadway preferences:
      (1)   These preferences do not apply to any of the Historic Districts
which are delineated in Sections
56.70 through
56.73.
      (2)   Most preferred roadways are collector streets' right-of-way areas.
Those streets include:
         (a)   Wooster Pike;
         (b)   Madisonville Road;
         (c)   Miami Road north of Wooster Pike;
         (d)   Murray Avenue.
      (3)   The next set of preferences would be the larger local streets,
including:
         (a)   Miami Avenue south of Wooster Pike;
         (b)   Confluence of Hiawatha, Rembold, Indianview and Wooster Pike;
         (c)   Belmont Street;
         (d)   Miami Bluff Drive;
         (e)   Mariemont Avenue.
      (4)   In each instance above, the priority shall be for placement of a
wireless communication facility most distant from residential property and
structures.
   (D)   Conservation areas and historic sites.
      (1)   A wireless communication facility shall not be placed in any
conservation area or site.
      (2)   Current conservation sites and areas include the Indian Mounds,
known as the Madisonville Site, Dogwood Park, Mariemont Earthwork, Madisonville
Mound, Spice Bush Mound, Ferris Mill Site and the Ferris Distillery Site, as
set forth in §
151.075(G) of the village Code of Ordinances.
   (E)   Existing pedestrian-scale decorative street lights and pole fixtures
are classified as historic landmarks, as such are subject to the Historic
District Specific Standards. They cannot accommodate new installations and are
not suitable for replacement.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.14 RIGHT TO RESERVE SPACE.
   The village may reserve space for future public safety or transportation
uses in the right-of-way or on a wireless support structure in a documented and
approved plan that is in place at the time an application is filed.
   (A)   A reservation of space shall not preclude placement on an existing
structure or colocation of a small cell facility.
   (B)   If replacement of a wireless support structure is necessary to
accommodate the small cell facility, it must accommodate the future use.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.15 INSTALLATION TYPE PREFERENCES.
   The following preferences hold except where otherwise provided in the
Historic District Specific Standards outlined in §§
56.70 through
56.73.
   (A)   Colocation of wireless facilities on existing wireless facilities is
strongly encouraged.
   (B)   Underground design is a preferred option.
   (C)   Other preferences include:
      (1)   Small cell facilities mounted to existing support structures or
buildings that follow design guidelines §§
56.41 and
56.42.
      (2)   New support structures that follow design guidelines §
56.43.
   (D)   Least preferred types include:
      (1)   Building or existing pole mounted designs that are not screened or
camouflaged.
      (2)   New support structures that are not screened or camouflaged.
      (3)   Temporary "cell on wheels" facilities.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.16 POWER SUPPLY AND FIBER OPTIC CONNECTIONS (ALL INSTALLATION TYPE
REQUESTS).
   (A)   Independent power and communication sources required. Small cell
facilities located on village-owned wireless support structures may not use the
same power or communication source providing power and/or communication for the
existing facility original to the purposes of the support structure. The
independent power source must be contained within a separate conduit inside the
support structure. The applicant shall coordinate, establish, maintain and pay
for all power and communication connections with private utilities.
   (B)   Utility undergrounding required. Where underground utilities are
present, all service lines from the power source to the small cell facilities
and wireless support structure shall be located underground.
   (C)   Wiring, cables and conduit requirements.
      (1)   All wiring and cables must be housed within the steel support
structure or pole and extended vertically within a flexible conduit.
      (2)   Spools and/or coils of excess fiber optic or coaxial cables or any
other wires shall not be stored on the pole except completely within the
approved enclosures or cabinets.
      (3)   Exposed wires, cables, connections and external conduit are
prohibited.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
PERMITTED AND PREFERRED   SITING STANDARDS
§ 56.25 RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS.
   Wireless communication facilities shall not be placed inside or within 100
feet of any building used for occupancy in any zoning district in order to
protect the health and safety of village residents.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.26 SCHOOL BOUNDARIES.
   Wireless communication facilities shall not be placed within 500 feet of a
school.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.27 ZONES OF EXCLUSION.
   (A)   No wireless communications facility shall be placed within the public
right-of-way in the area between the street centerline and the central 50% of
the immediately adjacent parcel's front lot line. The central 50% standard
shall be based on the parcel's lot width. For corner lots, the central 50%
standard along the street lot line shall be based on the parcel's lot depth.
   (B)   New wireless support structures should be sited in alignment with
other existing poles on the same side of the right-of-way, and aligned as close
as practicable with adjacent side property lines, or with shared wall locations
in adjacent multi-tenant structures.
   (C)   In no case shall a wireless support structure be sited directly in
front of a residence, building entrance or storefront.
   (D)   Special care should be taken to avoid siting wireless support
structures in conflict with business signs.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.28 INTERSECTION CORNERS AND DRIVEWAY APRONS.
   A wireless communication facility shall not be placed less than 20 feet away
from any roadway intersection nor less than 12 feet from a driveway apron. An
intersection is measured from the start of the curb radius.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.29 RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   Wireless communication facilities shall not be permitted on properties
either used or zoned residentially.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.30 EXISTING OBJECTS IN THE RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   New wireless support structures shall be located a minimum of 12 feet from
any permanent object or existing lawful encroachment in the right-of-way to
allow for access.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.31 MINIMUM SPACING.
   (A)   Minimum spacing between proposed and existing privately owned wireless
support structures.
      (1)   The minimum horizontal distance between a new wireless support
structure and associated small cell facilities and any other existing, or
permitted but unconstructed, wireless support structures and small cell
facilities on the same side of the right-of-way at the time a complete
application is filed with the village, irrespective of the owners/operators,
shall be not less than 600 feet, as measured parallel to the right-of-way,
except as found in the Historic District Specific Standards, §§ 56.70 through
56.73.
      (2)   This requirement does not preclude wireless communication
facilities collocating on the same structure where otherwise allowed.
         (a)   It is the village's strong preference that whenever an applicant
proposes to place a new wireless support structure with a small cell facility
within 500 feet from an existing wireless support structure, the applicant
either collocate with the existing facility or demonstrate that a colocation is
either not technically feasible or space on the existing facility is not
potentially available.
      (3)   Spacing between proposed wireless support structures and existing
publicly owned wireless support structures.
         (a)   New wireless support structures shall be located midway between
the immediately adjacent existing publicly-owned wireless support structures on
either side of the proposed wireless support structure to the maximum extent
possible.
      (4)   Multiple requests in violation of spacing requirements.
         (a)   If multiple requests are received to install two or more
wireless support structures that would violate the applicable spacing
requirements, or to collocate two or more small cell facilities on the same
wireless support structure, the village may resolve conflicting requests
through whatever reasonable and nondiscriminatory manner it deems appropriate.
   (B)   Village proposed alternative location for wireless support structures,
excluding colocation.
      (1)   The village may propose an alternate location to any proposed
location of a new wireless support structure, subject to the following:
         (a)   The alternate location is within 100 feet of the proposed
location; or
         (b)   The alternate location is within a distance that is equivalent
to the width of the right-of-way in which the new wireless support structure is
proposed, whichever is greater; and
         (c)   The operator shall use the alternate location if it has the
right to do so on reasonable terms and conditions and the alternate location
does not impose technical limits or additional costs.
      (2)   Waiver to village directed alternate wireless support structure
location or undergrounding requirements.
         (a)   Small cell operators may seek a waiver of the undergrounding or
alternative location requirements for the placement of a new wireless support
structure if the operator is unable to achieve its service objective using a
small cell facility under the following circumstances:
            1.   From a location in the right-of-way where the prohibition does
not apply;
            2.   In a utility easement within the right-of-way the operator has
the right to access; or
            3.   In or on other suitable locations or structures made available
by the village at reasonable rates, fees, and terms.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.32 TREES.
   A wireless communication facility shall not be located in a manner that
requires the removal of an existing tree in the immediate vicinity, including
major trees (six inches or greater in diameter at 54 inches above ground level)
on private property. Wireless support structures shall be sited outside of the
critical root zone of existing street trees and any existing major trees
located in the immediate vicinity, including major trees on private property.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
OBJECTIVE DESIGN AND   CONCEALMENT STANDARDS
§ 56.40 GENERALLY.
   This subchapter establishes objective standards for requests for small
utility facilities, new and existing installations, eligible facilities
including colocation and removal. These standards are meant to protect public
health and safety while maintaining visual compatibility with the community,
while also allowing for the orderly deployment of small utility facilities for
the benefit of the community.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.41 EXISTING STRUCTURE INSTALLATIONS STANDARDS - BUILDING MOUNTED.
   (A)   All antennas shall be mounted in a cylinder form and concealed within
a shroud at the top of the building.
   (B)   Screening materials shall be integrated with the building and match in
color, size, proportion, style, texture and quality with the exterior design
and architectural character of the structure and the surrounding visual
environment.
   (C)   Facade mounted antennas shall be architecturally integrated into the
building design and otherwise made as unobtrusive as possible.
   (D)   Facility components including all antennas and antenna panels shall be
mounted either:
      (1)   Inside the structure,
      (2)   Entirely behind the proposed screening elements,
      (3)   Below the top of wall or roofline/ parapet, or
      (4)   Flat against the building to the extent possible.
   (E)   Wires and cables should be mounted in such a way as to minimize
exposure and/or be located underground.
   (F)   Facade mounted antennas shall not extend more than 24 inches out from
the building face.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.42 EXISTING STRUCTURE INSTALLATIONS STANDARDS - STRUCTURE MOUNTED.
   (A)   Streetlights/traffic signals/utility poles.
      (1)   All antennas shall be mounted in a cylinder form and concealed
within a shroud at the top of the building.
      (2)   Antenna panels or other equipment shall be wired in a manner
minimizing exposed cables.
      (3)   All undergrounded equipment, including any pull boxes or other
cabinetry, shall be located entirely underground and flush with existing
sidewalk or ground surface.
      (4)   Where the small utility facility requires a replacement structure,
all other equipment associated with the antennas shall either be mounted in the
same shroud that houses the antennas, within the replacement structure, or
underground.
      (5)   Where the small utility facility requires a replacement structure,
it shall be no further than five feet from the original structure.
      (6)   The diameter of the replacement structure, including any
concealment elements, shall be a maximum of 12 inches.
      (7)   The height of the support structure may extend a maximum of five
feet beyond the height of the existing structure or the structure it is
intended to replace, or nearest existing piece of vertical infrastructure
exceeding 25 feet in height.
      (8)   Antenna installations located in the public right-of-way or on
streetlights or traffic signal standards shall be limited to equipment
components that are compatible in scale and proportion to streetlights and
traffic signals and the poles on which they are mounted.
      (9)   Equipment shall be painted or otherwise coated to be visually
compatible with existing lighting and signal equipment.
   (B)   Flagpole mount.
      (1)   All antennas shall be mounted in a cylinder form and concealed
within a shroud at the top of the building.
      (2)   All antenna panels and accessory equipment shall be mounted inside
the tower.
      (3)   Screening materials shall match the size, color, texture and design
of the existing tower.
      (4)   All accessory equipment shall be located inside the existing
equipment enclosure.
      (5)   All new utility lines should be located underground.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.43 NEW SUPPORT STRUCTURE INSTALLATIONS DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Pole specifications.
      (1)   All antennas shall be mounted in a cylinder form and concealed
within a shroud at the top of the support structure. There shall be no exposed
equipment (conductors, wires, conduit, etc.).
      (2)   All undergrounded equipment, including any pull boxes or other
cabinetry, shall be located entirely underground and flush with existing
sidewalk or ground surface.
      (3)   Poles shall be tapered in diameter from the base to the top, with a
maximum diameter of 12
inches at the base and a maximum diameter of eight inches at the top.
   (B)   Maximum height.
      (1)   The maximum permitted height for private wireless support
structures, antennas and associated small cell facilities shall not exceed 40
feet in height above established grade as measured at the base of the wireless
support structure, except as provided below.
      (2)   The maximum permitted height for private wireless support
structures, antennas and associated small cell facilities shall not exceed 35
feet in height in areas meeting the following criteria:
         (a)   The area is within 500 feet of the proposed site for a new
wireless support structure in the same or connecting rights-of way, and there
are no existing wireless support structures or utility poles greater than 30
feet in height above ground level;
         (b)   The maximum permitted height for building construction in the
district is 35 feet in height above ground level or less.
   (C)   Objective concealment standards.
      (1)   Monopole installations shall be situated so as to utilize existing
natural or man-made features including topography, vegetation, buildings, or
other structures to provide the greatest amount of visual screening.
      (2)   All antenna components and support equipment shall be treated with
exterior coatings of a color and texture that matches the existing wireless
facility.
      (3)   Antenna panels or other equipment shall be wired in a manner
minimizing exposed cables.
      (4)   All new utility lines shall be located underground where already
present and wherever feasible.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.44 ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUESTS - COLOCATION.
   (A)   General guidelines.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the Historic District Specific
Standards, §§
56.70 through
56.73, the colocation of wireless facilities on existing support structures
(that are engineered to accommodate such facilities) is strongly encouraged.
      (2)   Antennas, small cell facilities and any associated concealment
materials shall not increase the overall height of the existing wireless
support structure by more than five feet.
   (B)   Objective concealment standards.
      (1)   If feasible, installations should use screening methods similar to
those used on the existing wireless communications facilities. Use of other
appropriate screening methods may be considered.
      (2)   Antenna panels and accessory equipment should be located and
arranged on the structure so as to replicate the existing appearance of the
installation and any equipment already mounted to the structure.
      (3)   All cabling shall be installed flat against the support structure
to the extent possible. The concealment measures applied to the facility should
result in an installation consistent with existing concealment elements.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.45 ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUESTS - "CELL ON WHEELS".
   (A)   Temporary installations are not permitted in resident areas.
   (B)   Temporary installations of less than 30 days duration may not require
screening to reduce visual impacts depending on the setting of the proposed
site.
   (C)   If screening methods are determined to be necessary, the appropriate
screening methods will be determined through the eligible facilities permit
process.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.46 ANTENNAS.
   (A)   Maximum size.
      (1)   Each antenna shall be located entirely within a shroud enclosure of
not more than six cubic feet in volume.
      (2)   The diameter of the antenna or antenna enclosure should not exceed
the diameter of the top of the wireless support structure pole, and to the
maximum extent practical, should appear as a seamless vertical extension of the
pole.
      (3)   In no case shall the maximum diameter of the shroud be wider than
one and one-half times the diameter of the top of the pole.
      (4)   Where maximum shroud diameter exceeds diameter of the top of the
pole, the shroud shall be tapered to meet the top of the pole.
   (B)   Antennas shall be generally cylindrical in shape.
   (C)   Antennas shall be completely housed within a cylindrical shroud that
is capable of accepting paint to match the wireless support structure.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.47 ASSOCIATED SMALL CELL EQUIPMENT.
   All accessory wireless equipment associated with the operation of any
wireless communications facilities shall be screened. The following is a menu
of potential screening techniques that should be utilized based on the type of
installation:
   (A)   All accessory wireless equipment shall be placed and mounted in the
least visually obtrusive feasible location.
   (B)   Accessory wireless equipment for building mounted facilities may be
located underground, inside the building, or on the roof of the building on
which the facility is mounted, provided that both the equipment and screening
materials are camouflaged to match the building, roof, and/or surroundings. All
screening materials for roof-mounted facilities shall be of a quality and
design that is architecturally integrated with the design of the building or
structure.
   (C)   Accessory wireless equipment for freestanding facilities, not mounted
on a building, may be visually screened by locating the equipment within a
nearby building or in an underground vault. For above ground installations,
screening can consist of walls or landscaping to effectively screen the
facility.
   (D)   Maximum size.
      (1)   Exclusive of the antenna, all wireless equipment associated with
the small cell facility shall not cumulatively exceed 28 cubic feet in volume.
The calculation of equipment volume shall not include electric meters,
concealment elements, communications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment,
power transfer switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the
connection of power and other services.
      (2)   The maximum permitted height for ground-mounted equipment cabinets
shall not exceed three feet as measured from established grade at the
foundation/pad.
   (E)   Encroachments prohibited. No portion of a wireless support structure
or small cell facility cabinet or enclosure may encroach at grade or within the
airspace beyond the right-of-way or over the travelway.
   (F)   Screening and installation location. All small cell facilities,
associated equipment and cabling shall be completely concealed from view within
an enclosure, and may be installed in the following locations:
      (1)   Within an equipment enclosure mounted to the wireless support
structure;
      (2)   Within an equipment cabinet integrated within the transformer base
of a new wireless support structure; or
      (3)   Within a ground-mounted cabinet physically independent from the
wireless support structure.
   (G)   No signs, striping, graphics or other attention getting devices are
permitted on a transmission tower or ancillary facilities except for warning
and safety signage with a surface area of no more than three square feet per
sign. The number of signs is limited to no more than two unless a greater
number is required by law.
   (H)   In cases where the wireless communications facility site is proposed
to be located in a village park, the wireless communications facility shall be
designed and located in such a manner as to avoid adverse visual impacts. Such
locations shall use design methods such as, but not limited to, type of
facility, camouflaging, screening and landscaping.
   (I)   The use of chain link fences for security of equipment is not
permitted.
   (J)   Antenna lighting shall be prohibited in the village. Beacon lights
shall not be permitted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration
and, if so, shall be included when calculating the height of the facility.
Beacon lights shall be of a type that minimizes downward illumination.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
FOR WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES
§ 56.60 NOISE.
   (A)   In residential areas with an average 24-hour noise level (Ldn) at or
below 45 decibels (dB), noise generated by wireless communication facilities
equipment shall not cause the Ldn to exceed 45 dB or to increase by 3.0 dB or
more, even if the resulting Ldn would remain below 45 dB.
   (B)   In residential areas with an Ldn above 45 dB, noise generated by
wireless communication facilities equipment shall not cause the average to
increase by 2.0 dB or more.
   (C)   Each facility shall comply with the village's noise ordinance pursuant
to §
132.15 of the village Code of Ordinances.
   (D)   In the event of a noise complaint, the applicant shall submit a noise
study for review and approval by the Building Administrator which demonstrates
that the equipment complies with the Noise Ordinance. The study shall include
cut-sheets detailing the following information:
      (1)   The ambient noise levels in the immediate area.
      (2)   The maximum dB level emitted from the equipment cabinet without
sound attenuation measures installed.
      (3)   If the equipment cabinet noise levels can be heard above ambient or
are in excess of the village's Noise Ordinance standard, the noise study shall
recommend attenuation measures that are in keeping with the wireless facility's
surroundings and overall design context.
      (4)   The maximum dB level emitted from the equipment cabinet with the
recommended attenuation measure(s).
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.61 SAFETY.
   (A)   At all times, wireless communication facilities shall comply with the
most current regulatory and operational standards, including, but not limited
to, radio frequency (RF) radiation exposure standards adopted by the FCC. The
applicant shall receive and maintain the most current information from the FCC
regarding allowable RF emissions and all other applicable regulations and
standards.
   (B)   Upon or prior to installation, and prior to activation, of any
wireless communication facility, the applicant shall submit to the village
certification that the facility will operate in compliance with all applicable
FCC regulations, including, but not limited to, radio frequency (RF) emissions
limitations.
   (C)   Thereafter, upon any proposed increase of at least 10% in the
effective radiated power or any proposed change in frequency use, the applicant
shall submit updated certifications for review by the village.
   (D)   Both the initial and updated certifications shall be subject to review
and approval. At the village's sole discretion, a qualified independent radio
frequency engineer, selected by and under contract to the village, may be
retained to review said certifications for compliance with FCC regulations. All
costs associated with the village's review of these certifications shall be the
responsibility of the applicant.
   (E)   Public access to a wireless communication facility shall be
restricted.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
HISTORIC DISTRICT SPECIFIC STANDARDS
§ 56.70 GENERALLY.
   (A)   The village is one of only a few planned communities in the United
States. It was built in the early 1920s and modeled after a small town in
England. The mindful and detailed dedication to quality and aesthetics created
a unique and special community. As a result, Mariemont was awarded the
prestigious honor of being named a National Historic Landmark.
   (B)   The design and character of the right-of-way in the village is defined
by a variety of interconnected factors—the most prevalent are the functional
classification of the roadway within the right-of-way and the predominant land
uses along the right-of-way. These variables influence the amount of space
available in the right-of-way outside of the travel lanes for elements such as
sidewalks and shared-use paths, street trees, street lights and utility
infrastructure, as well as the aesthetic qualities of these elements.
   (C)   The Historic District is made up of the 'front doors' to businesses
and residences and possesses a strong pedestrian environment that should be
free of visual clutter along the streetscapes to the maximum extent possible.
   (D)   The unique environmental aesthetics of each Historic District area, as
well as the characteristics of the right-of-way itself must be taken into
consideration in the deployment of small cell facilities and wireless support
structures. These facilities must blend seamlessly into the surrounding context
to the maximum extent possible.
   (E)   Where conflicts exist between the design guidelines, §§
56.10 through
56.61 and the standards articulated in the Historic District Specific
Standards, §§
56.71 through
56.73, the language of Historic District Specific Standards shall take
precedence over the language of the design guidelines.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.71 DEFINED TERMS.
   OLD TOWN. The section of Mariemont bordered by Beech Street and Plainville
Road, west to east, and Murray Avenue and Wooster Pike, north to south.
   OLD TOWN SQUARE. The confluence of Oak Street, Chestnut Street and Cherry
Lanes.
   VILLAGE SQUARE. The confluence of Wooster Pike, Miami Road, Madisonville
Road and Crystal Springs Roads.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.72 PERMITTED AND PREFERRED LOCATIONS AND SITING STANDARDS FOR WIRELESS
COMMUNICATION FACILITIES.
   (A)   Existing historic districts.
      (1)   A wireless communication facility shall not be placed within 100
feet nor directly in front of an historic structure or site.
      (2)   A wireless communication facility shall not be mounted on or inside
an historic structure.
      (3)   Within Old Town and on its borders, preferred streets include:
         (a)   Wooster Pike;
         (b)   Lanes and access roads;
         (c)   Murray Avenue;
      (4)   Wireless communication facilities within 200 feet of the Old Town
Square or the Village Square are strongly discouraged.
      (5)   Wireless communications facilities are strongly discouraged within
the tree lawn/pedestrian furnishing zone of any right-of-way in Old Town. Lanes
exist behind every street that can be utilized instead.
      (6)   In order to maintain the character of our village, we strongly
encourage that wireless support structures and associated small cell facilities
not be placed closer than 750 feet.
   (B)   Potential historic districts.
      (1)   Wireless communication facilities shall not be placed in or
immediately adjacent to a potential historic district, landmark or site, or
conservation area or site where the application for historic designation was
filed with the village, pursuant to designation of historic districts,
landmarks, and historic sites regulations, §
151.075(I) of the village Code of Ordinances, prior to the filing of a wireless
communication facility application, until a final decision has been made
regarding that pending historic designation.
      (2)   Timing of decisions on wireless communication facilities permit
applications will be made within the prescribed limit of 60 or 90 days
depending on permit type, regardless of a pending designation process.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
§ 56.73 OBJECTIVE DESIGN AND CONCEALMENT OF WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE
STANDARDS.
   (A)   Installation type preferences.
      (1)   Colocation of wireless facilities on existing wireless facilities
is strongly encouraged.
      (2)   Other preferences include:
         (a)   Small cell facilities mounted to existing support structures or
buildings that are camouflaged and screened, following design guidelines §§
56.40 through
56.47.
         (b)   Underground design is a preferred option.
      (3)   Least preferred types include:
         (a)   New and replacement structure installations are strongly
discouraged.
         (b)   Building or existing pole mounted designs that are not screened
or camouflaged.
         (c)   Temporary "cell on wheels" facilities.
   (B)   Objective concealment standards.
      (1)   All wireless communication facilities, regardless of installation
type, are required to utilize shrouding and camouflaging.
      (2)   All efforts shall be made to match, in as precise a way as
possible, the aesthetics, colors, materials, architectural styles and features
introduced into any Historic District, landmark or site.
   (C)   Height. New wireless support structures and antennas should be no
taller than functionally necessary. They must coordinate with the height of
existing poles in the same right-of-way to the maximum extent practicable. In
no case shall the overall height exceed 35 feet.
   (D)   Ground mounted small cell equipment. Landscape screening of ground
mounted equipment cabinets shall be as required.
(Ord. O-15-20, passed 6-8-2020)
CHAPTER 57: COMPREHENSIVE RIGHT-OF-WAY ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
57.01   Declaration of findings and purpose, scope, definitions
   
57.02   Rights-of-way administration
   
57.03   Certificate of registration applications
   
57.04   Reporting requirements
   
57.05   Compensation for certificate of registration
   
57.06   Oversight and regulation
   
57.07   Registration term
   
57.08   Indemnity
   
57.09   Civil forfeitures
   
57.10   Termination of certificate of registration
   
57.11   Unauthorized use of public rights-of- way
   
57.12   Assignment or transfer of ownership and renewal
   
57.13   Construction permits
   
57.14   Construction, relocation and restoration
   
57.15   Minor maintenance permit
   
57.16   Enforcement of permit obligation
   
57.17   Construction and removal bonds
   
57.18   Indemnification and liability
   
57.19   General provisions
 
   
57.99   Penalty
§ 57.01 DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE, SCOPE, DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Findings and purpose.
      (1)   The Village of Mariemont, Ohio (the "village") is vitally concerned
with the use of all rights-of-way in the village as such rights-of- way are a
valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public
health, safety, and welfare including the economic development of the village.
      (2)   Changes in the public utilities and communication industries have
increased the demand and need for access to rights-of-way and placement of
facilities and structures therein.
      (3)   It is necessary to comprehensively plan and manage access to, and
structures and facilities in, the rights-of-way to promote efficiency,
discourage uneconomic duplication of facilities, lessen the public
inconvenience of uncoordinated work in the rights-of- way, and promote the
public health, safety, and welfare.
      (4)   The village has authority under the Laws and Constitution of the
State of Ohio, including but not limited to Article 18, Sections 3, 4 and 7, to
regulate public and private entities which use the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all users of the
rights-of-way as provided herein. To the extent that anything in this chapter
conflicts with
Chapter 151 of the village Code of Ordinances, then the provisions of this
chapter shall control.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter the following terms,
phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. When
not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The words "shall" and "will"
are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless
otherwise specified, references to sections in this chapter. Defined terms
remain defined terms whether or not capitalized.
      AFFILIATE. Each person who falls into one or more of the following
categories:
         (a)   Each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling
interest in a provider,
         (b)   Each person in which a provider has, directly or indirectly a
controlling interest,
         (c)   Each officer, director, general partner, limited partner or
shareholder holding an interest of 15% or more, joint-venturer or joint venture
partner, of a provider, and
         (d)   Each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by,
or under common control with the provider; provided that affiliate shall in no
event mean any limited partner or shareholder holding an interest of less than
15% of such provider, or any creditor of such provider solely by virtue of its
status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliate by reason of
owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common
ownership, common management, or common control with, such provider.
      APPLICANT. Any person who seeks to obtain a certificate of registration
and/or a permit.
      APPLICATION. The process by which an applicant submits a request to
obtain certificate of registration and/or a permit.
      APPLICATION FEE. The fee paid to the village for application for a
certificate of registration pursuant to §
57.03(A).
      BANKRUPTCY CODE. The United States Bankruptcy Code of 1978, as amended
including regulations promulgated by Title 11 of the United States Code.
      BEST EFFORT(S). The best reasonable efforts under the circumstances,
taking into consideration, among other appropriate matters, all applicable
laws, regulations, safety, engineering and operational codes, available
technology, human resources, and cost.
      CABLE FRANCHISE. The same as "franchise" in the Cable Communications
Policy Act of 1984, 98 Stat. 2779, 47 U.S.C. 522.
      CABLE OPERATOR. The same as in the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, 98 Stat 2779, 47 U.S.C. 522.
      CABLE SERVICE. The same as in the Cable Communications Policy Act of
1984, 98 Stat 2779, 47 U.S.C. 522.
      CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION. The document issued to each provider and its
unique system to occupy the rights-of- way within the village that outlines the
terms of that occupancy of the rights-of-way.
      CODE. The codified ordinances of Mariemont, Ohio.
      CONFIDENTIAL/PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. All information that has been
either identified or clearly marked as confidential/proprietary information by
the provider prior to any submission. Information that is considered by a
provider to be either trade secret, confidential and/or proprietary, or
information that upon public disclosure would be highly likely to place
critical portions of a provider's system in material danger of vandalism,
sabotage, or an act of terrorism, all may be marked as confidential/
proprietary information by a provider when submitted. Upon receipt of such
clearly marked confidential/ proprietary information from a provider, the
village shall endeavor, in accordance with the requirements of R.C. Chapter 149
(The Ohio Public Records Act), to use all the same reasonable measures and
exercise the same degree of care that the village uses to protect its own
information of such a nature from disclosure to third parties. In the event
that the village receives a request from a third party for disclosure of
information a provider has clearly marked as confidential/proprietary
information, then the village shall respond as required by R.C. Chapter 149,
but will attempt to use all reasonable means to notify the provider as soon as
possible.
      CONSTRUCT. Means, but is not limited to, digging, boring, tunneling,
trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires, installing conduit,
installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing poles, installing
signs or installing facilities, other than landscaping, ornamental plantings
in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any part of the rights-of-
way. CONSTRUCT shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the
surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way.
      CONSTRUCTION. Means, but not limited to, the act or process of digging,
boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing wires,
installing conduit, installing pipes, installing transmission lines, installing
poles, installing signs or installing facilities, other than landscaping,
ornamental plantings in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any
part of the rights-of-way. CONSTRUCTION shall also include the act of opening
and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is part
of the right-of-way.
      CONSTRUCTION AND MAJOR MAINTENANCE PLAN. A written plan including maps of
the expected location, design, other related equipment and facilities of a
provider which describes in full the construction intended to be accomplished
by the provider in the rights-of-way over the next calendar year.
      CONSTRUCTION BOND. A bond posted to ensure proper and complete
construction and/or repair of a facility and the affected rights-of- way
pursuant to a permit.
      CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. The permit specified in §
57.13 et seq. which must be obtained before a person may construct in, locate
in, occupy, maintain, move or remove facilities from, in or on the rights-of-
way.
      COUNTY. Hamilton Ohio. County specifically excludes any and all
contractors, agents or other person acting on behalf of said county.
      CREDIBLE. Worthy of being believed.
      EMERGENCY. A condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life or
health, or of a significant loss of property.
      FACILITY(IES). Any tangible thing located in any rights-of-way within the
village; but shall not include boulevard plantings, ornamental plantings or
gardens planted or maintained in the rights-of-way between a person's property
and the street edge of pavement.
      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or any successor thereto.
      FERC. The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission as created and amended in
accordance with the Federal Power Act, 16 U.S.C. 792, or its statutory
successor.
      FULL. Unable to accommodate any additional facilities as determined by
the Village Engineer in accordance with the principles of public health, safety
and welfare, following a reasonable analysis taking into consideration all
applicable law; commonly accepted industry standards; and routine engineering
practices.
      IN. When used in conjunction with rights-of-way, means in, on, above,
within, over, below, under or through a right-of-way.
      INSPECTOR. Any person authorized by the Mayor to carry out inspections
related to the provisions of this chapter.
      LAW. Any local, state and/or federal legislative, judicial or
administrative order, certificate, decision, statute, constitution, ordinance,
resolution, regulation, rule, tariff or other requirement in effect either at
the time of execution of this chapter or at any time during the location of,
and/or while a provider's facilities are located in the public rights-of-way.
      MAYOR. The duly elected Mayor of the Village of Mariemont, Ohio.
      MINOR MAINTENANCE PERMIT. A permit, which must be obtained before a
person can  perform minor maintenance, as set forth in §
57.15, in or on the rights-of-way.
      OHIO MANUAL OF UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES (OMUTCD). The uniform
system of traffic control devices promulgated by the Ohio Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09.
      OHIO UTILITY PROTECTION SERVICE. The utility protection service as
defined in R.C. § 153.64 and/or § 3781.26 or a statutory successor thereto.
      PERMIT. A construction permit or a minor maintenance permit, as the
context requires.
      PERMIT COST. All direct, incidental and indirect costs actually incurred
or realized by the village for permit issuance, permit oversight and pavement
degradation resulting from construction activity.
      PERMIT FEE. Money paid to the village for a permit to construct in the
rights-of-way as required by this chapter.
      PERMITTEE. Any person to whom a construction permit and/or minor
maintenance permit has been granted by the village and not revoked.
      PERSON. Any natural or corporate person, business association or other
business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, a public or private agency of any
kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or any other
legal entity.
      PROVIDER. A person who owns or operates a system and has a valid
certificate of registration. The village, Hamilton County, and cable operators
operating pursuant to a valid cable franchise, or video service provider
operating pursuant to a valid video service authorization shall also be
considered providers.
      PUCO. The Public Utilities Commission of Ohio as defined in R.C. §
4901.02.
      REGISTRATION MAINTENANCE FEE. The money paid to the village to maintain a
certificate of registration and compensate the village for all actual costs
incurred by the village in the management, administration and control of the
rights- of-way of the village, and which are not reasonably recoverable by the
village through construction permit fees or other approved recovery mechanisms.
      REMOVAL BOND. A bond posted to ensure the availability of sufficient
funds to remove a provider's facilities upon abandonment or disuse, or
discontinuance of a provider's use or occupation of the rights-of-way.
      RESTORATION. The process and the resultant effects by which a right-of-
way is returned to a condition as good as or better than its condition
immediately prior to the construction. Restoration shall occur in accordance
with the rules and regulations as may be enacted or amended from time to time.
      R.C. The Revised Code of the State of Ohio.
      RIGHT(S)-OF-WAY. The surface and space in, above, within, over, below,
under or through any real property in which the village has an interest in law
or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee
for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard,
road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, river, tunnel,
viaduct, bridge, conduit, or any other place, area, or real property owned by
or under the legal or equitable control of the village that, consistent with
the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of
constructing, operating, repairing, or replacing a system. RIGHTS-OF-WAY shall
not include buildings, parks, or other public property or easements that have
not been dedicated to compatible uses, except to the extent the use or
occupation of such property is specifically granted in a permit or by law.
      RIGHT(S)-OF-WAY COST. All direct, incidental and indirect costs borne by
the village for  the management and administration of the rights-of- way and
this chapter.
      RULE(S) AND REGULATION(S). Any rules or regulations adopted by the
Village Engineer pursuant to §
57.06(E).
      SERVICE(S). The offering of any service or utility for a fee directly to
the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly
to the public, or alternatively, the provision (for a fee or otherwise) of any
service or utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a
class of users other than the general public that in the opinion of the Mayor
constitutes a service.
      SUPPLEMENTARY APPLICATION. Any application made to construct on or in
more of the rights-of-way than previously allowed, or to extend a permit that
had already been issued.
      SYSTEM. Any system of conduit, cables, ducts, pipes, wires, lines,
towers, antennae wave guides, optic fiber, microwave, laser beams and any
associated converters, equipment or facilities or utilities designed and
constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying, delivering or
distributing services within the village. A system shall specifically include,
but not necessarily be limited to: electric distribution and/or transmission
systems, natural or artificial gas distribution and/or transmission systems,
water distribution systems, storm sewer systems, sanitary sewer systems, cable
television systems, video service networks, telecommunications systems (whether
voice, video, data, or other), fiber optic systems, and wireless communications
systems.
      SYSTEM REPRESENTATIVE. The specifically identified agent/employee of a
provider who is authorized to direct field activities of that provider and
serve as official notice agent for system related information. Any such system
representative shall be required to be available at all times to receive notice
of and immediately direct response to system related emergencies or situations.
      TRANSFER. The disposal by the provider, directly or indirectly, by gift,
assignment, voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, of 51% or more
at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the system, or 51%
cumulatively over the term of a certificate of registration of such interests
to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association or
person or group of persons acting in concert
      TRENCHLESS TECHNOLOGY. Means but is not limited to, the use of
directional boring, horizontal drilling, micro-tunneling and other techniques
in the construction of underground portions of facilities which result in the
least amount of disruption and damage to rights-of-way as possible.
      UNDERGROUND FACILITY(IES). All lines, cables, conduits, pipes, posts,
tanks, vaults and any other facilities which are located wholly or partially
underneath rights-of-way.
      UNUSED FACILITY(IES). Facilities located in the rights-of-way which have
remained unused for 12 months and for which the provider is unable to provide
the village with a credible plan detailing the procedure by which the provider
intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or
that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be
actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or that the
availability of such facilities is required by the provider to adequately and
efficiently operate its system.
      UTILITY(IES). Any water, sewer, gas, drainage, sprinkler or culvert pipe
and any electric power, telecommunications, signal communications, cable
television or video service provider conduit, fiber, wire, cable, or an
operator thereof.
      UTILITY CORRIDOR(S). Those specific areas of the rights-of-way designated
as such by the Village Engineer pursuant to §
57.03(F)(1).
      VIDEO SERVICE. The same as "video service" in R.C. § 1332.21Q).
      VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATION (VSA). A "video service authorization" as
issued to a video service provider by the Director of the Ohio Department of
Commerce in accordance R.C. § 1332.24(A)(1).
      VIDEO SERVICE NETWORK. The same as "video service network" in R.C. §
1332.21(L).
      VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER (VSP). The same as "video service provider" in
R.C. § 1332.21(M).
      VILLAGE. The Village of Mariemont, Ohio.
      VILLAGE COUNCIL. The governing body of the Village of Mariemont, Ohio.
      VILLAGE ENGINEER. The duly appointed Village Engineer of the Village of
Mariemont, Ohio.
      VILLAGE FISCAL OFFICER. The duly appointed Fiscal Officer of the Village
of Mariemont, Ohio.
      VILLAGE SOLICITOR. The duly appointed Village Solicitor of Mariemont,
Ohio.
      WORKING DAY. Any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday, but
excluding legal holidays observed by the village.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.02 RIGHTS-OF-WAY ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   Administration. The Mayor shall be the principal village official
responsible for the administration of this chapter, except as otherwise
provided herein. The Mayor may delegate any or all of the duties hereunder to
the Village Engineer or other designee.
   (B)   Rights-of-way occupancy. Each person who occupies, uses or seeks to
occupy or use the rights-of-way to operate a system located in the rights- of-
way, or who has, or seeks to have, a system located in any rights-of-way, shall
apply for and obtain a certificate of registration pursuant to this chapter.
Any person owning, operating or maintaining a system in the rights-of-way
without a certificate of registration, including persons operating under a
permit, license or franchise issued by the village prior to the effective date
of this chapter shall apply for and obtain a certificate of registration from
the village, unless exempted by §
57.02(D). Application will consist of providing the information set forth in §
57.03 and as reasonably required by the Mayor.
   (C)   No construction without a certificate of registration. Following the
effective date of this chapter, no person shall construct or perform any work
on or in, or use any system or any part thereof located on or in any rights-of-
way without first obtaining a certificate of registration. Whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree as provided for in
§
57.99.
   (D)   Exceptions.
      (1)   The following entities are not obligated to obtain a certificate of
registration: The village and resellers of services or persons that do not own
any system or facilities in the rights-of-way.
      (2)   The following entities are required to participate in the
certificate of registration process, but shall be exempt from the financial
obligations of the application fee required by §
57.03(a) and the registration maintenance fee required by §
57.05(A): the Hamilton County, the village and cable operators for the purpose
of providing only cable service and operating pursuant to a valid cable
franchise and video service provider for the purpose of providing only video
service and operating pursuant to a valid video service authorization issued in
accordance with R.C. § 1332.24, the village and Hamilton County. In addition,
cable operators shall be exempt from any requirement of the certificate of
registration process that is in direct conflict with the requirements of, and/
or specifically exempted by, a valid current and valid cable franchise with the
village.
   (E)   Systems in place without a certificate of registration. Any system or
part of a system found in a right-of-way for which a certificate of
registration has not been obtained shall be deemed to be a nuisance and an
unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The village may exercise any remedies or
rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the
nuisance; taking possession of the facilities and/or non-complying portion of
such system; and/or prosecuting the violator.
   (F)   Future uses. In allowing providers and permittees to place facilities
in the rights-of-way, the village shall not be liable for any damages caused
thereby to any provider's facilities that are already in place or that shall be
placed in the rights-of-way unless those damages arise out of the sole
negligence, gross negligence, willful misconduct, or fraud of the village. No
provider is entitled to rely on the provisions of this chapter as creating a
special duty to any provider.
   (G)   Discontinuance of operations, abandoned and unused facilities.
      (1)   A provider who has discontinued or is discontinuing its operations
of any system in the village shall:
         (a)   Provide information satisfactory to the village that the
provider's obligations for its system in the rights-of-way under this section
and any other sections in the Code of Ordinances have been lawfully assumed by
another applicant and/or provider; or
         (b)   Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities in a manner
that promotes the village's goals of providing innovative and economic
solutions to efficiently and economically utilize limited rights-of-way
capacity. Such proposal must be approved by the Village Engineer; or
         (c)   Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities in place
indicating why good engineering practice would support this type of solution.
The Village Engineer must approve said proposal; or
         (d)   Completely remove all specifically identified portion(s) of its
system in a manner acceptable to the village within a reasonable amount of time
if the village believes that there exists a reasonable justification for such
removal; or
         (e)   Submit to the village within a reasonable amount of time and in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4905.20 and 4905.21, a proposal for transferring
ownership of its facilities to the village. If a provider proceeds under this
clause, the village may, at its option where lawful:
            1.   Purchase the facilities; or
            2.   Unless a valid removal bond has already been posted pursuant
to §
57.17(B), require the provider to post a bond in an amount sufficient to
reimburse the village for reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in
removing the facilities.
      (2)   Facilities of a provider who fail to comply with this section and
which remain unused facilities shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned
facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The village may exercise any remedies
or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Abating the nuisance;
         (b)   Taking possession of the facilities and restoring them to a
useable condition subject to a finding of the PUCO pursuant to the requirements
of R.C. §§ 4905.20 and 4905.21; or
         (c)   Requiring removal of the facilities by the provider or by the
provider's surety.
      (3)   If the village requires a provider to remove unused facilities in
any rights-of- way, the village shall use reasonable efforts to direct that
this removal occur in conjunction with other scheduled excavations of the
rights-of-way. If the village abates the nuisance it may take all action
necessary to recover its costs and to abate said nuisance, including but not
limited to, those methods set forth in R.C. § 715.261.
   (H)   Nature of issuance. A certificate of registration shall not convey
equitable or legal title in the rights-of-way. A certificate of registration is
only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of- way in the village,
for the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the certificate
of registration and in accordance with this chapter. The rights to occupy the
right-of-way may not be subdivided or subleased; provided, however, that two or
more providers may collocate facilities in the same area of the rights-of-way
so long as each such provider complies with the provisions of this chapter.
Collocating providers may file a joint application for a construction permit. A
certificate of registration does not excuse a provider from obtaining
appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its
facilities on facilities of others, including the village's facilities. A
certificate of registration does not prevent a provider from leasing space in
or on the provider's system, so long as the sharing of facilities does not
cause a violation of law, including the provisions of this chapter. A
certificate of registration does not excuse a provider from complying with any
provisions of the code or other applicable law.
   (I)   Other approvals, permits, and agreements. In addition to a certificate
of registration, providers shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals,
permits, authorizations, or licenses necessary for the offering or provision of
such services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities and
upon the village's reasonable request, shall provide copies of such documents
to the village. Further, a certificate of registration issued pursuant to this
chapter shall not entitle a provider to use, alter, convert to, or interfere
with, the facilities, easements, poles, conduits, lines, pipelines, wires,
fiber, cable or any other real or personal property of any kind whatsoever
under the management or control of the village.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.03 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Certificate of registration applications. To obtain a certificate of
registration to construct, own, or maintain any system within the village, or
to obtain a renewal of a certificate of registration issued pursuant to this
chapter, an application must be filed with the village on the form adopted by
the village which is hereby incorporated by reference. For all applications the
village shall collect an application fee. The application fee shall be equal to
all the actual and direct costs incurred by the village that are associated
with receiving, reviewing, processing and granting (or denying) an application.
At the time of its decision to either grant or deny an application the village
shall calculate and assess all actual and direct costs involved in receiving,
reviewing, processing and granting (or denying) the application and provide a
written invoice to the applicant for the appropriate amount. The village shall
require that the applicant remit all application fee amounts invoiced within 30
days of its decision to either grant or deny a certificate of registration. Any
applicant who fails to timely remit such invoiced application fee amounts shall
be subject to the penalties of this chapter, the imposition of any other legal
or equitable remedies available to the village and the immediate revocation of
any certificate of registration having been issued.
   (B)   Information required for application to obtain a certificate of
registration.
      (1)   The applicant shall keep all of the information required in this
section current at all times, provided further that applicant or provider shall
notify the village of any changes to the information required by this section
within 30 days following the date on which the applicant or provider has
knowledge of such change. The information provided to the village at the time
of application shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Each applicant's name, legal status (i.e. partnership,
corporation, etc.), street address and email address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers; and
         (b)   The name, address and email address, if applicable, and
telephone and facsimile numbers of a system representative. The system
representative shall be available at all times. Current information regarding
how to contact the system representative in an emergency shall be provided at
the time of application and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate
contact information is available to the village at all times; and
         (c)   A certificate of insurance where required to be provided to meet
the requirements of this section shall:
            1.   Verify that an insurance company licensed to do business in
the State of Ohio has issued an insurance policy to the applicant;
            2.   Verify that the applicant is insured on an occurrence basis
against claims for personal injury, including death, as well as claims for
property damage arising out of the:
               a.   Use and occupancy of the rights-of-way by the applicant,
its officers, agents, employees and contractors; and
               b.    Placement and use of facilities in the rights-of-way by
the applicant, its officers, agents, employees and contractors, including, but
not limited to, protection against liability arising from any and all
operations, damage of underground facilities and collapse of property;
            3.   Name the village, its elected officials, officers, employees,
agents and volunteers as an additional insured as to whom the comprehensive
general liability and completed operation and products liability insurance
required herein are in force and applicable and for whom defense will be
provided as to all such coverage, as is required within this chapter.
            4.   Require that the village be notified 30 days in advance of
cancellation of, or coverage changes in, the policy. The liability
insurance policies required by this section shall contain the following
endorsement:
               a.   "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may
not be diminished in value, canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated,
until 30 days after receipt by the village, by registered mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the Mayor or her/his designee of
such intent to cancel, diminish or not to renew."
               b.   Within 30 days after receipt by the village of said notice,
and in no event later than five days prior to said cancellation, the provider
(or applicant) shall obtain and furnish to the Mayor a certificate of insurance
evidencing replacement insurance policies.
            5.   Satisfy the requirements for comprehensive liability coverage,
automobile liability coverage and umbrella coverage as follows:
               a.    Comprehensive general liability insurance: comprehensive
general liability insurance to cover liability, bodily injury, and property
damage must be maintained. Coverage must be written on an occurrence basis,
with the following minimum limits of liability and provisions, or their
equivalent:
                  i.    Bodily injury: Each occurrence - $1,000,000; annual
aggregate - $3,000,000.
                  ii.    Property damage: Each occurrence - $1,000,000; annual
aggregate - $3,000,000.
                  iii.    Personal injury: Annual aggregate - $3,000,000.
                  iv.    Completed operations and products liability shall be
maintained for six months after the termination of a certificate of
registration.
                  v.    Property damage liability insurance shall include
coverage for the following hazards: E - explosion, C - collapse, U -
underground.
               b.    Comprehensive auto liability insurance: Comprehensive auto
liability insurance to cover owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles must be
maintained. Applicant may maintain comprehensive auto liability insurance as
part of applicant's comprehensive general liability insurance, however, said
insurance is subject to approval by the Mayor or her or his designee. Coverage
must be written on an occurrence basis, with the following limits of liability
and provisions, or their equivalent:
                  i.    Bodily injury: Each occurrence - $1,000,000; annual
aggregate - $3,000,000.
                  ii.    Property damage: Each occurrence - $1,000,000; annual
aggregate - $3,000,000.
      (2)   Additional insurance. The village reserves the right to require any
other insurance coverage it deems necessary after review of any proposal
submitted by the applicant.
      (3)   Self-insurance. Those applicants maintaining a book value in excess
of $50,000,000 may submit a statement requesting to self-insure. If approval to
self-insure is granted, applicant shall assure the village that such self-
insurance shall provide the village with no less than would have been afforded
to the village by a third party insurer providing applicant with the types and
amounts of coverage detailed in this section. This statement shall include:
         (a)   Audited financial statements for the previous year; and
         (b)   A description of the applicant's self-insurance program; and
         (c)   A listing of any and all actions against or claims made against
the applicant for amounts over $1,000,000 or proof of available excess umbrella
liability coverage to satisfy all total current claim amounts above
$50,000,000.
         (d)   The Mayor may modify or waive these requirements if they are not
necessary in determining the sufficiency of the self-insurance. The Mayor may
request applicable and pertinent additional information if it is necessary in
determining the sufficiency of the self-insurance.
      (4)   The village's examination of, or failure to request or demand, any
evidence of insurance in accordance with this chapter shall not constitute a
waiver of any requirement of this section and the existence of any insurance
shall not limit applicant's obligations under this chapter.
      (5)   Documentation that applicant or provider maintains standard
workers' compensation coverage as required by law. Similarly, provider shall
require any subcontractor to provide workers' compensation coverage in amounts
required by law for all of the subcontractor's employees.
      (6)   If the person is a corporation, upon specific request of the
village, a copy of the certificate of incorporation (or its legal equivalent)
as recorded and certified to by the secretary of state (or legal equivalent) in
the state or country in which incorporated.
      (7)   A copy of the person's certificate of authority from the PUCO and/
or the FCC and/or FERC, if the person is lawfully required to have or actually
does possess such certificate from said commission(s) and any other approvals,
permits, or agreements as set out in §
57.02(I).
      (8)   Upon request of the village, a narrative (or if applicable PUCO/
FCC/FERC application information) describing applicant's proposed activities in
the village including credible information detailing applicant's financial,
managerial, and technical ability to fulfill applicant's obligations under this
chapter and carry on applicant's proposed activities.
   (C)   Criteria for issuance of a certificate of registration. In deciding
whether to issue a certificate of registration, the village shall consider:
      (1)   Whether the issuing of the certificate of registration will
contribute to the health, safety, and welfare of the village and its citizens.
      (2)   Whether the issuing of the certificate of registration will be
consistent with this chapter.
      (3)   Whether the applicant has submitted a complete application and has
secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law in order to
construct and operate a system in the manner proposed by the applicant
      (4)   Whether the applicant is delinquent on any taxes or other
obligations owed to the village, Hamilton County or State of Ohio.
      (5)   Unless applicant is otherwise exempted from such consideration by
R.C. § 4939.03(C)(5), whether the applicant has the requisite financial,
managerial, and technical ability to fulfill all its obligations under this
chapter and the issuance of a certificate of registration.
      (6)   Any other applicable law.
   (D)   Grant or denial of an application for a certificate of registration.
      (1)   The village, not later than 60 days after the date of filing by an
applicant of a completed application, shall grant or deny the application.
      (2)   If an application for a certificate of registration is denied, the
village shall provide to the applicant, in writing, the reasons for denying the
application and such other information as the applicant may reasonably request
to obtain consent.
   (E)   Obligations of a provider upon receipt of a certificate of
registration. In addition to the other requirements set forth herein and in the
rules and regulations each provider shall:
      (1)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with other providers and users of
the rights- of-way and the village for the best, most efficient, and least
obtrusive use of rights-of-way, consistent with safety, and to minimize traffic
and other disruptions including street cuts; and
      (2)   When possible, participate in joint planning, construction and
advance notification of rights-of-way work, as may be required by the village;
and
      (3)   Upon reasonable written notice, and at the direction of the Mayor
or his or her designee, promptly remove or rearrange facilities as necessary
for public safety; and
      (4)   Perform all work, construction, maintenance or removal of
facilities within the rights-of-way, in accordance with good engineering,
construction and arboricultural practice (if applicable), including any
appropriate state building codes, safety codes and law and use best efforts to
repair and replace any street, curb or other portion of the rights-of-way, or
facilities located therein, to a condition to be determined by the Village
Engineer to be adequate under current standards and not less than materially
equivalent to its condition prior to such work and to do so in a manner which
minimizes any inconvenience to the public, the village and other providers, all
in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter, any rules and
regulations the village may adopt and the code of ordinances; and
      (5)   Construct, install, operate and maintain its facilities and system
in a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction
standards and governmental requirements including, but not limited to, The
National Electric Safety Code, National Electric Code and applicable FCC, FERC,
or other federal, state and/or local regulations; and
      (6)   Be on notice that removal of trees, or the use of vegetation
management programs within the rights-of-way of the village require prior
written approval by the Mayor or his or her designee. Any such activities,
unless an emergency, shall only be performed following the prior written
approval of the Mayor or his or her designee and must be performed in
accordance with standard horticultural and arboreal practices as promulgated by
entities such as the National Arbor Day Foundation, the International Society
of Arboriculture, and the Tree Care Industry, all as may be required by the
village. Pruning shall at a minimum meet or exceed the requirements of the most
current version of the American National Standards Institute ANSI A300
standard. Any additionally required horticultural and arboreal practices and
guidelines shall be described in the rules and regulations adopted by pursuant
to §
57.05(E). Emergency removal of trees or the use of vegetation management
programs within the rights-of- way of the village may be performed in rights-
of-way as described herein and in accordance with the rules and regulations,
but the Mayor shall be provided notice of such emergency work being performed
within two business days of the start of the work. Any non-emergency tree
removal or the use of vegetation management programs within the rights-of-way
that is performed without the Mayor or designee's written permission shall
subject a person to the penalties of §
57.99 and may further require that the tree or vegetation be replaced, at the
sole expense of the responsible person, with a healthy tree or vegetation of
like kind and quality; and
      (7)   Warrant that all worker facilities, conditions and procedures that
are used during construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the
provider's facilities within the rights-of-way shall comply with all applicable
standards of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; and
      (8)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with the village in any
emergencies involving the rights-of-way; and
      (9)   Provider shall, weather permitting, remove all graffiti within 21
calendar days of notice. Provider shall use all reasonable efforts to remove
any and all graffiti on any of the provider's facilities located within the
village rights-of-way. Should the provider fail to do so, the village may take
whatever action is necessary to remove the graffiti and bill the provider for
the cost thereof; and
      (10)   Providers shall use all reasonable efforts to field identify their
facilities in the rights-of-way whenever providers are notified by the village
that the village has determined that such identification is reasonably
necessary in order for the village to begin planning for the construction,
paving, maintenance, repairing, relocating or in any way altering any street or
area in the rights-of-way as defined in this chapter. The village shall notify
the providers of the village's date to begin the process at least 30 days prior
to the commencement of said activities. In field identifying facilities:
         (a)   Providers shall identify all facilities that are within the
affected rights- of-way using customary industry standards and distinct
identification; and
         (b)   Facilities will be so marked as to identify the provider
responsible for said facilities; and
         (c)   Should any such marking interfere with the facilities function,
create a safety problem or violate any safety code, alternative methods of
marking the facilities may be approved by the Village Engineer; and
         (d)   All marking should be clearly readable from the ground and
include provider's name, logo and identification numbering or tracking
information. No advertising will be permitted.
      (11)   A provider that is replacing an existing utility pole shall be
responsible to coordinate with all other providers to ensure the orderly
transfer of all lines or cables to the replacement utility pole, the removal of
the existing utility pole, and the restoration of the rights-of-way within 30
days weather permitting after the replacement utility pole is installed. Upon
request, the Village Engineer may grant the provider additional time for good
cause.
   (F)   Establishment of utility corridors.
      (1)   The Village Council may assign specific corridors within the
rights-of-way, or any particular segment thereof as may be necessary, for each
type of facilities that are, or that the Village Engineer expects may someday
be, located within the rights-of-way.
      (2)   Any provider whose facilities are in the rights-of-way and are in a
position at variance with utility corridors established by the Village Council
shall at the time of the next construction of the area, excluding normal
maintenance activities, move such facilities to their assigned position within
the rights-of-way. Existing underground facilities located within a designated
utility corridor shall not be required to relocate into adjacent or alternative
portions of the rights-of-way unless they are in conflict with an actual or
proposed public improvement project. The above requirements may be waived by
the Mayor for good cause shown including, but not limited to, consideration of
such factors as: the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety,
customer service needs, law precluding such undergrounding of facilities, and
hardship to the provider. If a provider is denied a requested waiver from the
above requirements, the provider may appeal the denial of the Mayor.
      (3)   The Village Engineer shall make every good faith attempt to
accommodate all existing and potential users of the rights-of-way as set forth
in this chapter.
      (4)   Providers may enter into written agreements to use existing poles
and conduits with the owners of same and shall use best efforts to install
their facilities within the rights-of-way.
      (5)   No facility placed in any rights-of-way shall be placed in such a
manner that interferes with normal travel on such rights-of-way.
      (6)   Unless otherwise stated in a certificate of registration, permit,
or division (F)(6)(c) of this section all facilities within the rights-of-way
shall be constructed and located in accordance with the code and with the
following provision:
         (a)   Whenever all existing facilities that have been traditionally
located overhead are located underground in a certain area within the village,
a provider who desires to place its facilities in the same area must also
locate its facilities underground.
         (b)   Whenever a provider is required to locate or relocate facilities
underground within a certain area of the village, every provider with
facilities within the same area of the village shall concurrently re-locate
their facilities underground.
         (c)   The above requirements may be waived by the village for good
cause shown including, but not limited to, consideration of such factors as:
the remaining economic life of the facilities, public safety, customer service
needs, law precluding such undergrounding of the facilities, and hardship to
the provider. If a provider is denied a requested waiver from the above
requirements, the provider may appeal the denial of the Village Engineer to the
Mayor.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.04 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Construction and major maintenance plan. Each provider shall, at the
time of initial application and by January 1 of each following year, file a
construction and major maintenance plan with the Building Department. Such
construction and major maintenance plan shall be provided for all geographical
areas requested by the Village Engineer, up to and including the entire
geographical area of the village. It shall be submitted using a format(s)
mutually agreeable to the provider and the village and shall contain the
information determined by the Village Engineer to be necessary to facilitate
the coordination and reduction in the frequency of construction in the rights-
of-way. The construction and major maintenance plan shall include, but not be
limited to, all currently scheduled and/or anticipated construction projects
for the next calendar year, if none are scheduled or anticipated then the plan
shall so state. The provider shall use its best efforts in supplying this
information and shall update the construction and major maintenance plan on
file with the Building Department whenever there is a material change in
scheduled and/or anticipated construction projects. In an effort to assist
providers with the completion of their annual construction and major
maintenance plan, the Building Department Commissioner, as soon as possible,
will send each provider's system representative a descriptive narrative (and
any mapping information reasonably available) for all the planned right-of-way
improvements and/or scheduled maintenance that the village then currently
intends to undertake during the calendar year.
   (B)   Mapping data. With the filing of its application for a certificate of
registration, a provider shall be required to accurately inform the village of
the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of right-of-way the
provider's system then currently occupies and begin submitting to the village
all information that currently exists (actual street address range) and which
can be provided regarding the location of its facilities in the right-of-way in
hard copy or in the most advanced format (including, but not limited to,
electronic and/or digital format (preferred) then currently being used by the
provider that is then currently capable of technologically being read (or
readily converted to a readable form) by the village. Unless otherwise required
by §
57.13(B), a provider shall have up to one year from the date of the provider's
initial filing of an application for a certificate of registration to
completely submit all the mapping data for a provider's system in the entire
geographical area of the village which it owns or over which it has control
that are located in any rights-of- way of the village in the most advanced
format (including, but not be limited to electronic and/or digital format) then
currently being used by the provider that is then currently capable of
technologically being read (or readily converted to a readable form) by the
village. The mapping data is only required to be at the "atlas" level of detail
necessary for the village to reasonably determine the location of the
provider's facilities in the rights-of- way. The provider shall supply the
mapping data on paper if the Village Engineer determines that the format
currently being used by the provider is not capable of being read by the
village. Any time after the issuance of a certificate of registration, and upon
the reasonable request of the Village Engineer, a provider shall be required to
provide to the village any additional location information for any facilities
which it owns or over which it has control that are located in any rights-of-
way of the village required by the village. Any and all actual direct,
incidental and indirect costs incurred by the village during the process of
reviewing, inputting and/or converting a provider's mapping information to
comport with the village's then current standard format (whether electronic or
otherwise) shall be directly billed to, and must be timely remitted by, the
provider. Failure to pay such mapping costs within 60 days of receipt of an
invoice shall subject an applicant or provider to revocation of its certificate
of registration and the penalties of §
57.99. Further, each provider that has been issued a certificate of
registration shall accurately inform the village on or before each subsequent
January 1 of the number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of right-of-
way the provider's system then occupied as of the immediately previous December
1. The Village Engineer may, in the future, adopt additional specifications and
further define or modify the mapping data requirements under this section for
reasons including, but not limited to, changes in technology or the law
regarding public disclosure of a provider's mapping information. When the
village modifies and/or amends the mapping data requirements, the village shall
use best efforts to avoid unreasonably increasing the burden to the providers
that may be associated with satisfying the amended mapping requirements. When
the mapping requirements of division (B) of this section are amended, each
provider shall be served with a copy of the new specifications or modifications
by regular U.S. mail to the system representative identified in each
certificate of registration and in accordance with §
57.19(B); provided, however, that any failure of any provider to actually
receive such notice shall not in any way affect the validity or enforceability
of said specifications or modifications.
   (C)   Exemption from disclosure. A provider shall notify the village if the
provider believes that any specific document or portion of a document being
submitted to the village is exempt from the public records disclosure
requirements of R.C. § 149.43. The notification shall be in writing and
indicate the specific documentor portion of a document that the provider
believes is exempt from disclosure. The notification shall include the legal
basis for the claimed exemption, including the applicable statutory reference
and any additional information necessary to make a determination of exemption
for each specific document or portion of a document. If a public records
request is made for documents submitted by a provider, the village will
consider the written notification in making its own independent determination
of whether a specific document or a portion of a document is exempt from the
disclosure requirements of R.C. § 149.43. To the extent permitted by law, the
village will endeavor to use reasonable best efforts to notify the provider of
the request prior to making the document available for inspection or copying.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020) Penalty, see §
57.99
§ 57.05 COMPENSATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Compensation. As compensation for the village's costs to administer
this chapter, manage, administer and control the rights-of-way and maintain
each certificate of registration issued, every provider or any person operating
a system shall pay to the village registration maintenance fees beginning
January 1, 2009. The registration maintenance fee shall be determined and
assessed to providers and other persons operating a system or otherwise using
and occupying the rights-of-way in accordance with the following process and
formula:
      (1)   The village by January 31 of each year shall calculate all actual
and incurred costs associated with rights-of-way management, administration and
control for the previous calendar year that the village was not able to
reasonably recover through construction permit fees or other recovery
mechanisms provided for in this chapter.
      (2)   Providers and applicants, as required in §
57.04(B), shall accurately inform the village upon application for a
certificate of registration and on or before each subsequent January 1 of the
number of miles (rounded up to the nearest mile) of right-of-way the provider's
system then occupied as of the immediately previous December 1.
      (3)   The village shall total the entire number of miles of right-of-way
reported as being used or occupied by all providers.
      (4)   The village shall divide the calculated costs referenced in
division (A)(1) of this section by the total number of miles of right-of-way
reported as being used or occupied by all providers as referenced in division
(A)(3) of this section to arrive at a per-mile cost number.
      (5)   The village shall then multiply each provider's mileage calculation
as referenced in division (A)(2) of this section by the per-mile cost
calculation referenced in division (A)(4) of this section. The product shall be
a provider's then current annual registration maintenance fee.
      (6)   The village shall perform its calculation of registration
maintenance fees every three years following receipt of the providers required
January 1 mileage report. Registration maintenance fees shall be invoiced to
providers on or about February 1 of each calendar year and shall be due 30 days
following receipt.
      (7)   Cable companies operating under non-exclusive cable franchises for
the purposes of providing cable service, video services provider operating
under a VSA for the purpose of providing video services, and providers of open
video system services, which compensate the village under other mechanisms in
an amount equal to or greater than the annual registration maintenance fee that
would normally be required for their right-of-way use in the village, shall
have the mileage of the right-of-way they use and/or occupy included in the
calculations described in this section, but shall not be required to contribute
to the recovery of rights-of-way costs as defined by this chapter with the
exception of permit costs.
      (8)   The village may by separate legislation enacted by Council on or
about January 31 of each year, in accordance with the results of division (A)
(4) of this section, enact an initial and thereafter a new annual registration
maintenance fee (per mile) by appropriately increasing or decreasing the
previous year's registration maintenance fee (per mile). Revised registration
maintenance fees shall be effective upon passage.
   (B)   Timing. Registration maintenance fees shall be invoiced to providers
on or about February 1st of each calendar year and shall be due 30 days
following receipt Registration maintenance fees shall be paid in full for the
first year of the registration as a condition of the certificate of
registration becoming effective. Fees may be prorated from the effective date
of the certificate of registration to the end of the calendar year if less than
one full year.
   (C)   Taxes and assessments. To the extent taxes or other assessments are
imposed by taxing authorities on the use of village property as a result of a
provider's use or occupation of the rights-of-way, the provider shall be
responsible for payment of such taxes. Such payments shall be in addition to
any other fees payable pursuant to this chapter and shall not be considered an
offset to, or in lieu of, the fees and charges listed in this chapter. The
registration maintenance fee is not in lieu of any tax, fee, or other
assessment except as specifically provided in this chapter, or as required by
applicable law.
   (D)   Interest on late payments. In the event that any registration
maintenance fee is not paid to the village by January 31, the provider shall
pay a monthly late charge of 1% of the unpaid balance for each month or any
portion thereof for which payment is not made.
   (E)   No accord and satisfaction. No acceptance by the village of any
registration maintenance fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount
paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such
registration maintenance fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the
village may have for additional sums payable.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.06 OVERSIGHT AND REGULATION.
   (A)   Reports. Upon reasonable request of the Mayor, a provider shall
provide the village with a list of any and all material communications, public
reports, petitions, or other filings, either received from or submitted to any
municipal, county, state or federal agency or official (and any response
thereto submitted by or received by a provider), and any other information or
report reasonably related to a provider's obligations under this chapter which
in any way materially affects the operation of the system or a provider's
representations and warranties set forth herein, but not including tax returns
or other filings which are confidential. Upon request, a provider shall
promptly, but in no case later than 30 business days following the request,
deliver to the village a complete copy of any item on said list. Upon the
request of the village, a provider shall promptly submit to the village any
information or report reasonably related to a provider's obligations under this
chapter, its business and operations with respect to the system or its
operation, in such form and containing such information as the village shall
specify. Such information or report shall be accurate and complete and supplied
within 30 days.
   (B)   Confidentiality. All information submitted to the village that is
considered confidential/proprietary information must be clearly marked as such
when submitted. A provider, at any time after submitting information without
confidential/proprietary information markings, may request and shall be
provided the opportunity to, subsequently mark any provided information as
confidential/proprietary information. The village shall exercise all reasonable
legal protections so as not to publicly disclose to any third party such
information unless required by law. The village shall, following receipt of a
request for public disclosure of clearly marked trade secret and/or proprietary
information submitted by a provider, endeavor to use reasonable best efforts to
timely place the provider's system representative on notice that such a request
for public disclosure has been made.
   (C)   Provider's expense. All reports and records required under this
chapter shall be furnished at the sole expense of a provider.
   (D)   Right of inspection and audit. The village's designated
representatives shall have the right to inspect, examine, or audit during
normal business hours and upon reasonable notice to a provider under the
circumstances; documents, records, or other information which pertain to a
provider's operation of a system within the village that are related to its
obligations under this chapter. All such documents shall be made available
within the village or in such other place that the village may agree upon in
writing in order to facilitate said inspection, examination, or audit.
   (E)   Rules and regulations. The Village Engineer may propose, and Village
Council may adopt (and from time to time amend) the rules and regulations
regarding this chapter, construction standards and occupancy requirements of
the right-of- way. Such rules and regulations shall not materially increase the
obligation of any provider hereunder, provided however that none of the
following shall in any way be considered a material increase in obligation; the
adoption of rules and regulations increasing fees; the requiring of the
placement of facilities in designated portions of the rights-of-way
(underground or otherwise); the overbuilding of facilities; or the requiring of
joint-builds. Prior to the adoption or amendment of the rules and regulations,
the village shall provide written notice and a copy of the proposed language of
such adoption or amendment, via United States regular mail, to each provider
who holds a then current certificate of registration. Each provider shall then
have 30 days following the date of the village's mailing to provide written
comment regarding the proposed language to the village. At least 45 days, but
not more than 60 days following the date of the village's mailing, the village
shall schedule and hold a meeting, to make available a forum at which all then
current providers may address any questions, concerns and make reasonable
suggestions regarding the proposed new rules and regulations to the village.
The Village Engineer shall, following said meeting and the review of the
providers' comments and suggestions, adopt or amend the rules and regulations
in a manner that best serves the village, for approval by Village Council.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.07 REGISTRATION TERM.
   The term of each certificate of registration granted under this chapter
shall be valid from the date of issuance until such time as it is revoked,
terminated, has lapsed or is properly amended.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.08 INDEMNITY.
   Indemnity required. Each certificate of registration issued pursuant to this
chapter shall contain provisions whereby providers agree to defend, indemnify
and hold the village and its agents, officers, elected officials, employees,
volunteers, and subcontractors harmless from and against all damages, costs,
losses or expenses:
   (A)   For the repair, replacement, or restoration of village property,
equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged, destroyed or
found to be defective as a result of such provider's acts or omissions; and
   (B)   From and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action,
and judgments:
      (1)   For damage to or loss of the property of any person, and/or the
death, bodily injury, illness, disease, worker's compensation, loss of
services, or loss of income or wages to any person;
      (2)   Arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the act
or omissions of such provider, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in
the performance of activities pursuant to such certificate of registration, no
matter how, or to whom, such loss may occur.
   (C)   In any event, all persons using or occupying the rights-of-way agree
to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the village as set forth above as a
condition of their use and occupancy of the rights-of-way, but such requirement
to defend, indemnify and hold harmless shall not extend to the negligence of
the village or its agents, elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers
and subcontractors, to the extent that the existence of such negligence shall
be proven to exist.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.09 CIVIL FORFEITURES.
   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter and the remedy
of specific performance, which may be enforced in a court of competent
jurisdiction, the Mayor may assess an additional penalty of civil forfeiture
for failure to comply with any provision of this chapter. Such penalty shall be
a monetary sum, payable to the village, in the amount of $500 per 24-hour day
of violation and any subsequent portion of a day less than 24 hours in length.
Prior to assessing said penalty, the village will provide written notice to the
provider detailing the failure to comply with a specific provision of this
chapter. Such notice shall also indicate that said penalty shall be assessed in
15 calendar days subsequent to the date of receipt if compliance is not
achieved. If a provider desires to challenge such penalty, provider must
request a public hearing before the Village Council within ten days of service
of the notice. Such public hearing shall be held within 30 days of the
provider's request. If provider requests such hearing before the Village
Council, such penalty shall be temporarily suspended. However, if, after the
public hearing, the Village Council determines that provider failed to comply
with the specific provision(s) of this chapter referenced in the notice, such
penalty shall be assessed starting with the 15 calendar days after receipt of
the notice referenced in this section and continuing each day thereafter until
compliance is achieved. The determination of the Village Council shall be
final. The provider may file an administrative appeal pursuant to R.C. Chapter
2506. The penalty shall continue to accrue during the appeal unless the
provider obtains a stay and posts a supersedeas bond pursuant to R.C. § 2505.09
or the provider comes into full compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.10 TERMINATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Default notice provided. The village through its Mayor shall give
written notice of default to a provider if the village, in its sole discretion,
determines that a provider has:
      (1)   Violated any material provision or requirement of the issuance or
acceptance of a certificate of registration or any law and failed to cure as
may be required; or
      (2)   Attempted to evade any provision of the issuance of a certificate
of registration or the acceptance of it; or
      (3)   Practiced any fraud or deceit upon village; or
      (4)   Made a material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
certificate of registration.
   (B)   Cure required. If a provider fails to cure a default within 30
calendar days after such notice is served by the village then such default
shall be a material default and village may exercise any remedies or rights it
has at law or in equity to terminate the certificate of registration. If the
Mayor decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure
shall be followed:
      (1)   Village shall serve a provider with a written notice of the reason
or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a provider a minimum of 15
calendar days to cure its breach.
      (2)   If the provider fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the Village
Engineer may declare the certificate of registration terminated.
      (3)   The provider shall have ten calendar days to appeal the termination
to the Village Council. All such appeals shall be in writing. If the Village
Council determines there was not a breach, then the Village Council shall
overturn the decision of the Mayor. Otherwise, the Village Council shall affirm
the decision of the Mayor to terminate. The determination of the Village
Council shall be final.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.11 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   No use without authorization. No person shall use the rights-of-way to
operate a system that has not been authorized by the village in accordance with
the terms of this chapter and has been issued a certificate of registration.
   (B)   No use without a certificate of registration. No person shall place or
have placed any facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or
through the rights-of-way, unless allowed under this chapter or having been
issued a certificate of registration.
   (C)   Unauthorized use a violation. Each and every unauthorized use shall be
deemed to be a violation and a distinct and separate offense. Each and every
day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and
separate offense.
   (D)   Distinct and separate offense. No person shall fail to comply with the
provisions of this chapter. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a
distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this chapter
continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
   (E)   Penalty assessed. The violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense. The penalty for any violation of this
chapter shall be as provided in §
57.99 .
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020) Penalty, see §
57.99
§ 57.12 ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP AND RENEWAL.
   (A)   Assignment or transfer approval required. A certificate of
registration shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part,
other than to an affiliate, without the prior written consent of the village,
which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any assignment or transfer of
certificate of registration, including an assignment or transfer by means of a
fundamental corporate change, requires the written approval of the village.
   (B)   Procedure to request assignment or transfer approval. The parties to
the assignment or transfer of certificate of registration shall make a written
request to the village for its consent in the form of the certificate of
registration application. The village shall reply in writing within 60 days of
actual receipt of the request and shall indicate its approval of the request or
its determination that a public hearing is necessary. Village may conduct a
public hearing on the request within 30 days of such determination if it
determines that a sale or transfer of the certificate of registration adversely
affects the village.
   (C)   Notice and hearing. Notice of a hearing shall be given 14 days prior
to the hearing by publishing notice thereof once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village. The notice shall contain the date, time and place
of the hearing and shall briefly state the substance of the action to be
considered by village.
   (D)   Review by village. The village will review the qualifications
(including, but not limited to legal, technical and financial where
appropriate) of the proposed assignee or transferee and terms of the existing
certificate of registration. Village will make its decision in writing setting
forth any conditions for assignment or transfer. Within 120 days of actual
receipt of the request for assignment or transfer, the village shall approve or
deny such assignment or transfer request in writing.
   (E)   Fundamental corporate change. For purposes of this section,
fundamental corporate change means the sale or transfer of a controlling
interest in the stock of a corporation or the sale or transfer of all or a
majority of a corporation's assets, merger (including a parent and its
subsidiary corporation), consolidation or creation of a subsidiary corporation.
For the purposes of this section, fundamental partnership change means the sale
or transfer of all or a majority of a partnership's assets, change of a general
partner in a limited partnership, change from a limited to a general
partnership, incorporation of a partnership, or change in the control of a
partnership.
   (F)   Certificate of registration and assignee/ transferee replacement
issuance required. In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or
control be ultimately acceptable to the village without transferee or assignee
requesting and being issued a replacement certificate of registration within 90
days of transfer or assignment
   (G)   Not a transfer. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no such
consent or approval shall be required for a transfer or assignment to any
person controlling, controlled by or under the same common control of the
original holder of the certificate of registration.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.13 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
   (A)   Construction permit requirement. Except as otherwise provided in the
code, no person may construct in any rights-of-way without first having
obtained a construction permit as set forth below. This requirement shall be in
addition to any requirement set forth in
Chapter 92 of the village Code of Ordinances.
      (1)   A construction permit allows the permittee to construct in that
part of the rights-of- way described in such construction permit and to
obstruct travel over the specified portion of the rights- of-way by placing
facilities described therein, to the extent and for the duration specified
therein.
      (2)   A construction permit is valid only for the dates and the area of
rights-of-way specified in the construction permit.
      (3)   No permittee may construct in the rights-of-way beyond the date or
dates specified in the construction permit unless such permittee:
         (a)   Submits a supplementary application for another construction
permit before the expiration of the initial construction permit; and
         (b)   Is granted a new construction permit or construction permit
extension.
      (4)   Original construction permits issued pursuant to this section
shall, when possible, be conspicuously displayed at all times at the indicated
work site and shall be available for inspection by inspectors and authorized
village personnel. If the original construction permit involves work conducted
simultaneously at multiple locations, each location shall display a photocopy
of the original construction permit. If the original construction permit is not
conspicuously displayed at the indicated work site, then upon request, the
original construction permit must be produced within 12 hours or the first
earliest business hour, whichever is later. For purposes of this section,
business hours shall mean the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. during a
business day.
   (B)   Construction permit applications.
      (1)   Application for a construction permit shall be made to the Village
Building Department.
      (2)   All construction permit applications shall contain, and will be
considered complete only upon compliance with the requirements of the following
provisions:
         (a)   Credible evidence that the applicant (where required) has been
issued a certificate of registration or proof that the applicant has written
authority to apply for a construction permit on behalf of a party that has been
issued a certificate of registration; and
         (b)   Submission of a completed construction permit application in the
form required by the village, including, but not limited to, all required
attachments, and dated drawings showing the location and area of the proposed
project, number and location of street cuts, and the location of all then known
existing and proposed facilities of the applicant or provider within the
proposed project area. All drawings, plans and specifications submitted with
the application shall comply with applicable technical codes, rules and
regulations and be certified as to being in such compliance by trained
technical personnel acceptable to the Village Engineer (and/or professional
engineer). The mapping data is only required to be at the "atlas" level of
detail necessary for the village to reasonably determine the location of the
provider's facilities in the rights-of-way. The village reserves the right, in
circumstances that the Village Engineer considers unique, complex or unusual,
to request that certain submitted drawings, plans and specifications be
accompanied by the certification of a registered licensed professional
engineer; and
         (c)   A village approved traffic control plan demonstrating the
protective measures and devices that will be employed, consistent with the
OMUTCD, to prevent injury or damage to persons or property and to minimize
disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and
         (d)   If the applicant wants to install new facilities, if
specifically requested by the Village Engineer, evidence that there is no
surplus space and evidence that the applicant has received an appropriate
permit and is adhering to the village's rules and regulations; and
         (e)   If applicant is proposing an above ground installation on
existing poles within the rights-of-way, the applicant shall provide credible
information satisfactory to the village to sufficiently detail and identify:
            1.   The size and height of the existing poles; and
            2.   Based on the facilities currently on the existing poles and if
specifically requested by the Village Engineer, the excess capacity currently
available on such poles before installation of applicant's facilities; and
            3.   Based on the facilities currently on the existing poles and if
specifically requested by the Village Engineer, the excess capacity for like or
similar facilities that will exist on such poles after installation of
applicant's facilities; and
         (f)   If the applicant proposes to install new poles within the
rights-of-way, the applicant shall provide:
            1.   Credible evidence if specifically requested by the Village
Engineer, satisfactory to the village that there is no excess capacity on
existing poles or in existing underground systems; and
            2.   Credible evidence to the Village Engineer that it is not
financially and/or technically practicable for the applicant to make an
underground installation or locate its facilities on existing poles; and
            3.   The location, size, height, color, and material of the
proposed poles; and
            4.   Credible evidence satisfactory to the village that the
applicant will adhere to all the applicable laws concerning the installation of
new poles.
            5.   A utility engineering study that satisfies the requirements of
§
57.14 and meets any additional plan submittal requirement of the Village
Engineer.
         (g)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation in
existing ducts or conduits within the rights-of-way, the applicant shall
provide credible information satisfactory to the village to sufficiently detail
and identify:
            1.   Based on the existing facilities, the excess capacity for like
or similar facilities currently available in such ducts or conduits before
installation of applicant's facilities; and
            2.   Based on existing facilities, the excess capacity for like or
similar facilities that will exist in such ducts or conduits after installation
of applicant's facilities.
         (h)   If applicant is proposing an underground installation within new
ducts or conduits to be constructed within the rights- of-way, the applicant
must provide a utility engineering study that satisfies the requirements of §
57.14 and meets any additional plan submittal requirements of the Village
Engineer and also credible information satisfactory to the village to
sufficiently detail and identify:
            1.   The location, depth, size, and quantity of proposed new ducts
or conduits; and
            2.   The excess capacity for like or similar equipment that will
exist in such ducts or conduits after installation of applicant's facilities.
         (i)   A preliminary construction schedule and completion date; and
         (j)   Payment of all money due to the village for:
            1.   Permit fees;
            2.   Any loss, damage, or expense suffered by the village as a
result of applicant's prior construction in the rights-of-way or any emergency
actions taken by the village;
            3.   Any certificate of registration issued to the applicant/person
whose facilities are being constructed;
            4.   Any other money due to the village from the applicant/person
whose facilities are being constructed.
         (k)   When a construction permit is requested for purposes of
installing additional systems or any part of a system, the posting of a
construction bond and removal bond, acceptable to the village and subject to
this chapter, for the additional systems or any part of a system is required.
         (l)   Upon request, the Village Engineer may modify or waive the
information requirements if they are not necessary in evaluating the
construction permit application. The Village Engineer may request applicable
and pertinent additional information if it is necessary in evaluating the
construction permit application.
   (C)   Issuance of permit; conditions.
      (1)   If the village determines that the applicant has satisfied the
requirements of this chapter and the construction permit process, the village
shall issue a construction permit subject to the provisions of division (C)(2)
of this section.
      (2)   The village may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of
the construction permit and the performance of the permittee thereunder in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to insure the
structural integrity of the rights-of-way, to protect the property and safety
of other users of the rights-of-way, and to minimize the disruption and
inconvenience to the traveling public.
   (D)   Construction permit fees.
      (1)   The village shall annually calculate construction permit fees and
appropriately revise any prior year's construction permit fees based upon the
formula and calculations described in this division. Construction permit fees
shall remain in effect until the village's next annual modification of the
construction permit fees.
      (2)   The village, on or about January 1 of each year, shall calculate
all the actual and incurred construction permit issuance, inspection,
oversight, enforcement and regulation costs for the previous calendar year
including the value of the degradation and reduction in the useful life of the
rights-of-way that will result from construction that takes place therein.
"Degradation and the reduction in the useful life" for the purpose of this
section means the accelerated depreciation of the rights-of-way caused by
construction in or disturbance of the rights- of-way, resulting in the need to
reconstruct or repair such rights-of-way earlier than would be required if the
construction did not occur.
      (3)   The village, on or about January 1 of each year, shall total all
the construction permit fee receipts received in accordance with the scheduled
fees required by the prior year's construction permit fees for the previous
calendar year.
      (4)   The village shall divide the calculated costs referenced in
division (D)(2) of this section by the total construction permit fees received
as referenced in division (D)(3) of this section to arrive at a numerical
factor representing the previous year's cost versus receipts analysis.
      (5)   The village shall multiply the then currently codified construction
permit fees by the numerical factor as referenced in division (D)(4) of this
section to calculate revised permit fees for the new calendar year.
      (6)   The village shall act, on or about January 31 of each year, in
accordance with the results of division (D)(5) of this section, to codify new
annual permit fees by separate legislation enacted by Council by appropriately
increasing or decreasing the previous year's permit fees. Revised permit fees
shall be effective upon passage. Any permit requests pending on the date of any
annual permit fee modification shall be subject to all new permit fees as
modified.
      (7)   Except as provided in division (D)(8) of this section, no
construction permit shall be issued without payment of construction permit fees
except to the village which shall be exempt. Construction permit fees that were
paid for a permit that the village has revoked due to breach and in accordance
with the terms of §§
57.10 or
57.16(E) are not refundable.
      (8)   The Building Department may permit a provider to make quarterly
payments of construction permit fees based upon the provider's financial
condition and past payment history. The quarterly payment shall be due and
payable within 30 days after the end of the quarter. The Village Fiscal Officer
may revoke this permission due to a change in financial condition, late
payment, or other just cause.
   (E)   Joint applications. Applicants are encouraged to submit joint
applications for construction permits to work in the rights-of-way at the same
place and time. Joint applicants shall have the ability to divide amongst
themselves, in proportions the parties find appropriate, any applicable
construction permit fees.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020) Penalty, see §
57.99
§ 57.14 CONSTRUCTION, RELOCATION AND RESTORATION.
   (A)   Utility engineering study required.
      (1)   Prior to commencement of any initial construction, extension, or
relocation of facilities in the rights-of-way, except for repair, maintenance
or replacement with like facilities or relocations requested or caused by a
third party (excluding the village) or another permittee, a permittee shall
conduct a utility engineering study on the proposed route of construction
expansion or relocation if requested by the Village Engineer. Where such
construction and/or relocation is requested or caused by a third party, every
permittee located within the rights-of-way at issue or involved with the work
shall use all best efforts to cooperate and assist any other permittee or
person who is directed by the village to perform the required utility
engineering study. A utility engineering study consists of, at minimum,
completion of the following tasks:
         (a)   Secure all available "as-built" plans, plats and other location
data indicating the existence and approximate location of all facilities along
the proposed construction route.
         (b)   Visibly survey and record the location and dimensions of any
facilities along the proposed construction route, including, but not limited
to, manholes, valve boxes, utility boxes, posts and visible street cut repairs.
         (c)   Determine and record the presence and precise location of all
underground facilities the applicant or person on whose behalf the permit was
applied for owns or controls in the rights- of-way along the proposed system
route. Upon request of the Village Engineer, a permittee shall also record and
identify the general location of all other facilities in the rights-of-way
along the proposed system route. For the purposes of this section, general
location shall mean the alignment of other facilities in the rights-of- way but
shall not necessarily mean the depth of other facilities in the rights-of-way.
         (d)   Plot and incorporate the data obtained from completion of the
tasks described in division (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(c) of this section on the
construction permittee's proposed system route maps and construction plans,
along with the locations of the proposed facilities and all other topographic
and cadastral information.
         (e)   Where the proposed location of facilities and the location of
existing underground facilities appear to conflict on the plans drafted in
accordance with division (A)(1)(d) of this section, permittee has the option of
either utilizing non-destructive digging methods, such as vacuum excavation, at
the critical points identified to determine as precisely as possible, the
horizontal, vertical and spatial position, composition, size and other
specifications of the conflicting underground facilities, or re-designing the
construction plans to eliminate the apparent conflict. Unless waived by the
Village Engineer, a permittee shall not excavate more than a 12-inch hole in
the rights-of-way to complete this task for each apparent conflict. Any
surfaces damaged shall be immediately repaired by the permittee. A minimum of
two working days' notice shall be provided to the village prior to performing
these investigations.
         (f)   Based on all of the data collected upon completion of the tasks
described in this section, adjust the proposed system design to avoid the need
to relocate other underground facilities.
      (2)   The Village Engineer may modify the scope of the utility
engineering study as necessary depending on the proposed construction plans.
   (B)   Copy to village. Upon completion of the tasks described in division
(A) of this section, the construction permittee shall submit, if necessary
labeled in accordance with the requirements of §
57.06(B), the proposed system route maps and construction plans, with the
results of the utility engineering study, in the most advanced format
(including, but not be limited to electronic and/or digital format) then
currently being used by the provider that is then currently capable of
technologically being read (or readily converted to a readable form) by the
village. The mapping data is only required to be at the "atlas" level of detail
necessary for the village to reasonably determine the location of the
provider's facilities in the rights-of- way. The provider shall supply the
mapping data on paper if the Village Engineer determines that the format
currently being used by the provider is not capable of being read by the
village.
   (C)   Qualified firm. All utility engineering studies conducted pursuant to
this section shall be performed by the permittee if in the discretion of the
Village Engineer the construction permittee is qualified to complete the
project itself, alternatively utility engineering studies shall be performed by
a firm specializing in utility engineering.
   (D)   Cost of study. The permittee shall bear the cost of compliance with
division (A) through (C) of this section.
   (E)   Construction schedule. Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter
or in the rules and regulations, or unless the Village Engineer waives any of
the requirements of this section due to unique or unusual circumstances, a
permittee shall be required to submit a written construction schedule to the
village not less than five working days before commencing any work in or about
the rights-of-way, and shall further notify the village not less than two
working days in advance of any excavation in the rights-of-way. This section
shall apply to all situations with the exception of circumstances under §
57.16(D)(1) (emergency situations) and §
57.15  (minor maintenance).
   (F)   Location of facilities.
      (1)   The placement of new facilities and replacement of old facilities,
either above ground or underground, shall be completed in conformity with
applicable laws and the village's rules and regulations. Detailed plans and
applicable specifications shall be submitted to the village for review and
approval prior to construction of any facilities except those that are
categorized as "minor maintenance" issues as per §
57.15.
      (2)   The village shall have the power to prohibit or limit the placement
of new or additional facilities within the rights-of-way if the right-of-way is
full. In making such decisions, the village shall strive to the extent possible
to accommodate all existing and potential users of the rights-of-way, but shall
be guided primarily by considerations of the public health, safety and welfare,
the condition of the rights-of-way, the time of year with respect to essential
utilities, the protection of existing facilities in the rights-of-way, future
village and county plans for public improvements, development projects which
have been determined to be in the public interest and nondiscriminatory and
competitively neutral treatment among providers.
   (G)   Least disruptive technology. All construction or maintenance of
facilities shall be accomplished in the manner resulting in the least amount of
damage and disruption of the rights-of-way. Specifically, every permittee when
performing underground construction, if technically and/or technologically
feasible and not economically unreasonable, shall utilize trenchless
technology, including, but not limited to, horizontal drilling, directional
boring, or micro-tunneling of pavement, driveways, and other sensitive
topographic areas. In addition, all cable, wire or fiber optic cable installed
in the subsurface rights-of-way pursuant to this chapter may be required to be
installed in conduit, and if so required, no cable, wire or fiber optic cable
may be installed pursuant to this chapter using "direct bury" techniques.
   (H)   Special exceptions. The village may grant a special exception to the
requirements of divisions (F) and (G) of this section if a permittee, upon
application, demonstrates with written evidence that:
      (1)   The exception will not create any threat to the public health,
safety or welfare.
      (2)   Permittee demonstrates that the increased economic burden and the
potential adverse impact on the permittee's construction schedule resulting
from the strict enforcement of the requirement actually or effectively inhibits
the ability of the permittee to provide services in the village.
      (3)   The permittee demonstrates that the requirement unreasonably
discriminates against the permittee in favor of another person.
      (4)   The requirements requested by the village herein create an
unreasonable economic burden for the permittee that outweighs any potential
benefit to the village.
   (I)   Relocation of facilities.
      (1)   A provider shall as promptly as reasonably possible and at its own
expense, permanently remove and relocate its facilities in the rights-of-way
whenever the village finds it necessary to require such removal and relocation.
In instances where the village requires removal and/or relocation, the village
shall waive all applicable construction permit fees. Upon removal and/or
relocation, the provider shall restore the rights-of-way to the same or better
condition it was in prior to said removal or relocation. If existing poles are
required to be removed and/or relocated, then the existing poles will be
replaced with poles of the same or similar size. In accordance with law, the
village may request relocation and/or removal in order to prevent unreasonable
interference by the provider's facilities with:
         (a)   A public improvement undertaken or approved by the village.
         (b)   When the public health, safety, and welfare requires it, or when
necessary to prevent interference with the safety and convenience of ordinary
travel over the rights-of-way.
         (c)   The sale, conveyance, vacation, or narrowing of all or any part
of a right-of- way.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a provider who has facilities in the
rights- of-way subject to a vacation or narrowing that is not required for the
purposes of the village, shall have a permanent easement in such vacated
portion or excess portion in conformity with R.C. § 723.041.
      (3)   If, in the reasonable judgment of the village, a provider fails to
commence removal and/or relocation of its facilities as designated by the
village, within 30 days after the village's removal order, or if a provider
fails to substantially complete such removal, including all associated repair
of the rights-of-way of the village, within 12 months thereafter, then, to the
extent not inconsistent with applicable law, the village shall have the right
to:
         (a)   Declare that all rights, title and interest to the facilities
belong to the village with all rights of ownership, including, but not limited
to, the right to connect and use the facilities or to effect a transfer of all
right, title and interest in the facilities to another person for operation; or
         (b)   Authorize removal of the facilities installed by the provider
in, on, over or under the rights-of-way of the village at provider's cost and
expense, by another person; however, the village shall have no liability for
any damage caused by such action and the provider shall be liable to the
village for all reasonable costs incurred by the village in such action; and
         (c)   To the extent consistent with applicable law, any portion of the
provider's facilities in, on, over or under the rights- of-way of the village
designated by the village for removal and not timely removed by the provider
shall belong to and become the property of the village without payment to the
provider, and the provider shall execute and deliver such documents, as the
village shall request, in form and substance acceptable to the village, to
evidence such ownership by the village.
   (J)   Pre-excavation facilities location.
      (1)   Before the start date of any rights-of-way excavation, each
provider who has facilities located in the area to be excavated shall, to the
best of its ability, mark the horizontal and approximate vertical placement of
all its facilities.
      (2)   All providers shall notify and work closely with the excavation
contractor in an effort to establish the exact location of its facilities and
the best procedure for excavation.
   (K)   Rights-of-way restoration.
      (1)   The work to be done under the permit, and the restoration of the
rights-of-way as required herein, weather permitting, must be completed within
the dates specified in the permit. In addition to its own work, the permittee
must restore the general area of the work, and the surrounding areas, including
trench backfill, paving and its foundations in accordance with the code and
rules and regulations. If a permittee is unable to timely complete the
restoration of rights-of- way due to unreasonable inclement weather conditions,
the permittee shall provide interim surface restoration as directed by the
engineer, and complete the restoration of the rights-of-way as soon as weather
conditions make it possible to do so and upon said completion notify the
village.
      (2)   In approving an application for a construction permit, the village
may choose either to have the permittee restore the rights-of-way or
alternatively to restore the rights-of-way itself if the permittee has in the
past not abided by requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   If the village allows a permittee to restore the rights-of-way, the
permittee may at the time of application for a construction permit be required
to post a construction bond in an amount submitted by the permittee with a
detailed cost breakdown to the Village Engineer for approval that is sufficient
to cover the cost of restoring the rights-of- way to its approximate pre-
excavation condition. If, 12 months after completion of the restoration of the
rights-of-way, the village determines that the rights- of-way have been
properly restored, the surety on the construction bond shall be released.
      (4)   The permittee shall perform the work according to the standards and
with the materials specified by the village. The village shall have the
authority to prescribe the manner and extent of the restoration and may do so
in written procedures of general application or on a case-by-case basis. The
village in exercising this authority shall be guided by the following standards
and considerations: the number, size, depth and duration of the excavations,
disruptions or damage to the rights-of-way; the traffic volume carried by the
rights-of-way; the character of the neighborhood surrounding the rights-of-way;
the pre-excavation condition of the rights-of-way; the remaining life-
expectancy of the rights-of-way affected by the excavation; whether the
relative cost of the method of restoration to the permittee is in reasonable
balance with the prevention of an accelerated depreciation of the rights-of-way
that would otherwise result from the excavation, disturbance or damage to the
rights-of-way; and the likelihood that the particular method of restoration
would be effective in slowing the depreciation of the rights-of-way that would
otherwise take place. Methods of restoration may include, but are not limited
to, patching the affected area, replacement of the rights-of-way base at the
affected area, and in the most severe cases; milling, overlay and/or street
reconstruction of the entire area of the rights-of-way affected by the work.
      (5)   By restoring the rights-of-way itself, the permittee guarantees its
work and shall maintain it for 12 months following its completion. During this
12-month period, it shall, upon notification from the Mayor, correct all
restoration work to the extent necessary using the method required by the
Village Engineer. Weather permitting, said work shall be completed within five
calendar days of the receipt of the notice from the Mayor, unless otherwise
extended by the Mayor.
      (6)   If the permittee fails to restore the rights-of-way in the manner
and to the condition required by the village, or fails to satisfactorily and
timely complete all repairs required by the village, the village, at its
option, may do such work or by its contractor of choice. In that event, the
permittee shall pay to the village, within 30 days of billing, the restoration
cost of restoring the rights-of-way and any other costs incurred by the
village. Upon failure to pay, the village may call upon any bond or letter of
credit posted by permittee and/or pursue any and all legal and equitable
remedies.
      (7)   If the work to be done under the permit is being done at the same
location and the same period of time as work by the village and/or another
permittee(s), then the Mayor may reasonably apportion the restoration
responsibility among the village, providers and/or other persons.
   (L)   Damage to other facilities.
      (1)   In the case of an emergency, and if possible after reasonable
efforts to contact the provider seeking a timely response, when the village
performs work in the rights-of-way and finds it necessary, as may be allowed by
law, to maintain, support, or move a provider's facilities to protect those
facilities, the costs associated therewith will be billed to that provider and
shall be paid within 30 days from the date of billing. Upon failure to pay, the
village may pursue all legal and equitable remedies in the event a provider
does not pay or the village may call upon any bond or letter of credit posted
by the permittee and pursue any and all legal or equitable remedies. Each
provider shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any damage to the
facilities of another provider caused during the village's response to an
emergency occasioned by that provider's facilities.
      (2)   Each provider shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any
village-owned facilities in the rights-of-way which the provider or its
facilities damage.
   (M)   Rights-of-way vacation. If the village sells or otherwise transfers a
rights-of-way which contains the facilities of a provider, such sale or
transfer shall be subject to any existing easements of record and any easements
required pursuant to R.C. § 723.041.
   (N)   Installation requirements. The excavation, backfilling, restoration,
and all other work performed in the rights-of-way shall be performed in
conformance with all applicable laws, rules and regulations, other standards as
may be promulgated by the Village Engineer.
   (O)   Inspection. When the construction under any permit hereunder is
completed, the permittee shall notify the village.
      (1)   The permittee shall make the construction site available to the
inspector and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all
reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction.
      (2)   At the time of inspection, the inspector may order the immediate
cessation of any work which poses a serious threat to the life, health, safety
or well-being of the public, violates any law or which violates the term and
conditions of the permit and/or this chapter.
      (3)   The inspector may issue an order to the permittee for any work
which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or
codes. The order shall state that failure to correct the violation will be
cause for revocation of the permit. The order may be served on the permittee as
provided in §
57.19(B). An order may be appealed to the Mayor. The decision of the Mayor may
be appealed to the Village Council whose decision shall be final. If not
appealed, within ten days after issuance of the order, the provider shall
present proof to the Mayor that the violation has been corrected. If such proof
has not been presented within the required time, the Mayor may revoke the
permit pursuant to §
57.16(E).
   (P)   Other obligations.
      (1)   Obtaining a construction permit does not relieve permittee of its
duty to obtain all other necessary permits, licenses, and authority and to pay
all fees required by any other laws.
      (2)   Permittee shall comply with all requirements of all laws, including
the Ohio Utility Protection Service.
      (3)   Permittee shall perform all work in conformance with all applicable
laws and standards and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way
pursuant to its permit, regardless of who performs the work.
      (4)   No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when
seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except
in the case of an emergency as outlined in §
57.16(D)(1).
      (5)   Permittee shall not obstruct a right-of-way so that the natural
free and clear passage of water through the gutters or other waterways shall be
interfered with. The Village Engineer may waive this requirement if it is
technically or economically unreasonable in the circumstances.
      (6)   Private vehicles other than necessary construction vehicles may not
be parked within or adjacent to a permit area. The loading or unloading of
trucks adjacent to a permit area is prohibited unless specifically authorized
by the permit.
   (Q)   Undergrounding required. Any owner of property abutting upon a street
or alley where service facilities are now located underground and where the
service connection is at the property line, shall install or cause others to
install underground any service delivery infrastructure from the property line
to the buildings or other structures on such property to which such service is
supplied. Where not otherwise required to be placed underground by this
chapter, a provider shall locate facilities underground at the request of an
adjacent property owner, provided that such placement of facilities underground
is consistent with the provider's normal construction and operating standards
and that the additional costs of such undergrounding over the normal aerial or
above ground placement costs of identical facilities are borne directly by the
property owner making the request. A provider, under any circumstance shall,
upon the reasonable request of the village, always use best efforts to place
facilities underground. Where technically possible and not economically
unreasonable or unsafe (based upon the technology employed and facilities
installed), all facilities to be installed by a provider under the right-of-way
shall be installed in conduit.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020) Penalty, see §
57.99
§ 57.15 MINOR MAINTENANCE PERMIT.
   (A)   Right-of-way minor maintenance permit requirement. No person shall
perform minor maintenance of facilities in the rights-of-way without first
having obtained a right-of-way minor maintenance permit as set forth in this
chapter. Minor maintenance means: (i) the routine repair or replacement of
facilities with like facilities not involving construction and not requiring
traffic control for more than two hours at any one location; (ii) or the
routine repair or replacement of facilities with like facilities not involving
construction and taking place on thoroughfares and arteries between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m.; (iii) or the routine repair or replacement of
facilities with like facilities not involving construction on all rights-of-
ways, other than thoroughfares and arterials, that does not impede traffic and
is for a period of less than eight contiguous hours; (iv) or construction other
than on thoroughfares and arterials that takes less than eight contiguous hours
to complete, does not impede traffic and does not involve a pavement cut; or
(v) minor and/or non-material vegetation management/tree pruning. The Village
Engineer may adopt rules and regulations pursuant to §
57.06(E) that clarify the definition of minor maintenance and/or provide a
process for a provider to determine whether particular activity constitutes
minor maintenance.
      (1)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit allows the right-of-way
minor maintenance permittee to perform all minor maintenance in any part of the
rights-of-way as required.
      (2)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit is valid from the date of
issuance until revoked by the Building Department Commissioner and/or the
Village Engineer.
      (3)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit must be displayed or upon
request produced within 12 business hours.
      (4)   A right-of-way minor maintenance permit by itself shall under no
circumstances provide a permittee with the ability to cut pavement without
seeking additional authority from the Building Department and/or the Village
Engineer.
   (B)   Right-of-way minor maintenance permit applications. Application for a
right-of-way minor maintenance permit shall be made to the Building Department.
In addition to any information required by the village, all right-of-way minor
maintenance permit applications shall contain, and will only be considered
complete upon compliance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Credible evidence that the applicant has obtained a certificate of
registration or proof that the applicant has written authority to apply for a
right-of-way minor maintenance permit on behalf of a party that has been issued
a certificate of registration.
      (2)   Submission of a completed right-of-way minor maintenance permit
application in the form required by the village.
      (3)   A statement that the applicant will employ protective measures and
devices that, consistent with the OMUTCD, will prevent injury or damage to
persons or property and to minimize disruptions to the efficient movement of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (C)   Issuance of right-of-way minor maintenance permits; conditions.
      (1)   If the Village Engineer determines that the applicant has satisfied
the requirements of this chapter and the right-of-way minor maintenance permit
process, the Village Engineer shall issue a right-of-way minor maintenance
permit subject to the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The village may impose reasonable conditions, in addition to the
rules and regulations enacted by the Village Engineer, upon the issuance of the
right-of-way minor maintenance permit and the performance of the right-of-way
minor maintenance permittee thereunder in order to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare, to insure the structural integrity of the rights-of-way,
to protect the property and safety of other users of the rights-of- way, and to
minimize the disruption and inconvenience to the traveling public.
   (D)   Right-of-way minor maintenance permit fees. The village shall not
charge a fee for the issuance of the right-of-way minor maintenance permit but
may revoke the right-of-way minor maintenance permit as any other permit may be
revoked under this chapter.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020) Penalty, see §
57.99
§ 57.16 ENFORCEMENT OF PERMIT OBLIGATION.
   (A)   Mandatory denial of permit. Except in the case of an emergency, no
permit will be granted:
      (1)   To any person who has not yet made an application; or
      (2)   To any person who has outstanding debt owed to the village unless
payment in full has been placed in an escrow account approved by the Village
Fiscal Officer and the Village Solicitor; or
      (3)   To any person as to whom there exists grounds for the revocation of
a permit; or
      (4)   If, in the discretion of the Village Engineer, the issuance of a
permit for the particular date and/or time would cause a conflict or interfere
with an exhibition, celebration, festival, or any other event. The Village
Engineer, in exercising this discretion, shall be guided by the safety and
convenience of ordinary travel of the public over the rights-of-way, and by
considerations relating to the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Permissive denial of permit. The Village Engineer may deny a permit in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to prevent interference
with the safety and convenience of ordinary travel over the rights-of-way, or
when necessary to protect the rights-of-way and its users.
      (1)   The Village Engineer, in his or her discretion, may consider one or
more of the following factors:
         (a)   The extent to which rights-of-way space where the permit is
sought is available; and/or
         (b)   The competing demands for the particular space in the rights-of-
way; and/or
         (c)   The availability of other locations in the rights-of-way or in
other rights- of-way for the proposed facilities; and/or
         (d)   The applicability of this chapter or other regulations of the
rights-of-way that affect location of facilities in the rights-of-way; and/or
         (e)   The degree of compliance of the provider with the terms and
conditions of its certificate of registration, this chapter, and other
applicable ordinances and regulations; and/or
         (f)   The degree of disruption to surrounding communities and
businesses that will result from the use of that part of the rights- of-way;
and/or
         (g)   The condition and age of the rights-of-way, and whether and when
it is scheduled for total or partial re-construction; and/or
         (h)   The balancing of the costs of disruption to the public and
damage to the rights-of-way, against the benefits to that part of the public
served by the expansion into additional parts of the rights-of-way; and/or
         (i)   Whether such applicant or its agent has failed within the past
three years to comply, or is presently not in full compliance with, the
requirements of this chapter or, if applicable, any other law.
      (2)   Under no circumstances will open cutting take place on a newly
constructed street within 24 months after construction completion or a newly
reconstructed street within 24 months of reconstruction completion, except
where:
         (a)   An emergency situation requires that an open cut is necessary;
and/or
         (b)   Vital services to resident(s) or business(es) are needed or have
been cut off and there is no reasonable alternative (such as jacking or boring)
in supplying or restoring such services; and/or
         (c)   The Village Engineer determines it is in the best interests of
the village that such an open cut take place.
   (C)   Discretionary issuance of permit.
      (1)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of
this section, the Building Department may issue a permit in any case where the
permit is necessary;
         (a)   To prevent substantial economic hardship to a customer of the
permit applicant, if established by credible evidence satisfactory to the
village; or
         (b)   To allow such customer to materially improve its service; or
         (c)   To allow a new economic development project to be granted a
permit under this section.
      (2)   To be granted a permit under this section, the permit applicant
must not have had knowledge of the hardship, the plans for improvement of
service, or the development project when it was required to submit its list of
next year projects.
   (D)   Work done without a permit in emergency situations.
      (1)   Each provider shall, as soon as is practicable, immediately notify
the Village Fiscal Officer of any event regarding its facilities which it
considers to be an emergency. The provider may proceed to take whatever actions
are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. Within five business days,
unless otherwise extended by the Village Engineer, after the occurrence or
discovery of the emergency (whichever is later), the provider shall apply for
the necessary permits, pay the fees associated therewith and fulfill the rest
of the requirements necessary to bring itself into compliance with this chapter
for any and all actions taken in response to the emergency. In the event that
the village becomes aware of an emergency regarding a provider's facilities,
the village shall use best efforts to contact the provider or the system
representative of each provider affected, or potentially affected, by the
emergency. In any event, the village may take whatever action it deems
necessary in order to respond to the emergency, the cost of which shall be
borne by the provider whose facilities caused the emergency.
      (2)   Except in the case of an emergency, any provider who constructs in,
on, above, within, over, below or through a rights-of-way without a valid
permit must subsequently obtain a permit, pay double the normal fee for said
permit, pay double all the other fees required by the code, deposit with the
village the fees necessary to correct any damage to the rights-of-way and
comply with all of the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Revocation of permits.
      (1)   Permittees hold permits issued pursuant to the code as a privilege
and not as a right. The village reserves its right, as provided herein, to
revoke any permit, without refunding any fees, in the event of a substantial
breach of the terms and conditions of any law, or any provision or condition of
the permit. A substantial breach by permittee shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following:
         (a)   The violation of any provision or condition of the permit; or
         (b)   An evasion or attempt to evade any provision or condition of the
permit, or the perpetration or attempt to perpetrate any fraud or deceit upon
the village or its citizens; or
         (c)   Any material misrepresentation of fact in the application for a
permit; or
         (d)   The failure to maintain the required construction or removal
bonds and/or insurance; or
         (e)   The failure to obtain and/or maintain, when required, a
certificate of registration; or
         (f)   The failure to complete the construction in a timely manner; or
         (g)   The failure to correct a condition of an order issued pursuant
to §
57.14(O)(3).
      (2)   If the Village Engineer determines that the permittee has committed
a substantial breach of a term or condition of any law or any condition of the
permit, the Village Engineer shall serve a written demand upon the permittee to
remedy such violation. The demand shall state that continued violations may be
cause for revocation of the permit. Upon a substantial breach, as stated above,
the Village Engineer may place additional or revised conditions on the permit.
      (3)   By the close of the second business day following receipt of
notification of the breach, permittee shall contact the Village Engineer with a
plan, acceptable to the Village Engineer, for its correction. Permittee's
failure to so contact the Village Engineer, or the permittee's failure to
submit an acceptable plan, or permittee's failure to reasonably implement the
approved plan, shall be cause for immediate revocation of the permit
      (4)   If a permittee commits a second substantial default as outlined
above, permittee's permit will automatically be revoked and the permittee will
not be allowed further permits for up to and including one full year, except
for emergency repairs.
      (5)   If a permit is revoked, the permittee shall also reimburse the
village for the village's reasonable costs, including restoration costs and the
costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection with
such revocation.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.17 CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL BONDS.
   (A)   Construction bond. Prior to the commencement of any construction, a
construction permittee, excluding the village and Hamilton County, shall
deposit with the village an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit and/or
surety bond in an amount determined by the Mayor to be appropriate based upon
fair and reasonable criteria. Unless a construction default, problem or
deficiency involves an emergency or endangers the safety of the general public,
the village shall serve written notice to the construction permittee detailing
the construction default, problem or deficiency. If the village determines that
correction or repair of the construction default, problem or deficiency has not
occurred or has not been substantially initiated within ten calendar days after
the date following service and notification and detailing the construction
default, problem or deficiency, then the village may attach the letter of
credit or surety bond. Upon attachment, written notice shall be served on the
construction permittee by the village.
   (B)   Removal bond. Upon issuance of a certificate of registration and
continuously thereafter, and until 120 days after a provider's facilities have
been removed from the rights-of-way, (unless the village notifies the provider
that a reasonably longer period shall apply), a provider shall deposit with the
village and maintain an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety
bond in an amount equal to or greater than $100,000, the village shall make all
reasonable efforts to allow provider a period of five calendar days after
serving notification in writing to correct or repair any default, problem or
deficiency prior to the village attachment of the letter of credit or surety
bond regarding the removal of facilities. Upon attachment, written notice shall
be provided to the provider by the village.
   (C)   Blanket bond. In lieu of the construction bond required by division
(A) of this section and the removal bond required by division (B) of this
section, provider may deposit with the village an irrevocable, unconditional
letter of credit and/or surety bond in the amount of $5,000,000. Unless a
construction default, problem or deficiency involves an emergency or endangers
the safety of the general public, the village shall make all reasonable effort
to allow permittee a period of five calendar days after sending notification in
writing to correct or repair any default, problem or deficiency prior to
village's attachment of the letter of credit or surety bond.
   (D)   Self bonding. In lieu of the construction bond required by division
(A) of this section, the removal bond required by division (B) of this section
and the blanket bond required by division (C) of this section, those providers
maintaining a book value in excess of $50,000,000 may submit a statement to the
village requesting to self-bond. If approval to self-bond is granted, a
provider shall assure the village that such self-bonding shall provide the
village with no less protection and security than would have been afforded to
the village by a third party surety providing provider with the types and
amounts of bonds detailed in the above named sections. This statement shall
include:
      (1)   Audited financial statements for the previous year; and
      (2)   A description of the applicant's self-bonding program.
      (3)   Other applicable and pertinent information as reasonably requested
by the village.
   (E)   Purposes. The bonds required by this section, and any self-bonding to
the extent it has been permitted, shall serve as security for:
      (1)   The faithful performance by the permittee or provider of all terms,
conditions and obligations of this chapter; and
      (2)   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee or provider's violation of this chapter or its failure to
comply with all rules, regulations, orders, permits and other directives of the
village issued pursuant to this chapter; and
      (3)   The payment of all compensation due to the village, including
permit fees; and
      (4)   The payment of premiums (if any) for the liability insurance
required pursuant to this chapter; and
      (5)   The removal of facilities from the rights-of-way pursuant to this
chapter; and
      (6)   The payment to the village of any amounts for which the permittee
or provider is liable that are not paid by its insurance or other surety; and
      (7)   The payment of any other amounts which become due to the village
pursuant to this chapter or the law.
   (F)   Form. The bond documents required by this section and any replacement
bond documents shall contain the following endorsement: "it is hereby
understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled or not renewed by the
surety nor the intention to cancel or not to renew be stated by the surety
until 90 days after completion of construction of the facilities and,
notwithstanding the foregoing, shall in no case be canceled or not renewed by
the surety until at least 90 days' written notice to village of surety's
intention to cancel or not renew this bond.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.18 INDEMNIFICATION AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   Village does not accept liability. By reason of the acceptance of an
application, the grant of a permit or the issuance of a certificate of
registration, the village does not assume any liability:
      (1)   For injuries to persons, damage to property, or loss of service
claims; or
      (2)   For claims or penalties of any sort resulting from the
installation, presence, maintenance or operation of facilities.
   (B)   Indemnification.
      (1)   (a)   By applying for and being issued a certificate of
registration with the village a provider is required, or by accepting a permit
a permittee is required to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the village's
agents, elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers and subcontractors
from all costs, liabilities, claims, and suits for damages of any kind arising
out of the construction, presence, installation, maintenance, repair or
operation of its facilities, or out of any activity undertaken in or near a
rights-of- way, whether any act or omission complained of is authorized,
allowed, or prohibited by a permit. Such requirement to defend, indemnify and
hold harmless shall not extend to the negligence of the village or its agents,
elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers and subcontractors, to the
extent that the existence of such negligence shall be proven to exist. A
provider or permittee shall not bring, nor cause to be brought, any action,
suit or other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any other relief against
the village's agents, elected officials, officers, employees, volunteers, and
subcontractors for any claim nor for any award arising out of the presence,
installation, maintenance or operation of its facilities, or any activity
undertaken in or near a rights-of-way, whether the act or omission complained
of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by a permit. This section is not, as to
third parties, a waiver of any defense or immunity otherwise available to the
provider, permittee or to the village; and the provider or permittee, in
defending any action on behalf of the village, shall be entitled to assert in
any action every defense or immunity that the village could assert in its own
behalf. Any and all exercise of the above shall be consistent with, but not
limited to, the following:
         (b)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, all providers and
permittees shall, at their sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and
hold harmless the village, its elected officials, agents, officers, employees,
volunteers and subcontractors from and against any and all lawsuits, claims
(including without limitation worker's compensation claims against the village
or others), causes of actions, actions, liability, and judgments for injury or
damages (including, but not limited to, expenses for reasonable legal fees,
costs and expenses assumed by the village in connection therewith); and
            1.   Persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the
acts or omissions of provider or permittee, its subcontractors, agents or
employees attributable to the occupation by the provider or permittee of the
rights- of-way, to which provider's or permittee's negligence shall in any way
contribute, and regardless of whether the village's negligence or the
negligence of any other party shall have contributed to such claim, cause of
action, judgment, injury or damage; and
            2.   Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy,
for defamation of person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement
of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or any other
right of any person, firm and corporation by the provider, but excluding claims
arising out of or related to the village's actions; and
            3.   Arising out of provider or permittee's failure to comply with
the provisions of law applicable to provider or permittee in its business
hereunder.
      (2)   The foregoing indemnification is conditioned upon the village:
         (a)   Giving provider or permittee prompt notice of any claim or the
commencement of any action, suit or proceeding for which indemnification is
sought; and
         (b)   Affording the provider or permittee the opportunity to jointly
participate in any compromise, settlement, or other resolution or disposition
of any claim or proceeding subject to indemnification; and
         (c)   Cooperate in the defense of such claim and making available to
the provider or permittee all pertinent information under the village's
control.
      (3)   The village shall have the right to employ separate counsel in any
such action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and defense
thereof, and the provider or permittee shall pay all reasonable fees and
expenses of such separate counsel if employed.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.19 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The village, by the
granting of a permit or by issuing a certificate of registration pursuant to
this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or
lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter
vested in the village under the constitution and laws of the United States,
State of Ohio or the Village of Mariemont to regulate the use of the rights-of-
way. The permittee by its acceptance of a permit, or provider by applying for
and being issued a certificate of registration, is deemed to acknowledge that
all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise
as now are or the same as may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the
village, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof
by the village at any time. A permittee or provider is deemed to acknowledge
that its rights are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the village
to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of
the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws
and ordinances enacted by the village pursuant to such powers.
   (B)   Method of service. Any notice or order of the Building Department,
Mayor or Village Council shall be deemed to be properly served if a copy
thereof is:
      (1)   Delivered personally; or
      (2)   Successfully transmitted via facsimile transmission to the last
known fax number of the person to be served; or
      (3)   Left at the usual place of business of the person to whom it is to
be served upon and with someone who is 18 years of age or older; or
      (4)   Sent by certified, pre-posted U.S. mail to the last known address;
or
      (5)   If the notice is attempted to be served by certified, pre-posted
U.S. mail and then returned showing that the letter was not delivered, or the
certified letter is not returned within 14 days after the date of mailing, then
notice may be sent by regular, pre-posted, first-class U.S. mail; or
      (6)   If the notice is attempted to be served by regular, first class
U.S. mail, postage prepaid, and the letter is then returned showing that the
letter was not delivered, or is not returned within 14 days after the date of
mailing, then notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure, building, premises or property affected by such notice.
   (C)   Applies to all providers. This chapter shall apply to all providers
and all permittees unless expressly exempted.
   (D)   Foreclosure and receivership.
      (1)   Upon the filing of any voluntary or involuntary petition under the
bankruptcy code by or against any provider and/or permittee, or any action for
foreclosure or other judicial sale of the provider and/or permittee facilities
located within the rights-of-way, the provider and/or permittee shall so notify
the Mayor within 14 calendar days thereof and the provider and/or permittee's
certificate of registration or permit (as applicable) shall be deemed void and
of no further force and effect.
      (2)   The village shall have the right to revoke, pursuant to the
provisions of the code, any certificate of registration or permit granted
pursuant to this chapter, subject to any applicable provisions of law,
including the bankruptcy code, 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or
trustee to take over and conduct the business of the provider and/or permittee,
whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or
proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated
prior to the expiration of said 120 days or unless:
         (a)   Within 120 days after election or appointment, such receiver or
trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of the relevant
certificate of registration, any outstanding permit, this chapter, and remedied
all defaults thereunder; and
         (b)   Said receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, shall have
executed an agreement, duly approved by a court having jurisdiction over the
facilities, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by
each and every provision of the relevant certificate of registration, permit
and this chapter.
   (E)   Choice of law and forum. This chapter and the terms and conditions of
any certificate of registration or permit shall be construed and enforced in
accordance with the substantive laws of the village, State of Ohio and United
States, in that order. As a condition of the grant of any permit or issuance of
any certificate of registration, unless otherwise required by law, all disputes
shall be resolved in a court of competent jurisdiction in Hamilton County,
Ohio.
   (F)   Force majeure. In the event any person's performance of any of the
terms, conditions or obligations required by this chapter is prevented by a
cause or event not within such person's control, such inability to perform
shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a
result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within
the control of a provider shall include, without limitation, acts of God,
strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of, explosions,
acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes,
landslides, and fires.
   (G)   No warranty. The village makes no representation or warranty regarding
its right to authorize the construction of facilities on any particular rights-
of-way. The burden and responsibility for making such determination shall be
upon the person installing facilities in the rights-of- way.
   (H)   Continuing obligation and holdover. In the event a provider or
permittee continues to operate all or any part of the facilities after the
termination, lapse, or revocation of a certificate of registration, such
provider or permittee shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions
of this chapter and other laws throughout the period of such continued
operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be
construed as a renewal or other extension of the certificate of registration,
nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the village as a
result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited
to, damages and restitution. Any conflict between the issuance of a certificate
of registration or of a permit and any other present or future lawful exercise
of the village's regulatory or police powers shall be resolved in favor of the
latter.
   (I)   Appeals. All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification
to the village required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via
certified U.S. mail to the Mayor or Village Engineer as specified in this
chapter.
   (J)   Village facilities. As part of village required standards wherever
rights-of-way are under construction, if deemed advisable and practicable by
the Village Engineer, the village may install all such facilities deemed
necessary to accommodate future provider needs. Any such installed facilities
shall be village property and may be conveyed to any person under such terms
and conditions as are deemed advisable by the Village Council.
   (K)   Section headings. Section headings are for convenience only and shall
not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
§ 57.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, and the remedy
of specific performance which may be enforced in a court of competent
jurisdiction the following penalties shall apply: any person violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for the fourth
degree. Each day such violation continued shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. O-20-20, passed 10-26-2020)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
73.   MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
      
74.   EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
      
75.   BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
      
76.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
77.   HEAVY AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
      
78.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
79.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Compliance with order of police officer
   
70.03   Emergency vehicles to proceed cautiously past red or stop signal
   
70.04   Exceptions generally; emergency, public safety, and coroner vehicles
exempt
   
70.05   Persons riding or driving animals upon roadways
   
70.06   Prohibitions against pedestrians and slow-moving vehicles on freeways
   
70.07   Use of private property for vehicular travel
   
70.08   Names of persons damaging real property by operation of vehicle to be
provided to owner
   
70.09   Limited access highways; barriers along; vehicles to enter and leave at
designated intersections
   
70.10   Through highways
   
70.11   Officer may remove ignition key
   
70.12   Removal of vehicles after accidents
   
70.13   Director of Transportation authority
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.30   Obeying traffic-control devices
   
70.31   Signal lights
   
70.32   Signals over reversible lanes
   
70.33   Ambiguous or non-working traffic signals
   
70.34   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.35   Unauthorized signs and signals prohibited
   
70.36   Alteration, defacement, or removal prohibited
   
70.37   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
   
70.38   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Streets and sidewalks, general regulations, see Title V
   Unauthorized use of a motor vehicle, see §
131.09
   Unclaimed and abandoned motor vehicles, see
Ch. 94
Statutory reference:
   Local traffic regulations, scope and authority, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see R.C. §§
4511.092 et seq.
   Uniform application and precedence of state traffic laws, see R.C. § 4511.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. § 4501.01
shall apply to this Title, Ch. 95, and the penal laws of the municipality. For
the purpose of this Title and Ch. 95, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. Every self- propelled vehicle designed or used for
drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.
   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose of
through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared an
“alley” by the legislative authority of the municipality in which the street or
highway is located.
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States or state numbered route, controlled-
access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway
designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part
of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
   BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.
   BICYCLE. Every device, other than a device that is designed solely for use
as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power upon
which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is more
than 14 inches in diameter.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers,
and used for the transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing
arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or funeral car,
other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement,
designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or
fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in an chauffeured
limousine. The term does not include any vehicle that is used exclusively in
the business of funeral directing.
(R.C. § 4501.01(LL))
   CHILD CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used
for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or
access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the street or
highway.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within
the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface;
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a crosswalk where the legislative authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for
the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing and
combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety fuse matches.
   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or
partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated in
grade.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
   FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with crossroads
separated in grade and with full control of access.
   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse, while
used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon.
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to
the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.
   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road
surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper,
mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle designed
for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power- operated traffic-control device by which
traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does not
include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker, warning
light, or steady burning electric lamp.
   HYBRID BEACON. A type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark mode
between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and, when in
operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway
with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the
roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic-control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition.
         (a)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated
on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and
any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal, and other local board or body
having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and laws of
this state.
   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. Means a device weighing less than 100 pounds
that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power, and has
an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles per hour
when propelled by the electric motor.
   MEDIAN. The area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured from
edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes. The
width of a median may be different between intersections, between interchanges,
and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except motorized
bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 mph or
less.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven  cycle”, “motor scooter”, “autocycle”, “cab-
enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or
one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled, and
that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic centimeters
piston displacement that produces not more than one brake horsepower and is
capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater than 20 mph on a
level surface. The terms do not include an electric bicycle.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self- propelled vehicle designed for, and used by,
a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight
mph.
   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that has
two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
   NATURAL RESOURCES OFFICER. An officer appointed pursuant to R.C. § 1501.24.
   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
   OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   PARKED or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road, alley,
highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a driver, but
does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal delivery
device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly suggests
otherwise.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing vehicle by
means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing
vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads
such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78, or
4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through (D), or
4511.74(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated; or
      (4)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
      (5)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in division (1),
(2), (3), or (4) of this definition.
   PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A private toll road or road, including
any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road, within a
shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or recreation
facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to travel
without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but does not
include a road within a private gated property where access is restricted at
all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area, or a private
grade crossing.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership used for
vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not by other persons.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and non-transport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   (a)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service.
         (b)   The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the Director of
Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety vehicles described
herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital; or
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed
principally on a private right-of-way.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a
distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes arrangements known as carpools, vanpools, and
buspools.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path; or
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way” includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state,
county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or
more separate roadways, the term means any roadway separately, but not all the
roadways collectively.
   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United States
mail on a rural mail delivery route.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by adequate
signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers which
is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function; provided the term does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the  territorial limits of a municipality, or within such
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and the term does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child care center
or type A family child care home to transport children from the child care
center or type A family child care home to a school if the van or bus does not
have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own
weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another
vehicle.
   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated
from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within
the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A shared-use path
also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers, users of manual
and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non-motorized
users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is intended to be used
primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar uses,
or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically been
reserved for non-motorized use.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device.
   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state route
number and so marked.
   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.
   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop
signs are erected.
   STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device.
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the
use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. § 4511.65, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel
any highway or private road open to public travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other device
used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to a
street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility, or
shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including
any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a semitrailer and a
vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a trailer dolly, a
vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production
materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or
towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 mph and a vehicle
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more than 25
mph.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semi-trailers, designed and
used to carry property.
   TYPE A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. §
5104.01.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that the term does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or
any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power.
   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE. A vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
   WILDLIFE OFFICER. An officer designated pursuant to R.C. § 1531.13.
(R.C. § 4511.01)
(2000 Code, § 70.01)
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (A) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the
offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) above is a felony and shall be
prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating
division (B) above and division (C)(5)(a) above applies, the sentencing court,
in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct for purposes of
sentencing the offender for a violation of division (B) above, shall consider,
along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12 and 2929.13 that are
required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(A) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been
found guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender's
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      MOVING VIOLATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      POLICE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) through (C), (E), (F)) (2000 Code, § 70.02)
Cross-reference:
   Resisting arrest, see §
136.08
§ 70.03 EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY PAST RED OR STOP SIGNAL.
   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.03) (2000 Code, § 70.03)
§ 70.04 EXCEPTIONS GENERALLY; EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY, AND CORONER VEHICLES
EXEMPT.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §§
73.01 and
73.02, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, and 4513.02, and R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. § 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35,
4511.66, or 4513.02 or R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   As used in this section, ENGAGED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF OFFICIAL DUTIES
includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the manufacturer or
vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway maintenance vehicle,
equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(R.C. § 4511.04)
   (E)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
   (F)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, and
4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to
a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle
in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
(2000 Code, § 70.04)
§ 70.05 PERSONS RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAYS.
   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05) (2000 Code, § 70.05)
§ 70.06 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST PEDESTRIANS AND SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES ON FREEWAYS.
   (A)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance;
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-driven
cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an
agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works
or official duties.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.051) (2000 Code, § 70.06)
Statutory reference:
   Designation of a freeway, see R.C. § 4511.011
§ 70.07 USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR VEHICULAR TRAVEL.
   The provisions of this traffic code do not prevent the owner of real
property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from
requiring additional conditions to those specified in this traffic code, or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to the owner.
(R.C. § 4511.08) (2000 Code, § 70.07)
§ 70.08 NAMES OF PERSONS DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY BY OPERATION OF VEHICLE TO BE
PROVIDED TO OWNER.
   (A)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4501.01.
   (B)   If damage is caused to real property by the operation of a motor
vehicle in, or during the, violation of any section of the Ohio Revised Code or
of any municipal ordinance, the law enforcement agency that investigates the
case, upon request of the real property owner, shall provide the owner with the
names of the persons who are charged with the commission of the offense. If a
request for the names is made, the agency shall provide the names as soon as
possible after the persons are charged with the offense.
   (C)   (1)   The personnel of law enforcement agencies who act pursuant to
division (B)above in good faith are not liable in damages in a civil action
allegedly arising from their actions taken pursuant to that division.
      (2)   Political subdivisions and the state are not liable in damages in a
civil action allegedly arising from the actions of personnel of their law
enforcement agencies if the personnel have immunity under this division.
(R.C. § 2935.28) (2000 Code, § 70.08)
§ 70.09 LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS; BARRIERS ALONG; VEHICLES TO ENTER AND LEAVE AT
DESIGNATED INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person, firm or corporation shall cut, injure, remove, or
destroy any fence or other barrier designed and erected to prevent traffic from
entering or leaving a limited access highway without the permission of the
Director of Transportation, except in a case of emergency where life or
property is in danger.
      (2)   No person, firm or corporation shall cause a vehicle of any
character to enter or leave a limited access highway at any point other than
intersections designated by the Director for such purposes, except in a case of
emergency where life or property is in danger.
(R.C. § 3767.201)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
(2000 Code, § 70.09)
§ 70.10 THROUGH HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or
removes a stop sign under this division, he or she shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (C)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (D)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65) (2000 Code, § 70.10)
§ 70.11 OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   (A)   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the
ignition switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street
or highway.
   (B)   The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05) (2000 Code, § 70.11)
§ 70.12 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (B)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(A) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (A) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         (b)   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         (c)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d) of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         (d)   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (C)   As used in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:
      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, university campus police department, park district police force, or
township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         (b)   A state highway patrol trooper;
         (c)   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         (d)   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions (a) to (c) of this definition;
         (e)   A natural resources officer or a wildlife officer.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (D)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (E)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (D) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (F)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (G)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (C) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68)
§ 70.13 DIRECTOR OF TRANSPORTATION AUTHORITY.
   (A)   It is hereby declared to be in the public interest that the consent of
said village be, and such consent hereby is, given to the State Department of
Transportation for said Department to maintain the traveled portions of, apply
standard longitudinal pavement markings, erect regulatory and warning signs,
and to plow snow and place abrasives for ice control on said state highways in
accordance with the standard practices of the State Department of
Transportation.
   (B)   The Clerk be, and hereby is, directed to furnish the Director of
Transportation and the Board of County Commissioners, with a certified copy of
this section immediately upon the taking effect thereof.
   (C)   This section shall take effect and be in force from and after the
earliest period allowed by law.
(Ord. O-19-11, passed 10-24-2011)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.30 OBEYING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) below, any operator of a
commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established for the
purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall comply
with any traffic-control device or the order of a peace officer directing the
vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (C) below, shall comply with an order of a
peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of an
electronic clearance device.
   (C)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless of
the instruction of a traffic- control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (D)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (E)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. pts. 100 through 180.
   (F)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates division (A) above
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) above is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) above or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, whoever violates
division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B) above or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, whoever violates
division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree on
each subsequent offense.
(2000 Code, § 70.20) (Ord. O-29-20, passed 11-23-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Bypassing vehicle weighing locations, see R.C. § 4511.121
   Obedience to traffic control devices, see R.C. § 4511.12
   Placing traffic-control devices on state highways, permission required, see
R.C. § 4511.10
   Traffic-control devices to conform to the state manual and specifications,
see R.C. § 4511.11
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. § 4511.09
Editor’s note:
   Per R.C. § 4511.11, Mariemont has to follow the Ohio Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices ("OMUTCD") concerning the installation and maintenance
of any and all traffic control devices. As such, before voting to install or
modify a traffic control device, Council should refer to the OMUTCD if any new
traffic control devices are being contemplated, to insure they comply with Ohio
law.
§ 70.31 SIGNAL LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (A)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-turn
movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic-control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u- turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u- turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic-control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (B)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing arrow
movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will be
exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic-control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (C)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in this division (C)(1) and
divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) above.
         (b)   Except when a traffic-control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic-control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         (b)   When a traffic-control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one- way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic-control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (D)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (E)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination
with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such
movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same
time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or
making a u- turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic-control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right- of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic-control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic-
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (F)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic-control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right- of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic-control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic-control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic-control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (G)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (H)   This section does not apply at railroad grade- crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13) (2000 Code, § 70.21)
§ 70.32 SIGNALS OVER REVERSIBLE LANES.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (A)   A steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (B)   A steady yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (C)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (D)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (E)   A steady red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(R.C. § 4511.131) (2000 Code, § 70.22)
§ 70.33 AMBIGUOUS OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.132) (2000 Code, § 70.23)
§ 70.34 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (A)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (B)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic-control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (C)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (E)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(R.C. § 4511.14) (2000 Code, § 70.24)
§ 70.35 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16) (2000 Code, § 70.26)
§ 70.36 ALTERATION, DEFACEMENT, OR REMOVAL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper
with a manhole cover.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
divisions (A)(1) or (A)(3) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If a violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(3) above creates a risk of
physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If a violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(3) above causes serious
physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or controlled by a state or
local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(2) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates division (A)
(2) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A)(2)
above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17) (2000 Code, § 70.27)
§ 70.37 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (A)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC- CONTROL DEVICE means any sign,
traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (B)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic-
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic-control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic-control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic-control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic-control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (C)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18) (2000 Code, § 70.28)
§ 70.38 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic- control device.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) above does not apply to any of the following persons
and division (A)(2) above does not apply to any of the following persons when
responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. §§ 109.71(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14), or (A)(19);
      (2)   A state highway patrol officer;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3), or (E)(4).
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (A)(2) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(R.C. § 4511.031) (2000 Code, § 70.29)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no
penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(2) or (A)(3) below, a
minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99) (2000 Code, § 70.99)
   (B)   Violations committed while distracted.
      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division (B)
(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         (a)   DISTRACTED means doing either of the following while operating a
vehicle:
            1.   Using an electronic wireless communications device, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.204, in violation of that section.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         (b)   DISTRACTED does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A  person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C. §
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (c)   DISTRACTED does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (B)(1)(c):
            UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E),
or (G).
            UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than $100 as follows:
         (a)   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (B) of this section.
         (b)   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the additional fine of not more
than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (B)(2)(a) of this section. If the offender
elects the course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the
offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender’s payment and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (B) of this section.
      (3)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation,
or summons for a violation of any of the sections of the Revised Code listed in
division (B)(2) of this section that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the officer shall do
both of the following:
         (a)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer's law enforcement agency;
         (b)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender's race.
(R.C. § 4511.991)
   (C)   Sentencing. Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
130.99.
Cross-reference:
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see §
130.18
   Multiple sentences, see §
130.19
Statutory reference:
   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
CHAPTER 71: LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
Motor Vehicle Licensing
   
71.01   Display of license plates or validation stickers; registration
   
71.02   Improper use of noncommercial motor vehicle
   
71.03   Operating motor vehicle ordered immobilized; forfeiture
   
71.04   Operation or sale without certificate of title
   
71.05   Display of certificate of registration
   
71.06   Use of unauthorized plates
   
71.07   Operating without dealer or manufacturer license plates
Driver’s Licenses
   
71.20   Prohibited acts
   
71.21   Permitting minor to operate vehicle prohibited; temporary instruction
permit; probationary license
   
71.22   License required as driver or commercial driver on public or private
property; nonresident exemption
   
71.23   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited
   
71.24   Restriction against owner lending vehicle for use of another
   
71.25   Suspension of driver’s licenses; license suspended by court of record
   
71.26   Display of license
   
71.27   Prohibition against false statements
   
71.28   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction
   
71.29   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license
   
71.30   Driving under OVI suspension
   
71.31   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation;
driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
   
71.32   Failure to reinstate license
Commercial Driver’s Licenses
   
71.45   Definitions
   
71.46   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating
   
71.47   Prohibited acts
   
71.48   Prerequisites to operation of commercial motor vehicle
   
71.49   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
   
71.50   Criminal offenses
   
71.51   Application of federal regulations
   
71.52   Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Commercial driver’s licenses, see R.C. Ch. 4506
   Driver’s licenses, see R.C. Ch. 4507
   Motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. Ch. 4504
   Municipal motor vehicle license tax, see R.C. § 4504.06
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Proof of financial responsibility required; civil penalties; peace officers
as agents of Registrar of Motor Vehicles; procedures and rules, see R.C. §§
4509.101 et seq.
   Suspension and revocation of driver’s licenses, see R.C. Ch. 4510
   Suspension of driver’s licenses; municipal power to suspend for a period not
to exceed time permitted or required by state law, see R.C. § 4510.05
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING
§ 71.01 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS; REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the rear of the motor vehicle a license plate
that displays the distinctive number and registration mark assigned to the
motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any county
identification sticker and any validation sticker when required by and issued
under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a commercial tractor shall display
the license plate on the front of the commercial tractor.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary motor vehicle license registration
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary motor
vehicle license registration in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license
registration by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.107, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (C)    (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (C)(1) of this section, RESIDENT means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))
   (D)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (E)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (F)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (A) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B), (C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (G)(3)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
(2000 Code, § 71.01)
§ 71.02 IMPROPER USE OF NONCOMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall use a motor vehicle registered as a noncommercial
motor vehicle for other than the purposes set forth in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4503.05) (2000 Code, § 71.02)
§ 71.03 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE ORDERED IMMOBILIZED; FORFEITURE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the operation of a
motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that
the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an immobilization
order issued under R.C. § 4503.233.
   (B)   A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a violation of
division (A) above shall be criminally forfeited to the state in accordance
with the procedures contained in R.C. § 4503.234.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
(R.C. § 4503.236) (2000 Code, § 71.03)
§ 71.04 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with R.C. Ch. 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued
for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing that the
ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Ch. 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Ch.
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Ch. 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Ch. 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chs. 4505 and 4517, sell at
wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by a state
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchp. IV of the
“Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act”, 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. § 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4505.18) (2000 Code, § 71.04)
§ 71.05 DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a “commercial car”, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, when the commercial car is required to be registered under state law,
shall, when operating the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer on the
streets, roads, or highways of this municipality display inside or on the
vehicle the certificate of registration for the commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer provided for in R.C. § 4503.19, or shall carry the certificate on
the operator’s person and display it upon the demand of any peace officer.
      (2)   Every person operating a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
required to be registered under state law shall permit the inspection of the
certificate of registration upon demand of any peace officer.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this above section is guilty of a
commercial car certificate of registration violation, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.18) (2000 Code, § 71.05)
§ 71.06 USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) above is guilty
of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or identification
mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08) (2000 Code, § 71.06)
§ 71.07 OPERATING WITHOUT DEALER OR MANUFACTURER LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon a public road or
highway a motor vehicle of a manufacturer or dealer unless the vehicle carries
and displays a placard, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.21, issued by the
Director of Public Safety that displays the registration number of its
manufacturer or dealer.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of illegal operation of
a manufacturer’s or dealer’s motor vehicle, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.10) (2000 Code, § 71.07)
DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.20 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended, or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's or
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any statement
required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or
fictitious.
   (B)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30) (2000 Code, § 71.10)
Statutory reference:
   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C. §
4510.33
§ 71.21 PERMITTING MINOR TO OPERATE VEHICLE PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION
PERMIT; PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a motor
vehicle upon a highway as an operator, unless the minor has first obtained a
license or permit to drive a motor vehicle under R.C. Chapter 4507.
(R.C. § 4507.31(A))
   (B)   (1)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no
holder of a temporary instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A)
and that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age
of 18 years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
         (b)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposed of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder
is accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent,
guardian, or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19
(A).
(R.C. § 4507.05(F))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to division (E)(1) of this section, division (C)(1)
(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s
license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         (b)   Division (C)(1)(b) of this section does not apply to the holder
of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or
(C)(1)(b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency
existed that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to
operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this
section or the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (E)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (E)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section.
   (F)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (G)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (F) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      FAMILY MEMBER. A family member of a probationary license holder includes
any of the following:
         (a)   A spouse;
         (b)   A child or stepchild;
         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law;
         (d)   An aunt or uncle;
         (e)   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law, or a sister-in-law;
         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s
stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      MOVING VIOLATION. Means any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. The term does
not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance regulating
pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load limitations,
vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4513.263.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (I))
   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.31(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C)(1), (C)(4), (E)(3), or (F) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4507.05(I), 4507.071(J))
(2000 Code, § 71.11)
§ 71.22 LICENSE REQUIRED AS DRIVER OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
PROPERTY; NONRESIDENT EXEMPTION.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle
upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid
driver's license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicle or a
deputy registrar under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver's license
issued under R.C. Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   No person shall receive a driver's license, or a motorcycle
operator's endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
      (3)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority, together
with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (4)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move, or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the peace
corps, volunteers in service to America, or the foreign service of the United
States, is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
such person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (C)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 through 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
(2000 Code, § 71.12)
   (D)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card issued by another state to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a person intends to
operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall
apply for a temporary instruction permit or driver's license in this state. If
the person fails to apply for a driver's license or temporary instruction
permit or within 30 days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate
any motor vehicle in this state under a license or permit issued by another
state.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (D)(2)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213)
§ 71.23 EMPLOYMENT OF A MINOR TO OPERATE A TAXICAB PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the definition of “chauffeur” in R.C. § 4501.01, no
person shall employ any minor for the purpose of operating a taxicab.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.321) (2000 Code, § 71.13)
§ 71.24 RESTRICTION AGAINST OWNER LENDING VEHICLE FOR USE OF ANOTHER.
   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Ch. 4510 or any
other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Ch. 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C. §
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) above has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that the
offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) above
if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
divisions (A)(1), (A)(3), or (A)(5) above, the offender and the operator of the
motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by consanguinity or
affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(2) above, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle
reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any violation
of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that would or
could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s license,
permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(4) above, the offender and the operator of the motor vehicle
occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in this division (C) and
divisions (D) to (H) below.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) below whoever violates
divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) above is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of divisions (A)(1),
(A)(2), or (A)(3) above, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more violations of divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3)
above, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         (b)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(4) or (A)(5) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Ch. 2929, the court may impose a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if the vehicle
involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender, the court
may order one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
below, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the vehicle
involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates.
If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (C)(3)(c) above is assigned or transferred
and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or independent of
any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the value
of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National Automobile Dealers
Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this division shall be
distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under divisions
(C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) above, the court shall not release the vehicle from the
immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization ordered
unless the court is presented with current proof of financial responsibility
with respect to that vehicle.
   (E)   (1)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
division (C)(3)(c) above, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order.
      (2)   The period of denial shall be five years after the date the order
is issued, unless, during that five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of
the offense that resulted in the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies
the Registrar of the termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and
notifies the Registrar, the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to
permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer the registration of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from
the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203) (2000 Code, § 71.14)
§ 71.25 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE; LICENSE SUSPENDED BY COURT OF RECORD.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of any provision of this code that is
substantially equivalent to a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, and a court
is permitted or required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to
any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or non resident operating privileges for
the period of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of
suspension imposed for the violation of the provision of this code shall not
exceed the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for
the violation of the provision of the Ohio Revised Code to which the provision
of this code is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
   (B)   Whenever a person is found guilty under the laws of this state or any
ordinance of any political subdivision of this state, of operating a motor
vehicle in violation of any such law or ordinance relating to reckless
operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or
independent of all other penalties provided by law, may impose a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(5).
   (C)   Suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall
be concurrent with any period of suspension disqualification under R.C. §
3123.58 or § 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a
commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Ch. 4507 during the period for which the commercial driver’s
license was suspended under this section, and no person whose commercial
driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Ch. 4507 during the period of the suspension.
(R.C. § 4510.15)
(2000 Code, § 71.15)
§ 71.26 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Ch. 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on or
about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, whoever violates
this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35) (2000 Code, § 71.16)
§ 71.27 PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE STATEMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement to any matter or
thing required by the provisions of this traffic code.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.36) (2000 Code, § 71.17)
§ 71.28 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (A)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) below, division (B) below, §
71.31 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, other than R.C.
Ch. 4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the
person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) above or the person operated a
motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at the time of the alleged
violation of division (A)(2) above. The person charged with a violation of
divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie
evidence.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b)2. or (A)(4)(b)3.
below the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on the
offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if, within
three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any
other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
Registrar of the termination. The Registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (B)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver's or commercial driver's license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99,
4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (B)(1) above may be admitted into evidence as prima facie
evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the time of the
alleged violation of division (B)(1) above. The person charged with a violation
of division (B)(1) above may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) above is guilty of driving under
suspension and shall be punished as provided in divisions (B)(3)(a) or division
(B)(3)(b) below.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b) below, the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this division
(B)(1), or any combination of two or more violations of this division (B)(1),
R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, and the offender
shall provide the court with proof of financial responsibility as defined in
R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide that proof of financial
responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties provided by law, the
court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not
exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the
vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the offender
is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (C)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point suspension, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a
minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days
of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
((R.C. § 4510.04)
(2000 Code, § 71.18)
§ 71.29 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under R.C. Ch. 4507 or a commercial
driver’s license issued under R.C. Ch. 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Ch. 4507. The license shall be in the
form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid driver’s or
commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of division
(A)(1) above or a valid license as a motorcycle operator either in the form of
an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or a restricted
license at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) above. The
person charged with a violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above may offer
evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) below, if within
three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the offender’s license was
expired for more than six months at the time of the offense, the court may
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)
(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12) (2000 Code, § 71.19)
§ 71.30 DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191, or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation
of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public
roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Ch. 2929, subject
to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B)(2) or (B)(3) below,
driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (C) below, the court instead
imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house arrest with
electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic monitoring
imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the court imposes a
mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court may impose a jail
term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall the cumulative
jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         (b)   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) below;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, the court may
sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The ten-
day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (C) below,
the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive days of
house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest with
electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Ch. 2929, a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) below;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, the court may
sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The
court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic
monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Ch. 2929, a fine of
not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) below;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that
is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed
shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (C)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2) below unless,
within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written finding on
the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the
offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender will not be
able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (D)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under divisions (B)(1),
(B)(2), or (B)(3) above shall be deposited into the municipal Indigent Drivers
Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by the
municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor’s
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under R.C. § 4503.231, on the vehicle
driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
R.C. § 3123.58 or R.C. § 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Ch. 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Ch. 4507 during the period of the suspension.
   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A)
above;
         (b)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (A) above.
      JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of thee, ten or 30
consecutive days that must be imposed under divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3)
above upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) above and in
relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4510.14)
   (H)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(2000 Code, § 71.20)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.31 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION;
DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509.
   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of divisions (A) or (B) above may be admitted into evidence as prima
facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a financial
responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division
(A) above or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time of the alleged
violation of division (B) above. The person charged with a violation of
divisions (A) or (B) above may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie
evidence.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in division (D)(1) to (D)(3) of this section. Whoever
violates division (B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment
of judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (D)(1) to
(D)(3) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2) below, the offense
is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. §§ 4510.11, 4510.111,
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(2000 Code, § 71.21)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.32 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the bureau of motor vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   (1)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) above may be admitted into evidence as prima facie
evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by the person
at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) above.
      (2)   The person charged with a violation of division (A) above may offer
evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) above, whoever violates
this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor.
         (b)   When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours.
         (c)   The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A) above, the
offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more
violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
(2000 Code, § 71.22)
COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s blood,
breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of alcohol per
the following: 100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma;
210 liters of breath; or 100 milliliters of urine.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE.
      (1)   A license issued in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506 that
authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle. Except as
otherwise specifically provided, COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE includes an
ENHANCED COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE.
      (2)   ENHANCED COMMERCIAL DRIVER'S LICENSE means a commercial driver's
license issued in accordance with R.C. §§ 4507.021 and 4506.072 that denotes
citizenship and identity and is approved by the United States Secretary of
Homeland Security or other designated federal agency for purposes of entering
the United States.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor Vehicle
Safety Act of 1986", 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any motor
vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A
or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. part 172, subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act”, 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. § 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that a
person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   DISQUALIFICATION. Means any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person’s
privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. § 391.
   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to which
an individual intends to return.
   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that
authorizes an individual to drive.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in R.C. §
4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, or over-the-counter
medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can
result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.
   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township, or county that has a
population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent federal
census.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state, and a
political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s license that
is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial
motor vehicle.
   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used for breeding,
feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the
truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the
operations of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle accident
occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by death
or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer as the
maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross vehicle
weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight rating of
the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed unit.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as hazardous
under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. part
172, subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin
in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a substantial
likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury, or a
substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or endangerment.
   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued a
medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or uses any
commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20, except that
mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio services.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of
a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that the
driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor carrier operation is out
of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5.
   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01
   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be loaded
onto or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids, mountings,
or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical means.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1) and
(E)(3).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with standards
prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (2)(b) of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         (b)   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         (a)   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         (b)   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or R.C. § 4511.201 or any
substantially equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state;
         (c)   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         (d)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         (e)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         (f)   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or R.C. § 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         (g)   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of Columbia.
   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to transport any
liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are either permanently
or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and have an individual
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of
1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial motor vehicle
transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed for
transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   TESTER. Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text from, an
electronic device. Texting includes short message service (SMS), e-mail,
instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
Texting does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor vehicle,
with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because of
traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   UNITED STATES. The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-certified
status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the ability of a
current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial motor vehicles
under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE. Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01) (2000 Code, § 71.25)
§ 71.46 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011) (2000 Code, § 71.26)
§ 71.47 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state, or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of-service order while the person’s driving privilege is
suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07;
      (5)   Knowingly provide false statements or engage in any fraudulent act
related to testing for a commercial driver's license as required in R.C. §
4506.09.
   (B)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the state Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under R.C. § 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(R.C. § 4506.12(I))
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (C) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.12(J))
(2000 Code, § 71.27)
§ 71.48 PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) or (C) of this section, the
following shall apply:
      (1)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in
this state unless the person holds, and has in the person’s possession, any of
the following:
         (a)   A valid commercial driver’s license with proper endorsements for
the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or by
another jurisdiction recognized by this state;
         (b)   A valid examiner’s commercial driving permit issued under R.C. §
4506.13;
         (c)   A valid restricted commercial driver’s license and waiver for
farm-related service industries issued under R.C. § 4506.24;
         (d)   A valid commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is accompanied by an
authorized state driver’s license examiner or tester or a person who has been
issued and has in the person’s immediate possession a current, valid commercial
driver’s license and who meets the requirements of R.C. § 4506.06(B).
      (2)   No person’s commercial driver’s license temporary instruction
permit shall be upgraded, and no commercial driver’s license shall be upgraded,
renewed, or issued to a person until the person surrenders to the registrar of
motor vehicles all valid licenses and permits issued to the person by this
state or by another jurisdiction recognized by this state. If the license or
permit was issued by any other state or another jurisdiction recognized by this
state, the Registrar shall report the surrender of a license or permit to the
issuing authority, together with information that a license or permit is now
issued in this state. The Registrar shall destroy any such license or permit
that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person who has been a resident of this state for 30 days or
longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a
commercial driver’s license issued in another jurisdiction.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section applies to any qualified
person when engaged in the operation of any of the following:
      (1)   A farm truck;
      (2)   Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or nonvolunteer
fire company, fire district, joint fire district, or the State Fire Marshal;
      (3)   A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation or emergency
medical service for ill or injured persons;
      (4)   A recreational vehicle;
      (5)   A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an eligible
unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible unit of
local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for the purpose
of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or salting, but
only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver’s license issued
under R.C. Chapter 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial motor vehicle for
these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the employing eligible unit
of local government determines that a snow or ice emergency exists that
requires additional assistance;
      (6)   A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member or uniformed
employee of the armed forces of the United States or their reserve components,
including the Ohio National Guard. This exception does not apply to United
States reserve technicians;
      (7)   A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for nonbusiness
purposes. “Operated for nonbusiness purposes” means that the commercial motor
vehicle is not used in commerce as “commerce” is defined in 49 C.F.R. § 383.5,
as amended, and is not regulated by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923;
      (8)   A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the transportation
of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being used for the
occasional transportation of personal property by individuals not for
compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise;
      (9)   A police SWAT team vehicle;
      (10)   A police vehicle used to transport prisoners.
   (C)   Nothing contained in division (B)(5) of this section shall be
construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule or regulation of this
state concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles.
(R.C. § 4506.03(A) - (C))
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may drive a
commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality if all of the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person has a valid commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit issued by any state or
jurisdiction in accordance with the minimum standards adopted by the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration under the “Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety
Act of 1986", 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App., for issuance of commercial
driver’s licenses;
      (2)   The person’s commercial driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit is not suspended, revoked, or canceled, and the person has the
appropriate endorsements for the vehicle that is being driven;
      (3)   The person is not disqualified from driving a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (4)   The person is not subject to an out-of-service order;
      (5)   The person is medically certified as physically qualified to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506.
         (a)   A person who submitted a medical examiner’s certificate to the
Registrar in accordance with R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) and whose medical
certification information is maintained in the commercial driver’s license
information system is not required to have the medical examiner’s certificate
in the person’s possession when on duty.
         (b)   A person whose medical certification information is not
maintained in the commercial driver’s license information system shall have in
the person’s possession when on duty the original or a copy of the current
medical examiner’s certificate that was submitted to the Registrar. However,
the person may operate a commercial motor vehicle with such proof of medical
certification for not more than 15 days after the date the current medical
examiner’s certificate was issued to the person.
         (c)   A person who has a medical variance shall have in the person’s
possession the original or copy of the medical variance documentation at all
times while on duty.
   (E)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this
municipality if the person does not meet the conditions specified in division
(D) of this section.
   (F)   Except as set forth in 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.62, 391.67,
and 391.68, no person holding a commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit or a commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter
4506 may drive a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce until the
person is at least 21 years of age.
(R.C. § 4506.05(A) - (C))
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under divisions (D), (E) and (F) of this
section are strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4506.03(D), 4506.05(D))
(2000 Code, § 71.28)
§ 71.49 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         (a)   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to
and meets the requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the
Registrar with the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and
each subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         (b)   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and
is subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall
self-certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E)) (2000 Code, § 71.29)
§ 71.50 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath, or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal
OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to
4549.03, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 through 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance
pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (14)   Use a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32 or any other substantially equivalent offense established under
federal law or the laws of another state.
(R.C. § 4506.15(A))
   (B)   No person shall refuse to immediately surrender the person’s
commercial driver’s license or permit to a peace officer when required to do so
by R.C. § 4506.17.
(R.C. § 4506.17(H))
   (C)   (1)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority,
any peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating division (A)
of this section without obtaining a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to
believe that a violation of division (A) of this section has been committed and
a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or blood serum,
breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the person to an
appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a test after
being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test that
discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol concentration of
0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol concentration of .048% or
more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol concentration of .056% or
more by urine, the peace officer shall require that the person immediately
surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to the peace officer.
      (2)   As used in this division (C), JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the
limits within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a
warrant under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers
of the State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person
who, in the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.15(B), 4506.17(N))
   (E)   The offenses established under division (A) of this section are strict
liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these
offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4506.15(C))
(2000 Code, § 71.30)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
R.C. § 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
§ 71.51 APPLICATION OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. pt. 383, subpt. C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19) (2000 Code, § 71.31)
§ 71.52 EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
10 years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (B)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked, or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (C)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
   (D)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20) (2000 Code, § 71.32)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision violated is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.99, 4507.99) (2000 Code, § 71.99)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.001   Lanes of travel upon roadways
   
72.002   Driving through safety zone
   
72.003   Vehicles traveling in opposite directions
   
72.004   Rules governing overtaking and passing of vehicles
   
72.005   Permission to overtake and pass on the right
   
72.006   Driving to left of center line
   
72.007   Prohibition against driving upon left side of roadway
   
72.008   Hazardous zones
   
72.009   One-way highways and rotary traffic islands
   
72.010   Rules for driving in marked lanes
   
72.011   Space between moving vehicles
   
72.012   Divided roadways
   
72.013   Rules for turns at intersections
   
72.014   U-turns and turning in roadway prohibited
   
72.015   Starting and backing vehicles
   
72.016   Turn and stop signals
   
72.017   Hand and arm signals
Right-of-Way
   
72.030   Right-of-way at intersections
   
72.031   Right-of-way when turning left
   
72.032   Right-of-way at through highways; stop signs; yield signs
   
72.033   Stop at sidewalk area; stop signs on private roads and driveways
   
72.034   Right-of-way on public highway
   
72.035   Pedestrian on sidewalk has right-of- way
   
72.036   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
   
72.037   Funeral procession has right-of-way
   
72.038   Pedestrians yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle
   
72.039   Pedestrian on crosswalk has right-of- way
   
72.040   Right-of-way yielded to blind person
   
72.041   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian
Pedestrians
   
72.055   Pedestrian movement in crosswalks
   
72.056   Pedestrian walking along highway
   
72.057   Prohibition against soliciting rides; riding on outside of vehicle
   
72.058   Pedestrian on bridge or railroad crossing
   
72.059   Persons operating motorized wheelchairs
   
72.060   Intoxicated or drugged pedestrian hazard on highway
   
72.061   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
   
72.062   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks
   
72.063   Low-speed micromobility devices
Grade Crossings
   
72.075   Stop signs at grade crossings
   
72.076   Driving vehicle across railroad grade crossing
   
72.077   Vehicles required to stop at grade crossings
   
72.078   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment crossing railroad tracks
School Buses
   
72.090   Regulations concerning school buses
   
72.091   Violation of regulations; report; investigation; citation; warning
   
72.092   Restrictions on the operation of school buses
   
72.093   School bus inspection
   
72.094   School bus not used for school purposes
   
72.095   Licensing by Department of Public Safety
   
72.096   Registration and identification of school buses
   
72.097   School bus marking
   
72.098   Flashing light signal lamps
   
72.099   Occupant restraining device for operator
Prohibitions
   
72.115   Obstruction and interference affecting view and control of driver
   
72.116   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion
   
72.117   Driving upon closed highway prohibited
   
72.118   Driving upon sidewalk area or paths exclusively for bicycles
   
72.119   Obstructing passage of other vehicles
   
72.120   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited; approaching
stationary public safety vehicle and certain other vehicles with caution
   
72.121   Driving over unprotected fire hose
   
72.122   Placing injurious material on highway or depositing litter from motor
vehicle
   
72.123   Transporting child not in child- restraint system prohibited
   
72.124   Occupant restraining devices
   
72.125   Use of engine brakes prohibited
   
72.126   Operating motor vehicle while wearing earphones or earplugs
   
72.127   Chauffeured limousines and livery services
   
72.128   Operating traction engine upon improved highways
   
72.129   Cracking exhaust noises; peeling out
   
72.130   Shortcutting across private property
   
72.131   Texting while driving prohibited
   
72.132   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited
   
72.133   Unreasonably loud operations
Statutory reference:
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.001 LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right- hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;
         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) above requires a driver of a slower
vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a faster
vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic
and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to
the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (A)(2) above.
      (2)   This division (C) shall not be construed as prohibiting the
crossing of the center line in making a left turn into or from an alley,
private road, or driveway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.25) (2000 Code, § 72.01)
§ 72.002 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.60) (2000 Code, § 72.02)
§ 72.003 VEHICLES TRAVELING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.26) (2000 Code, § 72.03)
§ 72.004 RULES GOVERNING OVERTAKING AND PASSING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (A)(3) below, signal
to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof at a safe
distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. §
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.27) (2000 Code, § 72.04)
§ 72.005 PERMISSION TO OVERTAKE AND PASS ON THE RIGHT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.28) (2000 Code, § 72.05)
§ 72.006 DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER LINE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.29) (2000 Code, § 72.06)
§ 72.007 PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.30) (2000 Code, § 72.07)
§ 72.008 HAZARDOUS ZONES.
   (A)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.31) (2000 Code, § 72.08)
§ 72.009 ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.32) (2000 Code, § 72.09)
§ 72.010 RULES FOR DRIVING IN MARKED LANES.
   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.33) (2000 Code, § 72.10)
§ 72.011 SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division does not prevent overtaking and passing
nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.34) (2000 Code, § 72.11)
§ 72.012 DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.35) (2000 Code, § 72.12)
§ 72.013 RULES FOR TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right- hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections,
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn
the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by the
markers, buttons, or signs.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.36) (2000 Code, § 72.13)
§ 72.014 U-TURNS AND TURNING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) below, no
vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.37) (2000 Code, § 72.14)
§ 72.015 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         (a)   In a rest area;
         (b)   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         (c)   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown
of a motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.38) (2000 Code, § 72.15)
§ 72.016 TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.39) (2000 Code, § 72.16)
§ 72.017 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, all signals required by the
provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm, shall be given
from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and the signals
shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (B)   As an alternative to division (A)(2) above, a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right
hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle or electric
bicycle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.40) (2000 Code, § 72.17)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.030 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) above is modified at
through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or R.C. Ch. 4511.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.41) (2000 Code, § 72.20)
§ 72.031 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.42) (2000 Code, § 72.21)
§ 72.032 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of- way.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.43) (2000 Code, § 72.22)
§ 72.033 STOP AT SIDEWALK AREA; STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private
road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.431(A))
   (B)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. §
4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law. The sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   The provisions of R.C. § 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the
driver of a vehicle on a private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed
in accordance with division (B) above and to a pedestrian crossing such a road
or driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (D)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (B) above, any
law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the stop sign
and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (E)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. §
4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:
      INTERSECTION. Means:
         (a)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         (b)   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet
or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      OWNER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      ROADWAY. Means that portion of a private road or driveway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.
If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways collectively.
(R.C. § 4511.432(A) through (C), (E))
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B), 4511.432(D))
(2000 Code, § 72.23)
   (G)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.431(B))
§ 72.034 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON PUBLIC HIGHWAY.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any
place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic
approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.44) (2000 Code, § 72.24)
§ 72.035 PEDESTRIAN ON SIDEWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right- of-way to any
pedestrian on a sidewalk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.441) (2000 Code, § 72.25)
§ 72.036 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to, and as close
as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE means a vehicle
used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust
whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (E), whoever
violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on
a first offense. On a second offense within one year after the first offense,
the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and, on each
subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45) (2000 Code, § 72.26)
   (E)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (A) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of a report under division (E)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         (b)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (A) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         (c)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may
issue a written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section based on a
report filed under division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         (b)   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(A) of this section based on a report filed under division (E)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (E):
         LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public safety
vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person
sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle used
by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules
of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
§ 72.037 FUNERAL PROCESSION HAS RIGHT- OF-WAY.
   (A)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles
accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the
daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying
a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any
direction.
   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. §
4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Ohio Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.451) (2000 Code, § 72.27)
§ 72.038 PEDESTRIANS YIELD RIGHT-OF- WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452) (2000 Code, § 72.28)
§ 72.039 PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right- of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of- way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if
required by R.C. § 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is
upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) above does not apply under the conditions stated in R.C.
§ 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.46) (2000 Code, § 72.29)
§ 72.040 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED TO BLIND PERSON.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (B)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.47) (2000 Code, § 72.30)
§ 72.041 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48) (2000 Code, § 72.31)
PEDESTRIANS
§ 72.055 PEDESTRIAN MOVEMENT IN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49)
(2000 Code, § 72.35)
§ 72.056 PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG HIGHWAY.
   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and § 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50) (2000 Code, § 72.36)
§ 72.057 PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITING RIDES; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, no person shall
stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The legislative authority, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance
of a permit to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of
the organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a
vehicle by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in R.C. §
4511.051(A)(1), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit
shall be valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the
permit, in any calendar year. The legislative authority also may specify the
locations where contributions may be solicited and may impose any other
restrictions on or requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations
are to be conducted that the legislative authority considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in division (B)(2) above, CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION means an
organization that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a currently
valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt status of the
organization pursuant to IRC § 501(c)(3).
   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 mph, unless either of the following applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (A) through (D) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) through (D) above is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(A) through (D) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (E) or (F) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.51) (2000 Code, § 72.37)
§ 72.058 PEDESTRIAN ON BRIDGE OR RAILROAD CROSSING.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511) (2000 Code, § 72.38)
§ 72.059 PERSONS OPERATING MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(R.C. § 4511.491) (2000 Code, § 72.39)
§ 72.060 INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED PEDESTRIAN HAZARD ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481) (2000 Code, § 72.40)
§ 72.061 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 mph or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (C)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS”.
   (E)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park district
commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or board, as applicable.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (C) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be fined $10;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of divisions (B) or (C) above or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to imposing
the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) above, shall do one of the
following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but not more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.    If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (F)(1)(b)1. above, issue an order prohibiting the offender from
operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
   (G)   As used in this code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 mph.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))
(2000 Code, § 72.41)
§ 72.062 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ELIGIBLE ENTITY. Means a corporation, partnership, association, firm,
sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. Means an electrically powered device to which
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         (b)   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         (c)   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         (d)   The device is equipped with technology that enables the
operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without
active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active
control or monitoring by a person.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. Means an agent of an eligible entity
who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the navigation
and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not include, with
respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal delivery device,
the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase also does not
include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal delivery
device for a delivery or other service.
   (B)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact
information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a
unique identification number;
         (b)   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         (c)   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (D)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         (a)   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         (b)   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction,
in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by
divisions (C)(1) to (C)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.063 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (D)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (F)   Notwithstanding division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low-speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514) Penalty, see §
70.99
GRADE CROSSINGS
§ 72.075 STOP SIGNS AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE means
signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed at a
public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an electrical
circuit.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
   (C)   (1)   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at a
railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
         (a)   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
         (b)   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013 and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) above does not apply to a railroad highway grade
crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from that division
because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
   (D)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to divisions (B) or (C) above,
the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less than 15, feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise due care before
proceeding across such grade crossing.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (D) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.61) (2000 Code, § 72.45)
§ 72.076 DRIVING VEHICLE ACROSS RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train or other on-track equipment.
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered.
         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train or other on-track equipment.
         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely
negotiate the crossing.
         (g)   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other on-track equipment.
         (h)   Approaching on-track equipment is emitting an audible signal or
is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
      (2)   (a)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(f) of this section exist at the
crossing.
         (b)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not recklessly proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in division (A)(1)(g) or (A)(1)(h) of this section exist at the
crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (2)   In lieu of a fine or jail term for a violation of this section, a
court may instead order the offender to attend and successfully complete a
remedial safety training or presentation regarding rail safety that is offered
by an authorized and qualified organization that is selected by the court. The
offender shall complete the presentation within a time frame determined by the
court, not to exceed 180 days after the court issues the order. The offender
shall notify the court of the successful completion of the presentation. When
the offender notifies the court of the successful completion of the
presentation, the court shall waive any fine or jail term that it otherwise
would have imposed for a violation of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.62) (2000 Code, § 72.46)
§ 72.077 VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the operator of
any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting a material or
materials required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 185,
before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle and,
while so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window and look in
both directions along the track for any approaching train or other on-track
equipment, and for signals indicating the approach of a train or other on-track
equipment, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping,
looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the
operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there
will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing and shall
not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
   (B)   This section does not apply at grade crossings when any local
authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities Commission
requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public Utilities
Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided in R.C. §
4511.63(B).
   (C)   As used in this section:
      BUS. Means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
      EXEMPT CROSSING. Means a highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
      SCHOOL VEHICLE. Means any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils
to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79, or
a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63) (2000 Code, § 72.47)
§ 72.078 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less mph or a vertical body or load clearance of less
than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon or across any
tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with divisions (A)
(1) and (A)(2) below.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped the
person shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train or other on-track equipment and for signals indicating the
approach of a train or other on-track equipment, and shall proceed only upon
exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagperson or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car or other on-track equipment.
   (B)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or structure
is not more than three mph, the person owning, operating, or moving the same
shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.64) (2000 Code, § 72.48)
SCHOOL BUSES
§ 72.090 REGULATIONS CONCERNING SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (B) below.
   (B)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped
or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending
programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate
the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading
areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when
children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading
at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head
start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and
stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by
the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) above.
   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above may be fined an amount not
to exceed $500. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(A) above is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and waive the
person’s right to contest the citation in a trial but instead must appear in
person in the proper court to answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or clerk of the
court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
      SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program offered
by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a head start
agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, is painted the
color and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is equipped
with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.77,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any
time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75) (2000 Code, § 72.80)
§ 72.091 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS; REPORT; INVESTIGATION; CITATION; WARNING.
   (A)   As used in this section, LICENSE PLATE includes but is not limited to
any temporary motor vehicle license registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182
or substantially equivalent law of another jurisdiction.
   (B)   When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has
violated R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the operator shall report the license plate number and general description of
the vehicle and of the operator of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency
exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged violation occurred. The
information contained in the report relating to the license plate number and to
the general description of the vehicle and the operator of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation may be supplied by any person with first-hand
knowledge of the information. Information of which the operator of the school
bus has first-hand knowledge also may be corroborated by any other person.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the report of the alleged violation of R.C. § 4511.75
(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the law enforcement
agency shall conduct an investigation to attempt to determine the identity of
the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. If the
identity of the operator at the time of the alleged violation is established,
the reporting of the license plate number of the vehicle shall establish
probable cause for the law enforcement agency to issue a citation for the
violation of R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance; however, if the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency
shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, except in the case of a leased or rented vehicle when the warning
shall be issued to the lessee at the time of the alleged violation.
(R.C. § 4511.751) (2000 Code, § 72.81)
§ 72.092 RESTRICTIONS ON THE OPERATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle used for pupil transportation within
this municipality in violation of the rules of the Ohio Department of Education
and Workforce or the Ohio Department of Public Safety. No person, being the
owner thereof, or having the supervisory responsibility therefor, shall permit
the operation of a vehicle used for pupil transportation within this
municipality in violation of the rules of the Ohio Department of Education and
Workforce or the Ohio Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   As used in this section, VEHICLE USED FOR PUPIL TRANSPORTATION means
any vehicle that is identified as such by the Ohio Department of Education and
Workforce by rule and that is subject to O.A.C. Chapter 3301-83.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.76, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.76(C), (H), (I)) (2000 Code, § 72.82)
§ 72.093 SCHOOL BUS INSPECTION.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof,
or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation of, a
school bus within this municipality, unless there is displayed thereon the
decals issued by the state highway patrol bearing the proper date of inspection
for the calendar year for which the inspection decals were issued.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.761, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.761) (2000 Code, § 72.83)
§ 72.094 SCHOOL BUS NOT USED FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, no person who is the owner
of a bus that previously was registered as a school bus that is used or is to
be used exclusively for purposes other than the transportation of children
shall operate the bus or permit it to be operated within this municipality
unless the bus has been painted a color different from that prescribed for
school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance and painted in such a way that the words “stop” and “school bus” are
obliterated.
   (B)   Any church bus that previously was registered as a school bus and is
registered under R.C. § 4503.07 may retain the paint color prescribed for
school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance if the bus complies with all of the following:
      (1)   The words “school bus” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or obliterated and the
bus is marked on the front and rear with the words “church bus” painted in
black lettering not less than ten inches in height.
      (2)   The automatically extending stop warning sign required by R.C. §
4511.75 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is removed and the
word “stop” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance is covered or obliterated.
      (3)   The flashing red and amber lights required by R.C. § 4511.771 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or removed.
      (4)   The inspection decal required by R.C. § 4511.761 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or removed.
      (5)   The identification number assigned under R.C. § 4511.764 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance and marked in black lettering on
the front and rear of the bus is covered or obliterated.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.762, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.762) (2000 Code, § 72.84)
§ 72.095 LICENSING BY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (A)   No person, partnership, association, or corporation shall transport
pupils to or from school on a school bus or enter into a contract with a board
of education of any school district for the transportation of pupils on a
school bus without being licensed by the Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.763) (2000 Code, § 72.85)
§ 72.096 REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof
or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation of a school
bus within this municipality unless there is displayed thereon an identifying
number in accordance with R.C. § 4511.764.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4511.63,
4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.764) (2000 Code, § 72.86)
§ 72.097 SCHOOL BUS MARKING.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof
or having supervisory responsibility therefor permit the operation of, a school
bus within this municipality unless it is painted national school bus yellow
and is marked on both front and rear with the words “school bus” in black
lettering not less than eight inches in height and on the rear of the bus with
the word “stop” in black lettering not less than ten inches in height.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.77, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend, for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.77) (2000 Code, § 72.87)
§ 72.098 FLASHING LIGHT SIGNAL LAMPS.
   (A)   Every school bus shall, in addition to any other equipment and
distinctive markings required pursuant to R.C. §§ 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764
and 4511.77, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, be equipped
with signal lamps mounted as high as practicable, which shall display to the
front two alternately flashing red lights and two alternately flashing amber
lights located at the same level and to the rear two alternately flashing red
lights and alternately flashing amber lights located at the same level, and
these lights shall be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight. The alternately
flashing red lights shall be spaced as widely as practicable, and the
alternately flashing amber lights shall be located next to them.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.771) (2000 Code, § 72.88)
§ 72.099 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE FOR OPERATOR.
   (A)   On and after May 6, 1986, no person, school board, or governmental
entity shall purchase, lease, or rent a new school bus unless the school bus
has an occupant restraining device, as defined in R.C. § 4513.263, installed
for use in its operator’s seat.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.772) (2000 Code, § 72.89)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 72.115 OBSTRUCTION AND INTERFERENCE AFFECTING VIEW AND CONTROL OF DRIVER.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70) (2000 Code, § 72.55)
§ 72.116 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         (a)   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         (b)   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, "viable communication" includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.701) (2000 Code, § 72.56)
§ 72.117 DRIVING UPON CLOSED HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (B)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (B) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 9.60.
      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D)) (2000 Code, § 72.57)
§ 72.118 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK AREA OR PATHS EXCLUSIVELY FOR BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an
electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to a law enforcement officer, or
other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, using
an electric bicycle with the motor engaged while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
(R.C. § 4511.711(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 4511.713(A))
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.711(B), 4511.713(B))
(2000 Code, § 72.58)
§ 72.119 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.712) (2000 Code, § 72.59)
§ 72.120 FOLLOWING AN EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC VEHICLE PROHIBITED; APPROACHING
STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.
   (A)   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited. The driver of any
vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle on official
business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle
traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park
the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to
a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer or a firefighter.
(R.C. § 4511.72(A))
   (B)   Approaching stationary public safety vehicle with caution.
      (1)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway
that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
         (b)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described
in division (B)(1)(a) above, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of that
type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be unsafe, the
driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the motor vehicle,
and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather, and traffic conditions.
      (2)   This division (B) does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle,
vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle
inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway
maintenance vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of
all persons and property upon the highway.
      (3)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) above when so required by this division (B).
(R.C. § 4511.213(A) through (C))
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
130.99 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor vehicle
in violation of division (B)(3) above, the court, in addition to all other
penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.213(D), 4511.72(B))
(2000 Code, § 72.60)
   (D)   The offense established under division (B) of this section is a strict
liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this
offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4511.213(E))
§ 72.121 DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.73) (2000 Code, § 72.61)
§ 72.122 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails,
or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (B)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles
which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or
upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway
by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
(R.C. § 4511.74(A), (B))
   (C)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (D)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road, or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (E)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture,
glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
(R.C. § 4511.82(A), (B), (D))
   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates division (A) above
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) above is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.74(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates divisions (C) or (D) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82(C))
(2000 Code, § 72.62)
§ 72.123 TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD-RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (B)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or child care
center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured
in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by divisions (A) or (B) above
to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a motor
vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is required
by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat
belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle
shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s
instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle safety
standards.
   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by divisions (A), (B), or
(C) above to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is being
transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle
as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States Department
of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or
assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly
restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards or in an
occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of divisions (C) or (D) above has been or is
being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of divisions (C) or (D) above or causing the arrest of
or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of divisions (C) or (D)
above, and absent another violation of law, a law enforcement officer’s view of
the interior or visual inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any
street or highway may not be used for the purpose of determining whether a
violation of divisions (C) or (D) above has been or is being committed.
   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (H)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731, a clinical nurse specialist or certified nurse
practitioner licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4723, or a
chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that
states that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under
this section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint
system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining device impossible or
impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and
appropriately restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of
the physician, nurse, or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this section.
   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A), (B), (C), or (D) above shall be
punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a motor
vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system, booster
seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that occurred
at the same time, on the same day, and at the same location is deemed to be a
single violation of this section:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(1)(b) below, the
offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $75.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of divisions (A), (B), (C), or (D) above or of a state
law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) above shall be
forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety Fund
created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) through (H), (K), (L)) (2000 Code, § 72.63)
§ 72.124 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      AUTOMOBILE. Means any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car,
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the “National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966", 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. § 1392.
      COMMERCIAL CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness,
or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or
passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is
occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      PASSENGER CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss to
person or property. The term includes a product liability claim, as defined in
R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91, but does
not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or another
agreement between persons.
      VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms set
forth above, VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (B)(3) below is wearing all of the available elements of a properly
adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         (a)   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         (b)   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         (c)   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (C)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (C)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (C)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (C)(3) or (C)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (C)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (D)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (B) above has been or is being committed or for the sole
purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the violation or for
causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (E)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (B) above shall be forwarded to the State Treasurer for
deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (F)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (F)(2) below, the failure of a person to wear
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device in violation of divisions (B)(1) or (B)(3) above or the failure of a
person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an automobile being
operated by that person is wearing all of the available elements of a properly
adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of division (B)(2) above
shall not be considered or used by the trier of fact in a tort action as
evidence of negligence or contributory negligence. But, the trier of fact may
determine based on evidence admitted consistent with the State Rules of
Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in the tort action
and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that represents non-
economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action that could have
been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device. Evidence of that
failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the person
other than a prosecution for a violation of this section; and shall not be
admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving the person other than a
prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car;
         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (G)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) above shall be fined $30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) above shall be subject to the
penalty set forth in §
70.99(B).
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) above shall be fined $20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B)(4) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(B)(4) above, whoever violates division (B)(4) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263) (2000 Code, § 72.64)
Cross-reference:
   Child restraint systems, see §
72.123
   Installation and sale of seat safety belts, see §
74.33
   School bus operators, restraining devices, see §
72.099
§ 72.125 USE OF ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The non-emergency use of engine brakes within the municipality is
prohibited.
   (B)   As used in this section, ENGINE BRAKES shall be defined to include but
is not limited to Jake Brakes, Jacobs Brakes, C Brakes, PacBrakes, TekBrakes,
and any other type of engine retarders commonly utilized within the trucking
industry.
   (C)   This section does not apply to emergency vehicles operated by fire,
police, or military units.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(2000 Code, § 72.65)
§ 72.126 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE WEARING EARPHONES OR EARPLUGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
      EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that are
built into protective headgear.
      EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (C)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84) (2000 Code, § 72.66)
§ 72.127 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES AND LIVERY SERVICES.
   (A)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall
not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance with
any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
   (B)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (C)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85) (2000 Code, § 72.67)
Statutory reference:
   Chauffeured limousine, motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. § 4503.24
   Proof of financial responsibility, see R.C. § 4509.80
§ 72.128 OPERATING TRACTION ENGINE UPON IMPROVED HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. As used in this section, “traction engine” or “tractor” applies to
all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (B)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (A), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 72.68)
§ 72.129 CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES; PEELING OUT.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling out”.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.130 SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across such property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on such property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.131 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person's body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person's duties;
      (3)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person's motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a traffic control signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person's ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person's body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person's body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person's body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person's body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person's body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person's body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person's body.
   (C)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (A) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer's law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender's race.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication device, an
unclassified misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (D)(1)
to (D)(5) of this section.
      (1)   The offender shall be fined, and is subject to a suspension of the
offender's driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in divisions (D)(1)(b), (D)(1)(c), (D)(1)(d),
and (D)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of
not more than $150.
         (b)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         (c)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         (d)   Notwithstanding divisions (D)(1)(a) to (D)(1)(c) of this
section, if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the
violation in a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with
R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law,
shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the
violation under division (D)(1)(a), (D)(1)(b), or (D)(1)(c) of this section, as
applicable.
      (2)   If the offender is in the category of offenders to whom division
(D)(1)(a) of this section applies, in lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under
division (D)(1)(a) of this section and the assessment of points under division
(D)(4) of this section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted
driving safety course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends
and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender's driver's license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court within 90 days of the violation of division (A) of this
section. However, successful completion of the course does not result in a
dismissal of the charges for the violation, and the violation is a prior
offense under divisions (D)(1)(b) and (D)(1)(c) of this section if the offender
commits a subsequent violation or violations of division (A) of this section
within two years of the offense for which the course was completed. This
division does not apply with respect to any offender in the category of
offenders to whom division (D)(1)(b), (D)(1)(c), or (D)(1)(d) of this section
applies.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (D)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (A) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (E)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (F)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person's body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (A) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator's electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         (a)   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         (b)   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant
to access the device;
         (c)   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Includes any of the following:
         (a)   A wireless telephone;
         (b)   A text-messaging device;
         (c)   A personal digital assistant;
         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
         (e)   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
         (f)   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed
or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or exchange
information or data.
      An "electronic wireless communications device" does not include a two-way
radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the federal
communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E), or (G).
      UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE FEATURE OR FUNCTION. A feature or function
that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications device
without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the
feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 72.132 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply to either of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) below, whoever violates
division (A) above shall be fined $150. In addition, the court shall impose a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license or permit for a
definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (D)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (E)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205)
§ 72.133 UNREASONABLY LOUD OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause
any unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises of such character,
intensity, or duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the community.
   (B)   No person shall accelerate any motor vehicle on the streets, lanes,
and ways of the village in such a manner as to cause the tires of the vehicle
on forward movement to squeal, peel, or leave tire markings on the pavement.
   (C)   No person shall accelerate a motor vehicle on the streets, lanes, and
ways of the village in such a manner as to cause the exhaust system of that
vehicle to emit a loud, cracking, or clattering noise unusual to the normal
operation of a motor vehicle.
   (D)   Every motor vehicle with an internal combustion engine shall at all
times be equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant
operation and no person shall use a muffler cutout, by-pass, or similar device
on a motor vehicle using the streets, lanes, and ways of the village.
   (E)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(1967 Code, § 73.06) (Ord. O-4-68, passed 3-11-1968) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 73: MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
Section
General Provisions
   
73.01   Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
   
73.02   Implied consent
   
73.03   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence
   
73.04   Driving commercial vehicle with impaired alertness or ability; use of
drugs
   
73.05   Reckless operation of vehicles
   
73.06   Reckless operation off streets and highways; competitive operation
   
73.07   Operator to be in reasonable control
   
73.08   Immobilizing or disabling device violation
   
73.09   Street racing, stunt driving and street takeovers prohibited
   
73.10   Speed limits
   
73.11   Slow speed or stopping
   
73.12   Emergency vehicles excepted from speed limitation
   
73.13   Speed regulations on bridges
   
73.14   Presenting false name or information to officer
   
73.15   Prohibition against resisting officer
   
73.16   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles
Stopping After Accident
   
73.30   Failure to stop after accident
   
73.31   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways
   
73.32   Accident involving damage to realty
   
73.33   Failure to report accident
Statutory reference:
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.01 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality,
if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them.
         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         (j)   Except as provided in division (K) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (six-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (six-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin metabolite (six-monoacetyl morphine) in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of
heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them the person has a concentration of marihuana
metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of marihuana
metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or any other
equivalent offense shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (A)(2)(a) above, being asked by a law enforcement officer
to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the officer
in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission to the test
or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate any vehicle within this
municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (C)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged
with a violation of divisions (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) above and a violation of
divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) above, but the person may not be convicted
of more than one violation of these divisions.
   (D)   (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for a violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood, oral
fluid, or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined
in R.C. § 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with
any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence
of the defendant.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) or
(B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the presence and concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them in the defendant's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, urine, oral fluid, or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged
violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three
hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified
in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect
the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period
of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as
described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the presence and
concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described
in this division when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine, oral fluid,
or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement officer
under R.C. § 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a
blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a
physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an
emergency medical technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath, oral fluid, or urine
specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse
to withdraw blood under this division, if in that person's opinion, the
physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood.
The bodily substance withdrawn under this division (D)(1)(b) shall be analyzed
in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(b) of this section, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN- PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (A)(1)(b), (A)(1)
(c), (A)(1)(d) and (A)(1)(e) above or less than the applicable concentration of
a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
specified for a violation of division (A)(1)(j) above, that fact may be
considered with other competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence
of the defendant. This division does not limit or affect a criminal prosecution
for a violation of division (B) above.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (D)(1)(b) above, the person tested may
have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical test or tests,
at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the request of a
law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as described in R.C. §
4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the person at the time of
the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken at the
person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest other than described in
R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the person to be tested, as
required under § 73.02, shall state that the person may have an independent
test performed at the person’s expense. The failure or inability to obtain an
additional chemical test by a person shall not preclude the admission of
evidence relating to the chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law
enforcement officer.
      (4)   (a)   As used in divisions (D)(4)(b) and (D)(4)(c) below, NATIONAL
HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration established as an administration of the United States Department
of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. § 105.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
divisions (D)(4)(b)1. or (D)(4)(b)2. above and if the testimony or evidence is
admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or
evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact
considers to be appropriate.
         (c)   Division (D)(4)(b) above does not limit or preclude a court, in
its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by probable
cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal prosecution or
juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division, from
considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by division
(D)(4)(b) of this section.
   (E)   (1)   Subject to division (E)(3) below, in any criminal prosecution or
juvenile court proceeding for a violation of divisions (A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c),
(A)(1)(d), (A)(1)(e), (A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g), (A)(1)(h), (A)(1)(i), or (A)(1)(j)
or (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) below or for an equivalent offense that is
substantially equivalent to any of those divisions, a laboratory report from
any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the Department of Health
authorizing an analysis as described in this division that contains an analysis
of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily
substance tested and that contains all of the information specified in this
division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the information and
statements that the report contains. The laboratory report shall contain all of
the following:
         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director of a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         (d)   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (E)(1) above is not
admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding, other
than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the prosecutor
has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if the
defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (E)(1) above shall not
be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any substance
if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains or the
defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. §§ 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. §§ 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician- paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (F)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-
INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 4765.01.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (A)(1)(a) through
(A)(1)(i) or (A)(2) above is guilty of operating a vehicle under the influence
of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever violates
division (A)(1)(j) above is guilty of operating a vehicle while under the
influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for either offense
under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or required by
divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) below:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (G)(1)(b), (G)(1)(c),
(G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) below, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties
and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) through (G)(1)(a)(iv).
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (A) of this section
or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) through (G)(1)(b)(v).
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (A) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) through (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (A) of
this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years
of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or
more violations of that nature, or an offender who previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C.
§ 2941.1413, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
         (e)   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) above who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the driver’s or
occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the conviction or
guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. § 4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   (a)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         (b)   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this division (G)
or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to grant limited
driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving privileges in
accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section requires the
court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender must display on
the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted license plates
that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in division (B) of
that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of the conditions of
the limited driving privileges granted to the offender, except as provided in
R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (A)
above shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under divisions (G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) above is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so imposed shall be
distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under this division
(G), the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this
division (G).
      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency
for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests
administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) of this section.
         (b)   The test or tests were of the offender's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, oral fluid, or urine.
         (c)   The test or tests indicated that the offender had one of the
following at the time of the offense:
            1.   A prohibited concentration of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance in the offender's whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine;
            2.   A drug of abuse or a metabolite of a drug of abuse in the
offender's oral fluid.
      (9)   A court may warn any person who is convicted of or who pleads
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or an equivalent offense
that a subsequent violation of this section or an equivalent offense that
results in the death of another or the unlawful termination of another's
pregnancy may result in the person being guilty of aggravated vehicular
homicide under R.C. § 2903.06. The court may warn the person of the applicable
penalties for that violation under R.C. §§ 2903.06 and 2929.142.
      (10)   As used in this division (G), ELECTRONIC MONITORING has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege form the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021
and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition
interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of
suspension as authorized under R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited
driving privileges under R.C. § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term
imposed under division (H)(1) of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (A)
of this section or other equivalent offenses, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for
the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the offender's
driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 130.99
(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the violation of division (B) of this section.
   (I)   (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment
program under this section unless the treatment program complies with the
minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. Ch. 5119 by
the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program; however, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (J)   If a person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section or R.C. §
4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person’s trial or sentence,
the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.
   (K)   Division (A)(1)(j) above does not apply to a person who operates a
vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount specified in
that division, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (L)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in division (A)(1)(j) above also
apply in a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the same manner
as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited concentration of
alcohol.
   (M)   All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to this section. If the
meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of the
same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as defined in R.C.
§ 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A) through (M))
   (N)   As used in this section, § 73.02 and § 73.03:
      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         (b)   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;
         (c)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender
was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         (d)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or R.C. § 2903.08 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those
divisions;
         (e)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4), R.C. §
2903.08(A)(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a
case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (f)   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         (g)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         (h)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         (i)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or R.C. § 1547.11(A).
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. Means an equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         (a)   A violation described in division (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of
the definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (N);
         (b)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         (c)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 6, 10, 20,
30, or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)(b),
or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of that
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      MUNICIPAL OVI ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL OVI OFFENSE. Mean any municipal
ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a  vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting
a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
(R.C. § 4511.181)
(2000 Code, § 73.01)
Cross-reference:
   Endangering children, see §
135.14
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 73.02 IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section:
         ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Means any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5119.01.
         PHYSICAL CONTROL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)   Any person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking within this
municipality or who is in physical control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have
given consent to a chemical test or tests of the person's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine to determine the alcohol, drug of
abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
oral fluid, or urine if arrested for a violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance.
      (3)   The chemical test or tests under division (A)(2) of this section
shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having
reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control
of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance identified in
division (A)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by which the
officer is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Any person who is dead or unconscious, or who otherwise is in a
condition rendering the person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed to have
consented as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, and the test or tests
may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 through 313.16.
      (5)   (a)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance and if the person if
convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (d),
or (e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and the
person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person's whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine. A law enforcement officer who
makes a request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical
test or tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required
to give the person the form described in division (C) of this section, but the
officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person
refuses to take a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable
means are necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise
the person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person's own expense. Divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) of
this section apply to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant
to this division.
         (b)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (A)(5)(a) of this section, the law enforcement
officer who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to
this division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, the arresting
law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance with this section to
any person under arrest for a violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance. The officer shall
give that advice in a written form that contains the information described in
division (C) of this section and shall read the advice to the person. The form
shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest
and read to the person by the arresting officer. One or more persons shall
witness the arresting officer’s reading of the form, and the witnesses shall
certify to this fact by signing the form. The person must submit to the
chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of the arresting officer,
within two hours of the time of the alleged violation and, if the person does
not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour time limit, the failure to
submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, if a person is
under arrest as described in division (B) of this section, before the person
may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to determine the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, the arresting officer shall read the
following form to the person:
You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state law or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of OVI or
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or municipal law
within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state OVI, and, if
you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased penalties if you
subsequently are convicted of the state OVI.
(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any chemical test
required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set by law, your
Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay
a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test taken at
your own expense.
   (D)   If the arresting law enforcement officer does not ask a person under
arrest as described in division (B) of this section or division (A)(5) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit of the person and immediately forward it
to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the
arrested person is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is
not in the person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it
to the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after
the arrest, and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the
license or permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge.
Upon receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
   (E)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (A)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (B) of this section
to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, if
the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the person
refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
person submits to the test or tests and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, the arresting officer
shall do all of the following:
         (a)   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the person
that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person, the
person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension will last at
least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which will be held
within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the issuance of a
citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the suspension at the
initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30 days after that
initial appearance;
         (b)   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
         (c)   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
         (d)   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
            1.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OVI ordinance or for being
in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance;
            3.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that the
officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests, advised
the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of submitting
to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the form
described in division (C) of this section;
            4.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged
offense.
            5.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (A)(5)
of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
arrested for a violation of §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who
is asked by a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests
under this section, and who submits to the test or tests, regardless of the
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance that the test results indicate is present in the person's whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine.
   (F)   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that is
completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the arrest,
or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person by
regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report, but
not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give an
unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest provided the
report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is sworn
to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48 hours
after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy of the
sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the
charge for which the person was arrested.
   (G)   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this section
is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it contains. It
shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the information and
statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197 relative to any
suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege that results from the arrest covered by the
report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
   (H)   (1)   A suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under this section for the
time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) is effective immediately from the
time at which the arresting officer serves the notice of suspension upon the
arrested person. Any subsequent finding that the person is not guilty of the
charge that resulted in the person’s being requested to take the chemical test
or tests under division (A) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (2)   If a person arrested for operating a vehicle in violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other municipal OVI
ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle in violation of §
73.03 or R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
regardless of whether the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. §
4511.191(B) or (C) or R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the
charge resulting from the arrest shall be held within five days of the persons’
arrest or the issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any
continuance granted by the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the
issues specified in that section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
(2000 Code, § 73.011)
Statutory reference:
   Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. §
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appealprocedures, occupational driving privileges, and Indigent Drivers Alcohol
Treatment Funds, see R.C. § 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
§ 73.03 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, PHYSICAL CONTROL means being in the driver’s
position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the vehicle’s
ignition key or other ignition device.
   (B)   No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the time of
the physical control, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), or (A)(1)(e).
      (3)   Except as provided in division (E) below, the person has a
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j).
   (C)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect what were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         (b)   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         (c)   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
divisions (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) above and if the testimony or evidence is
admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or
evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact
considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) above does not limit or preclude a court, in its
determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by probable cause
or its determination of any other matter in a criminal prosecution or juvenile
court proceeding of a type described in that division, from considering
evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by division (C)(1)
above.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having physical control of
a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In
addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
   (E)   Division (B)(3) above does not apply to a person who is in physical
control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the
person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds
the amount specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j) if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194) (2000 Code, § 73.012)
§ 73.04 DRIVING COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WITH IMPAIRED ALERTNESS OR ABILITY; USE OF
DRUGS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue,
illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive such
vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s
ability or alertness.
   (B)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a
driver in any such condition described in division (A) above to drive such
vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to one or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. §§
4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, or 4511.77 or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79) (2000 Code, § 73.02)
§ 73.05 RECKLESS OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.20) (2000 Code, § 73.05)
Cross-reference:
   License suspension, see §
71.25
§ 73.06 RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; COMPETITIVE OPERATION.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of
vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property
knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.201) (2000 Code, § 73.06)
Cross-reference:
   License suspension, see §
71.25
§ 73.07 OPERATOR TO BE IN REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202) (2000 Code, § 73.07)
§ 73.08 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44) (2000 Code, § 73.03)
§ 73.09 STREET RACING, STUNT DRIVING AND STREET TAKEOVERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      BURNOUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
vehicle is kept in a stationary position, but the wheels of the vehicle are
spun, which may cause the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit smoke
from the friction.
      DOUGHNUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
front or rear of the vehicle is rotated around the opposite set of wheels in a
continuous motion, which may cause a circular skid-mark pattern of rubber on
the driving surface, or the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit
smoke from the friction, or both.
      DRIFTING. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
vehicle is driven in a manner that causes a controlled, sideways skid during a
turn, with the front wheels pointing in a direction that is the opposite of the
direction of the turn.
      STREET RACING. The operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by
side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out-distance each other
or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course, from
the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the participating
vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds. The operation of two or
more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of prima facie lawful
speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) to (B)(9) or rapidly accelerating
from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawful
speeds shall be prima facie evidence of street racing.
      STREET TAKEOVER. Blocking or impeding the regular flow of vehicle or
pedestrian traffic on a public road, street, or highway or on private property
that is open to the general public for the purpose of street racing or stunt
driving.
      STUNT DRIVING. Performing or engaging in burnouts, doughnuts, drifting,
or wheelies, or allowing a passenger to ride either partially or fully outside
of the vehicle while operating that vehicle.
      WHEELIE. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the front
wheel or wheels of the vehicle are raised off of the ground or whereby two
wheels that are on the same side of the vehicle are raised off of the ground.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly participate in street racing, stunt driving,
or street takeover upon any public road, street, or highway, or on private
property that is open to the general public.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to
any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege for not less than 30 days or more
than three years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of
an offender's license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.
   (D)   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover shall be equally charged as the participants.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property when the political subdivision with jurisdiction
of the location or owner of the property knowingly permits such operation
thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.251) (2000 Code, § 73.13)
§ 73.10 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface, and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (B)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   (a)   Twenty mph in school zones during school recess and while
children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing hours,
and when 20 mph school speed limit signs are erected, except that on
controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line fence has
been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed by
division (B)(4) below, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line fence has been
erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed by divisions
(B)(10) and (B)(11) below. The end of every school zone may be marked by a sign
indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section or in the Manual and
Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control Devices shall be
construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs equipped with
flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the hours in which
the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         (b)   As used in this section, SCHOOL means all of the following:
            1.   Any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16;
            2.   Any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed
with the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce in compliance with O.A.C. §
3301-35-08, a copy of the school's report for the parents of the school's
pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for
nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to
the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone;
            3.   Any special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of such written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs;
            4.   Any preschool education program operated by an educational
service center that is located on a street or highway with a speed limit of 45
miles per hour or more, when the educational service center in writing requests
that the County Engineer create a school zone at the location of that program.
Upon receipt of such a written request, the County Engineer shall create a
school zone at that location by erecting the appropriate signs.
         (c)   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (B)(1)(c)1. through (B)(1)(c)3.
below shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (B)
(1)(a) and (B)(1)(c) above.
         (e)   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the meaning given that
term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         (f)   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the legislative
authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic,
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         (g)   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five mph in all other portions of the municipality, except
on state routes outside business districts, through highways outside business
districts, and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five mph on all state routes or through highways within the
municipality outside business districts, except as provided in divisions (B)(4)
and (B)(6) below;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality, except as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)
(14), (B)(15), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (B)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (B)(9) and (B)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (B)
(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty mph on state routes within the municipality outside urban
districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as further provided
in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen mph on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five mph on highways outside the municipality that are
within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty mph on two-lane state routes outside municipal corporations
as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour on freeways with paved shoulders inside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (B)(14) and (B)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty miles per hour on rural expressways with traffic control
signals and on all portions of rural divided highways, except as provided in
divisions (B)(13) and (B)(14) of this section;
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all rural expressways without traffic
control signals;
      (14)   Seventy miles per hour on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt, except as provided in division (B)(16) of this section;
      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways without traffic control signals in urbanized areas.
   (C)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)
(8) and (B)(9) above or any declared or established pursuant to this section by
the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person to exceed
any of the speed limitations in division (D) below. No person shall be
convicted of more than one violation below for the same conduct, although
violations of more than one provision of this section may be charged in the
alternative in a single affidavit.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and
(B)(16) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (B)(12) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (B)(13) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (B)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(B)(14) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (B)(14) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (E)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (C) above also the speed which divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)
(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) above, or a limit declared or
established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima facie
lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (F)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (D) above is alleged, the
defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act, with a
violation indicated of both divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)
(6), (B)(7), or (B)(8) above, or of a limit declared or established pursuant to
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local authorities, and of the
limitation in division (D) above. If the court finds a violation of division s
(B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a
limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has
occurred, it shall enter a judgment of conviction under such division and
dismiss the charge under division (D) above. If it finds no violation of
divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9)
above, or a limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. §
4511.21, it shall then consider whether the evidence supports a conviction
under division (D) above.
   (G)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (D) above in accordance with R.C. §
4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) through (G))
   (H)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.
   (I)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL BUS. Means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than
nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      DIVIDED. Means a roadway having two or more travel lanes for vehicles
moving in opposite directions and that is separated by a median of more than
four feet, excluding turn lanes.
      INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
      NONCOMMERCIAL BUS. Includes but is not limited to a school bus, or a
motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated with
a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate system
and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or group
of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      RURAL. Means an area outside urbanized areas and outside of a business or
urban district, and areas that extend within urbanized areas where the roadway
characteristics remain mostly unchanged from those outside the urbanized areas.
      URBANIZED AREA. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O))
   (J)   Speed limits for private roads and driveways.
      (1)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:
         (a)   The speed limit is not less than 25 mph and is indicated by a
sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the basic speed
limit sign included in the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;
         (b)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road
or driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road
or driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway
as provided in division (J)(1) above at a speed exceeding any speed limit
established and posted pursuant to division (J)(1) above.
      (3)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (J)(1) above a law enforcement officer may apprehend a person
violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of the means
described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of determining the
speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person with exceeding the
speed limit.
      (4)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for
violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division
(J)(1) above in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   As used in this division (J):
         OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to the
real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
         PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Does
not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
(R.C. § 4511.211(A) through (E))
   (K)   Penalties.
      (1)   Divisions (A) through (I).
         (a)   A violation of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) above
is one of the following:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(1)(a)2., (K)(1)
(a)3., (K)(1)(b), and (K)(1)(c) below, a minor misdemeanor;
            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of
divisions (A) through (I) above, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision of that
section, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of divisions (A) through (I) above, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision
of any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any
provision of that section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (b)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an
hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour
in other portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a
school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school's opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. This division does not apply if penalties may be imposed under division
(K)(1)(a)2. or (K)(1)(a)3. of this section.
         (c)   Notwithstanding division (K)(1)(a) above, if the offender
operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then posted in
accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two times the
usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the offender
alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
         (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
      (2)   Division (J).
         (a)   A violation of division (J)(2) above is one of the following:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(2)(a)2. and (K)
(2)(a)3. below, a minor misdemeanor;
            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (J)(2)
above R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division
(J)(2) above, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.211(F))
(2000 Code, § 73.10)
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of speed limits with approval of Director, see R.C. § 4511.21(H)
through (N)
   Arrest pending warrant when radar, electrical or mechanical timing device
used to determine violation, see R.C. § 4511.091
§ 73.11 SLOW SPEED OR STOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (B)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be
less than 30 mph, greater than 50 mph, nor effective until the provisions of
R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, relating to
appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and local authorities have obtained the
approval of the Director.
   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.22) (2000 Code, § 73.11)
§ 73.12 EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED FROM SPEED LIMITATION.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24) (2000 Code, § 73.12)
§ 73.13 SPEED REGULATIONS ON BRIDGES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this
section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which such structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.23) (2000 Code, § 73.14)
§ 73.14 PRESENTING FALSE NAME OR INFORMATION TO OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally communicate a
false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361) (2000 Code, § 73.16)
§ 73.15 PROHIBITION AGAINST RESISTING OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any sheriff,
constable, or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this Title VII. No person shall interfere with
any person charged under any provision of this Title VII with the enforcement
of the law relative to public highways.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.36)
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
(2000 Code, § 73.15)
§ 73.16 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER- SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 mph.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         (a)   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 mph and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (E) below;
         (b)   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 mph.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under- speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 mph;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 mph.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
   (E)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 mph;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini- truck on the public streets or highways to submit
the vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Ch. 4503, and are titled in accordance with R.C. Ch.
4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (F)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
   (G)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (F) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.112.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (H)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (H) and divisions (E) and
(F) above, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini- truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini- truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (H) shall be penalized as provided
in division (D) above.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT
§ 73.30 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         (a)   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         (b)   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         (c)   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (A)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(2000 Code, § 73.20) (R.C. § 4549.02)
§ 73.31 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (A)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (A)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021) (2000 Code, § 73.21)
§ 73.32 ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours after accident, shall
forward to the police department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of failure to stop
after an accident involving the property of others, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03) (2000 Code, § 73.22)
§ 73.33 FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   (A)   No person shall fail to report a motor vehicle accident as required
under state or local law.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4509.74) (2000 Code, § 73.23)
CHAPTER 74: EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
74.01   Unsafe vehicles, prohibition against operation
   
74.02   Bumpers on motor vehicles
   
74.03   Lighted lights required
   
74.04   Headlights
   
74.05   Tail lights and illumination of rear license plate
   
74.06   Red reflectors required
   
74.07   Safety lighting of commercial vehicles
   
74.08   Stoplight regulations
   
74.09   Obscured lights on vehicles
   
74.10   Red light or flag required
   
74.11   Lights on parked vehicles
   
74.12   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles
   
74.13   Spotlight and auxiliary driving lights
   
74.14   Cowl, fender, and back-up lights
   
74.15   Two lights displayed
   
74.16   Headlights required
   
74.17   Lights of less intensity
   
74.18   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
   
74.19   Standards for lights on snow removal equipment and oversize vehicles
   
74.20   Flashing lights permitted for certain types of vehicles
   
74.21   Lights and sign on transportation for preschool children
   
74.22   Focus and aim of headlights
   
74.23   Brake equipment; specifications
   
74.24   Brake fluid
   
74.25   Minimum standards for brakes and components
   
74.26   Horns, sirens, and warning devices
   
74.27   Mufflers; excessive smoke or gas
   
74.28   Rearview mirrors
   
74.29   Windshields and wipers
   
74.30   Solid tire requirements
   
74.31   Requirements for safety glass in motor vehicles; use of tinted glass or
reflectorized material
   
74.32   Directional signals
   
74.33   Installation and sale of seat safety belts required; definition
   
74.34   Requirements for extra signal equipment
   
74.35   Display of warning devices on disabled vehicles
   
74.36   Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives
   
74.37   Safety inspection decals for buses
   
74.38   Air bags
Loads
   
74.50   Permit required to exceed load limits
   
74.51   Limitation of load extension on left side of vehicle
   
74.52   All loads shall be properly secured
   
74.53   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
   
74.54   Weighing of vehicle; removal of excess load
   
74.55   Operation of vehicle exceeding weight limits prohibited
   
74.56   Load limits
   
74.57   Maximum width, height, and length
   
74.58   Statement of gross vehicle weight
   
74.59   Wheel protectors required on heavy commercial vehicles
   
74.60   Liability for damages; prosecution; application of monies
   
74.61   Weight exceptions for certain vehicles
Statutory reference:
   Exemption of certain vehicles from emission, noise control and fuel
standards, see R.C. § 4513.41
   Exemption of collector’s or historical vehicles from equipment standards,
see R.C. § 4513.38
   Motorcycles, protective eye devices required for operators and passengers;
helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. § 4501-17-01
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Snowmobiles and all-purpose vehicles, equipment, see O.A.C. § 4501-29-01
   Vehicle lighting, see O.A.C. Ch. 4501-15
EQUIPMENT
§ 74.01 UNSAFE VEHICLES, PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H)) (2000 Code, § 74.01)
§ 74.02 BUMPERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. Means the manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.
      MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. Means a motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed
either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road
operation.
      PASSENGER CAR. Means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      TRUCK. Means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semi-trailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
R.C. Ch. 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (C)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
   (D)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs:
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not
apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.021) (2000 Code, § 74.02)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Ch. 4501-43
§ 74.03 LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 to 4513.37 during all of the following
times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (B)   (1)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted
lights meeting the rules adopted by the State Director of Public Safety under
R.C. § 4511.521.
      (2)   No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall
be operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking
lights as illumination.
   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) above has been or is being
committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for
a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03) (2000 Code, § 74.03)
§ 74.04 HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04) (2000 Code, § 74.04)
§ 74.05 TAIL LIGHTS AND ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05) (2000 Code, § 74.05)
§ 74.06 RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and
so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to
50 feet from such vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06) (2000 Code, § 74.06)
§ 74.07 SAFETY LIGHTING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semi-trailers, and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any
such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a
distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07) (2000 Code, § 74.07)
§ 74.08 STOPLIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to
the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. § 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.071) (2000 Code, § 74.08)
§ 74.09 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08) (2000 Code, § 74.09)
§ 74.10 RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09) (2000 Code, § 74.10)
§ 74.11 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(2000 Code, § 74.11)
§ 74.12 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BOAT TRAILER. Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm machinery,
road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the manufacturer to
operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does not include a
bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (B)(2) of this section:
         (a)   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         (b)   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (B)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   (a)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi-wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         (b)   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (B)(3)(a) of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (B)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (B) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (C)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         (a)   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         (b)   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (C)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         (a)   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance
work in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         (b)   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(C) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         (b)   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         (c)   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (D)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         (a)   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         (b)   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         (a)   The SMV emblem;
         (b)   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (E)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         (a)   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         (b)   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         (c)   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   (a)   Divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         (b)   No operator described in division (E)(4)(a) of this section
shall operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with
and displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         (c)   As used in division (E)(4) of this section, "animal-drawn
agricultural equipment" means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an
animal that is used solely for agricultural purposes. "Animal-drawn
agricultural equipment" includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (E) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (F)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115) (2000 Code, § 74.12)
§ 74.13 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12) (2000 Code, § 74.13)
§ 74.14 COWL, FENDER, AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13) (2000 Code, § 74.14)
§ 74.15 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (A)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14) (2000 Code, § 74.15)
§ 74.16 HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15) (2000 Code, § 74.16)
§ 74.17 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided that
such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 mph.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.16) (2000 Code, § 74.17)
§ 74.18 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         (a)   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         (b)   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         (c)   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         (d)   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
         (e)   A vehicle being used for emergency preparedness, response, and
recovery activities, as those terms are defined in R.C. § 5502.21, that is
equipped with and displays, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber
or red and white light, provided that the vehicle is being operated by a person
from one of the following and the vehicle is clearly marked with the applicable
agency's or authority's insignia:
            1.   The Ohio Emergency Management Agency;
            2.   A countywide emergency management agency established under
R.C. § 5502.26;
            3.   A regional authority for emergency management established
under R.C. § 5502.27;
            4.   A program for emergency management established under R.C. §
5502.271.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (D)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), an emergency management agency vehicle, as described in
division (C)(2)(e) of this section, or a school bus, no person shall operate,
move, or park upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public
street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying
a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
   (F)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle
operated by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle
or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a
distance of not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing,
oscillating or rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of
the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor
vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the
stoppage of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
      (2)   This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.171)
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4513.17(F), 4513.171(B))
(2000 Code, § 74.18)
§ 74.19 STANDARDS FOR LIGHTS ON SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT AND OVERSIZE VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway unless
the lights thereon comply with and are lighted when and as required by the
standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Transportation pursuant
to R.C. § 4513.18.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.18) (2000 Code, § 74.19)
§ 74.20 FLASHING LIGHTS PERMITTED FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.
   Rural mail delivery vehicles, state highway survey vehicles, and funeral
escort vehicles are permitted to use flashing lights.
(R.C. § 4513.181) (2000 Code, § 74.20)
§ 74.21 LIGHTS AND SIGN ON TRANSPORTATION FOR PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten, or child care center, while transporting
preschool children to or from such an institution unless the motor vehicle is
equipped with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar
attached to the top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation "caution
– children", which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing
lights in such a manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind
the vehicle. The lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications
adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(2000 Code, § 74.21)
§ 74.22 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19) (2000 Code, § 74.22)
§ 74.23 BRAKE EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         (b)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight
of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semi-trailers
equipped with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes
in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and
developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest
rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the
rearmost brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used
alternatively, may be employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semi-trailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         (a)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 mph.
         (b)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 mph.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(2000 Code, § 74.23)
§ 74.24 BRAKE FLUID.
   (A)   No hydraulic brake fluid for use in motor vehicles shall be sold in
this municipality if the brake fluid is below the minimum standard of
specifications for heavy duty type brake fluid established by the society of
automotive engineers and the standard of specifications established by 49
C.F.R. § 571.116, as amended.
   (B)   All manufacturers, packers, or distributors of brake fluid selling
such fluid in this municipality shall state on the containers that the brake
fluid meets or exceeds the applicable minimum SAE standard of specifications,
and the standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.116, as
amended.
(R.C. § 4513.201)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(2000 Code, § 74.24)
§ 74.25 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BRAKES AND COMPONENTS.
   (A)   No brake lining, brake lining material, or brake lining assemblies for
use as repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall be sold in this
municipality if these items do not meet or exceed the minimum standard of
specifications established by the Society of Automotive Engineers and the
standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.105, as amended, and
49 C.F.R. § 571.135, as amended.
   (B)   All manufacturers or distributors of brake lining, brake lining
material, or brake lining assemblies selling these items for use as repair and
replacement parts in motor vehicles shall state that the items meet or exceed
the applicable minimum standard of specifications.
   (C)   As used in this section, MINIMUM STANDARD OF SPECIFICATIONS means a
minimum standard for brake system or brake component performance that meets the
need for motor vehicle safety and complies with the applicable SAE standards
and recommended practices, and the federal motor vehicle safety standards that
cover the same aspect of performance for any brake lining, brake lining
material, or brake lining assemblies.
(R.C. § 4513.202)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(2000 Code, § 74.25)
§ 74.26 HORNS, SIRENS, AND WARNING DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21) (2000 Code, § 74.26)
§ 74.27 MUFFLERS; EXCESSIVE SMOKE OR GAS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22) (2000 Code, § 74.27)
§ 74.28 REARVIEW MIRRORS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.23) (2000 Code, § 74.28)
§ 74.29 WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus,
with any sign, poster, or other non-transparent material upon the front
windshield, sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a
certificate or other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there
may be in the lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign,
poster, or decal not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width.
         (b)   No sign, poster, or decal shall be displayed in the front
windshield in such a manner as to conceal the vehicle identification number for
the motor vehicle when, in accordance with federal law, that number is located
inside the vehicle passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable
through the vehicle glazing without moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a "vehicle safety technology" as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a "vehicle safety technology" as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24) (2000 Code, § 74.29)
§ 74.30 SOLID TIRE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every solid tire, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, on a vehicle shall
have rubber or other resilient material on its entire traction surface at least
one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery.
(R.C. § 4513.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(2000 Code, § 74.30)
§ 74.31 REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFETY GLASS IN MOTOR VEHICLES; USE OF TINTED GLASS OR
REFLECTORIZED MATERIAL.
   (A)   Safety glass.
      (1)   No person shall sell any new motor vehicle nor shall any new motor
vehicle be registered, and no person shall operate any motor vehicle, which is
registered in this state and which has been manufactured or assembled on or
after January 1, 1936, unless the motor vehicle is equipped with safety glass,
wherever glass is used in the windshields, doors, partitions, rear windows, and
windows on each side immediately adjacent to the rear window.
      (2)   As used in this section, SAFETY GLASS means any product composed of
glass so manufactured, fabricated, or treated as substantially to prevent
shattering and flying of the glass when it is struck or broken, or such other
or similar product as may be approved by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
      (3)   Glass other than safety glass shall not be offered for sale, or
sold for use in, or installed in any door, window, partition, or windshield
that is required by this section to be equipped with safety glass.
(R.C. § 4513.26)
   (B)   Tinted or reflectorized material.
      (1)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
      (2)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle, any glass or
other material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or
of any rule adopted under that section.
      (3)   (a)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform
to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
         (b)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in
R.C. § 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Ch.
4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
      (4)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.
      (5)   This division (B) does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or
glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance
with or permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.
      (6)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (B) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
R.C. Ch. 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division, CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
      (7)   This division (B) does not apply to any school bus that is to be
sold and operated outside the municipality.
      (8)   (a)   This division (B) does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a
law enforcement agency when the motor vehicle is used by the law enforcement
agency for a purpose within the scope of the law enforcement agency's duties.
         (b)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) through (J))
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1),(B)(3)(b) or (B)(4) above is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3)(a) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity at
the time of sale.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         (b)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (B)(2) above is liable in a civil action to the owner
of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or material
for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the installation of the
nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the civil action, and
attorney fees.
         (c)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (B)(2) above and the offender is a motor vehicle repair operator
registered under R.C. Ch. 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C.
Ch. 4517, whoever violates division (B)(2) above is subject to a registration
or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K))
(2000 Code, § 74.31)
Statutory reference:
   Regulations, see O.A.C. Ch. 4501-41
   Recording and reporting violations, certain court requirements, see R.C. §
4513.241(L)
§ 74.32 DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with
electrical or mechanical directional signals.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the vehicle is
equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.
   (B)   As used in this section, DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS means an electrical or
mechanical signal device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn
either to the right or to the left and which shall be visible from both the
front and rear.
   (C)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self- illuminating devices when
in use at the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.261) (2000 Code, § 74.22)
§ 74.33 INSTALLATION AND SALE OF SEAT SAFETY BELTS REQUIRED; DEFINITION.
   (A)   As used in this section and in R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the component parts of a seat safety belt
include a belt, anchor attachment assembly, and a buckle or closing device.
   (B)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate any passenger car, as
defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this
state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1962, unless
the passenger car is equipped with sufficient anchorage units at the attachment
points for attaching at least two sets of seat safety belts to its front seat.
Such anchorage units at the attachment points shall be of such construction,
design, and strength to support a loop load pull of not less than 4,000 pounds
for each belt.
   (C)   No person shall sell, lease, or rent any passenger car, as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this state and
that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1966, unless the
passenger car has installed in its front seat at least two seat safety belt
assemblies.
   (D)   After January 1, 1966, neither any seat safety belt for use in a motor
vehicle nor any component part of any such seat safety belt shall be sold in
this municipality unless the seat safety belt or the component part satisfies
the minimum standard of specifications established by the society of automotive
engineers for automotive seat belts and unless the seat safety belt or
component part is labeled so as to indicate that it meets those minimum
standard specifications.
   (E)   Each sale, lease, or rental in violation of this section constitutes a
separate offense.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.262) (2000 Code, § 74.33)
Statutory reference:
   Child restraint systems, regulations, see O.A.C. Ch. 4501-37
§ 74.34 REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA SIGNAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor truck, bus, or commercial tractor
upon any highway at any time from sunset to sunrise unless there is carried in
such vehicle, except as provided in division (B) below, the following equipment
which shall be of the types approved by the Director of Transportation.
      (1)   At least three flares or three red reflectors or three red electric
lanterns, each of which is capable of being seen and distinguished at a
distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions at nighttime;
      (2)   At least three red-burning fusees, unless red reflectors or red
electric lanterns are carried;
      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than two inches square, with
standards to support them;
      (4)   The type of red reflectors shall comply with such standards and
specifications in effect on September 16, 1963, or later established by the
Interstate Commerce Commission and must be certified as meeting such standards
by Underwriters Laboratories.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions
stated in this section any motor vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids
in bulk, or in transporting compressed flammable gases, unless there is carried
in such vehicle three red electric lanterns or three red reflectors meeting the
requirements stated in division (A) above.
      (2)   There shall not be carried in any such vehicle any flare, fusee, or
signal produced by a flame.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person who operates any motor
vehicle in a work area designated by protection equipment devices that are
displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.
(R.C. § 4513.27)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
(2000 Code, § 74.34)
§ 74.35 DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer, or pole trailer is disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway
and connecting, entering, or exiting ramps within the municipality, at any time
when lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the operator of such vehicle shall
display the following warning devices upon the highway during the time the
vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided in division (B) below:
      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the
traffic side of such vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or red reflectors
are displayed.
      (2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly as possible,
three lighted flares or pot torches, or three red reflectors or three red
electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows:
         (a)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet in
advance of the vehicle;
         (b)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the
rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this section, each in the center of
the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle;
         (c)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a highway at
any time or place mentioned in division (A) above, the driver of such vehicle
shall display upon the roadway the following warning devices:
      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be immediately
placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle;
      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or two other red reflectors shall
be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same manner prescribed
for flares in division (A) above.
   (C)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) above is disabled,
the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by flame as warning signals
is prohibited.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled
upon any freeway, expressway, thruway, and connecting, entering, or exiting
ramps within the municipality, at any time when the display of fusees, flares,
red reflectors, or electric lanterns is not required, the operator of such
vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the lane of traffic
occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distance of 40 paces or
approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a distance of 40
paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle, except as provided
in this section.
   (E)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors, and flags to be
displayed as required in this section shall conform with the applicable
requirements of R.C. § 4513.27 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (F)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a hill, or
other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector, or lantern in that
direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the
highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or approximately
100 feet nor more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from the disabled
vehicle.
   (G)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in a work
area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and used in
accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation under
R.C. § 4511.09.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.28) (2000 Code, § 74.35)
§ 74.36 REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than
24 inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches
high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with Section 177.823 of the
United States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.37 SAFETY INSPECTION DECALS FOR BUSES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BUS.
         (a)   Means any vehicle used for the transportation of passengers that
meets at least one of the following:
            1.   Was originally designed by the manufacturer to transport more
than 15 passengers, including the driver;
            2.   Either the gross vehicle weight rating or the gross vehicle
weight exceeds 10,000 pounds.
         (b)   The term does not include a church bus as defined in R.C. §
4503.07 or a school bus unless the church bus or school bus is used in the
transportation of passengers by a motor carrier.
         (c)   The term also does not include any of the following:
            1.   Any vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails;
            2.   A trolley bus operated by electric power derived from a fixed
overhead wire furnishing local passenger transportation similar to street-
railway service;
            3.   Vehicles owned or leased by government agencies or political
subdivisions.
      MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01
(R.C. § 4513.50)
   (B)   Safety inspection decals.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) above, on and after July 1,
2001, no person shall operate a bus, nor shall any person being the owner of a
bus or having supervisory responsibility for a bus, permit the operation of any
bus unless the bus displays a valid, current safety inspection decal issued by
the State Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4513.52.
      (2)   For the purpose of complying with the requirements of this section
and R.C. § 4513.52, the owner or other operator of a bus may drive the bus
directly to an inspection site conducted by the State Highway Patrol and
directly back to the person’s place of business without a valid registration
and without displaying a safety inspection decal, provided that no passengers
may occupy the bus during such operation.
(R.C. § 4513.51(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 4513.51(D))
§ 74.38 AIR BAGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
      COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or similar to
the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the authorization of
the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
         (a)   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         (b)   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         (c)   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (B)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (E)   (1)   (a)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (D) above is guilty of
improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense.
         (b)   On each subsequent offense, or if the violation results in
serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (C) above is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(2000 Code, § 74.36) (R.C. § 4549.20)
LOADS
§ 74.50 PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCEED LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
         (a)   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.
         (b)   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
         (c)   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
      (2)   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a permit
under division (A)(1) above, the municipality, with respect to highways under
its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good cause shown, may
issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to operate or move
a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load
exceeding the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or
otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37, upon any
highway under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may
move the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any
highway that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly
within and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local
authority shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee
or other charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4513.34(B)(3), permits may be issued
for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its
discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction
project.
   (C)   (1)   The application for a permit issued under this section shall be
in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe a
permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a
non-divisible load.
      (3)   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director
under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle,
are deemed a non-divisible load. The Director shall adopt rules establishing
requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to the
requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Ch. 5501:2-1.
   (D)   (1)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (A)(1) above upon application and payment of the
applicable fee; however, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (A)(2) above.
      (2)   If a permit is to be issued, the municipality may limit or
prescribe conditions of operation for the vehicle and may require the posting
of a bond or other security conditioned upon the sufficiency of the permit fee
to compensate for damage caused to the roadway or a street or highway
structure.
      (3)   In addition, the municipality, as a condition of issuance of an
overweight permit, may require the applicant to develop and enter into a mutual
agreement with the municipality to compensate for or to repair excess damage
caused to the roadway by travel under the permit.
   (E)   (1)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting
the permit.
      (2)   No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
   (F)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
   (G)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
   (H)   (1)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to gross load limits.
      (2)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
      (3)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
   (I)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit; however, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
Statutory reference:
   Overweight or oversized vehicles, state permit regulations, see O.A.C. Ch.
5501:2-1
§ 74.51 LIMITATION OF LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.52 ALL LOADS SHALL BE PROPERLY SECURED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or
water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.53 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a
white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 mph or less, and vehicles designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 mph or less, shall have
a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch mounted on the towing
vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials as provided in this section may be towed or
drawn at one time except as follows:
         (a)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         (b)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (C)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to a any of the following:
         (a)   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         (b)   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         (c)   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (C)(1)(a) of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
§ 74.54 WEIGHING OF VEHICLE; REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.
   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and its load is unlawful may require the driver of the vehicle to stop
and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact, self-contained, portable,
sealed scale specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed location, having a
load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
highway vehicles; a sealed scale, permanently installed in a fixed location,
having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the combined
load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive axles of a highway
vehicle; or a sealed scale adapted to weighing highway vehicles, loaded or
unloaded.
   (B)   The driver of the vehicle shall, if necessary, be directed to proceed
to the nearest available sealed scales to accomplish the weighing, provided the
scales are within three miles of the point where the vehicle is stopped.
   (C)   Any vehicle stopped in accordance with this section may be held by the
police officer for a reasonable time only to accomplish the weighing as
prescribed by this section.
   (D)   All scales used in determining the lawful weight of a vehicle and its
load shall be annually compared by a municipal, county or state sealer with the
state standards or standards approved by the state, and the scales shall not be
sealed if they do not conform to the state standards or standards approved by
the state.
   (E)   At each end of a permanently installed scale, there shall be a
straight approach in the same plane as the platform, of sufficient length and
width to ensure the level positioning of vehicles during weight determinations.
During determination of weight by compact, self-contained, portable, sealed
scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways, they shall always be used on a level terrain of sufficient length and
width to accommodate the entire vehicle being weighed. Such terrain shall be
level, or if not level, it shall be of such elevation that the difference in
elevation between the wheels on any one axle does not exceed two inches and the
difference in elevation between axles being weighed does not exceed one-quarter
inch per foot of the distance between such axles.
   (F)   In all determinations of all weights, except gross weight, by compact,
self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the
wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all successive axles, 12 feet or less
apart, shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale under the
outside wheel of each such axle. In determinations of gross weight by the use
of compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to
determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all axles shall be weighed
simultaneously by placing one such scale under the outside wheel of each axle.
   (G)   Whenever an officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that
the weight is unlawful, he or she may require the driver to stop the vehicle in
a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed
as is necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted
under R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.14 and this chapter.
(R.C. § 4513.33)
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of weight limits, approval of Director required, see R.C. §
4513.33
§ 74.55 OPERATION OF VEHICLE EXCEEDING WEIGHT LIMITS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move a traction engine, steam roller, or
other vehicle, load, object or structure, whether propelled by muscular or
motor power, over or upon the improved public streets, highways, bridges, or
culverts in this municipality, that weighs in excess of the weights prescribed
in this subchapter or R.C. §§ 5577.01 et seq., unless the person has been
issued a permit under R.C. § 4513.34, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. The prohibition in this section applies regardless of whether the
weight is moved upon wheels, rollers, or otherwise. Any weight determination
shall include the weight of the vehicle, object, structure, contrivance, and
load.
(R.C. § 5577.02)
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be
fined $80 for the first 2,000 pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload; for
overloads in excess of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds, such
person shall be fined $100, and in addition thereto $1 per 100 pounds of
overload; for overloads in excess of 5,000 pounds but not in excess of 10,000
pounds, such person shall be fined $130, and in addition thereto $2 per 100
pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For all
overloads in excess of 10,000 pounds, such person shall be fined $160, and in
addition thereto $3 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30
days, or both.
      (2)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of vehicle and load relating
to gross load limits shall be fined not less than $100. No penalty prescribed
in this division (B)(2) shall be imposed on any vehicle combination if the
overload on any one axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds, and if the immediately
preceding or following axle, excepting the front axle of the vehicle
combination, is underloaded by the same or greater amount. For purposes of this
division (B)(2), two axles on one vehicle less than eight feet apart shall be
considered as one axle.
(R.C. § 5577.99(A))
§ 74.56 LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   Weight of load; width of tire. No person, firm or corporation shall
transport over the improved public streets, alleys, intercounty highways, state
highways, bridges or culverts in this municipality, in any vehicle propelled by
muscular, motor or other power, any burden, including weight of vehicle and
load, greater than the following:
      (1)   (a)   In vehicles having metal tires three inches or less in width,
a load of 500 pounds for each inch of the total width of the tire on all
wheels;
         (b)   When the tires on such vehicles exceed three inches in width, an
additional load of 800 pounds shall be permitted for each inch by which the
total width of the tires on all wheels exceeds 12 inches.
      (2)   In vehicles having tires of rubber or other similar substance, for
each inch of the total width of tires on all wheels, as follows.
 
Tire Width  Load Limits
(in inches) (in pounds)
3.5         450
6 and over  650
 
      (3)   The total width of tires on all wheels shall be, in the case of
solid tires of rubber or other similar substance, the actual width in inches of
all such tires between the flanges at the base of the tires, but in no event
shall that portion of tire coming in contact with the road surface be less than
two-thirds the width so measured between the flanges.
      (4)   In the case of pneumatic tires, of rubber or other similar
substance, the total width of tires on all wheels shall be the actual width of
all such tires, measured at the widest portion thereof when inflated and not
bearing a load.
      (5)   In no event shall the load, including the proportionate weight of
vehicle that can be concentrated on any wheel, exceed 650 pounds to each inch
in width of the tread as defined in this division (A) for solid tires, or each
inch in the actual diameter of pneumatic tires measured when inflated and not
bearing a load.
(R.C. § 5577.03)
   (B)   Vehicles with pneumatic tires, load limits.
      (1)   The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of any vehicle, load,
object or structure operated or moved upon improved public highways, streets,
bridges or culverts shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of pneumatic
tire, measured as prescribed by division (A) above.
      (2)   The weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that
is part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not
exceed any of the following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;
         (b)   On any tandem axle, 34,000 pounds;
         (c)   On any two or more consecutive axles, the maximum weight as
determined by application of the formula provided in division (B)(3) below.
      (3)   (a)   For purposes of division (B)(2)(c) above, the maximum gross
weight on any two or more consecutive axles shall be determined by application
of the following formula
W = 500[(LN/–1) + 12N + 36]
         (b)   In this formula, W equals the overall gross weight on any group
of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L equals the
distance in rounded whole feet between the extreme of any group of two or more
consecutive axles, and N equals the number of axles in the group under
consideration; however, two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross
load of 34,000 pounds each, provided the overall distance between the first and
last axles of such consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (B)(9) below, the weight of vehicle
and load imposed upon a road surface that is not part of the interstate system
by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not exceed any of the following weight
limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds.
         (b)   On any two successive axles:
            1.   Spaced four feet or less apart, and weighed simultaneously,
24,000 pounds;
            2.   Spaced more than four feet apart, and weighed simultaneously,
34,000 pounds, plus 1,000 pounds per foot or fraction thereof, over four feet,
not to exceed 40,000 pounds.
         (c)   On any three successive load- bearing axles designed to equalize
the load between such axles and spaced so that each such axle of the three-axle
group is more than four feet from the next axle in the three-axle group and so
that the spacing between the first axle and the third axle in the three- axle
group is no more than nine feet, and with such load-bearing three-axle group
weighed simultaneously as a unit:
            1.   A weight of 48,000 pounds, with the total weight of the
vehicle and load not exceeding 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900 pounds for
each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle;
            2.   As an alternative to division (B)(4)(c)1. above, 42,500
pounds, if part of a six-axle vehicle combination with at least 20 feet of
spacing between the front axle and rearmost axle, with the total weight of the
vehicle and load not exceeding 54,000 pounds plus an additional 600 pounds per
each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle.
         (d)   The total weight of the vehicle and load utilizing any
combination of axles, other than as provided for three-axle groups in this
division (B)(4), shall not exceed 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900 pounds
for each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle.
      (5)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) above, the maximum
overall gross weight of a vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface shall
not exceed 80,000 pounds.
      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between nearest axles of the respective vehicles
to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet.
      (7)   As used in division (B)(2) above, TANDEM AXLE means two or more
consecutive axles whose centers may be included between parallel transverse
vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches but not more than 96 inches apart,
extending across the full width of the vehicle.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to passenger bus type vehicles
operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through
306.54.
      (9)   Either divisions (B)(2) or (B)(4) above applies to the weight of a
vehicle and its load imposed upon any road surface that is not a part of the
interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires. As between divisions (B)(2)
and (B)(4) above, only the division that yields the highest total gross vehicle
weight limit shall be applied to any such vehicle. Once that division has been
determined, only the limits contained in the subdivisions of that division
shall apply to that vehicle.
(R.C. § 5577.04)
   (C)   Axle and wheel load, gross weights and towing connection length for
solid rubber tires.
      (1)   No vehicle, load, object or structure having a maximum axle load
greater than 16,000 pounds when such vehicle is equipped with solid rubber
tires shall be operated or moved upon the improved public highways, streets,
bridges or culverts. The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of such vehicle
shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of tire, measured as prescribed by
division (A) above, nor shall any solid tire or rubber or other resilient
material, on any wheel of any such vehicle, be less than one inch thick when
measure from the top of the flanges of the tire channel.
      (2)   The weight of vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface by any
two successive axles, spaces four feet or less apart, shall not exceed 19,000
pounds for solid tires; or by any two successive axles spaced more than four
feet but less than eight feet apart, shall not exceed 24,000 pounds for solid
tires; or by any two successive axles, spaced eight feet or more apart, shall
not exceed 28,000 pounds for solid tires; nor shall the total weight of vehicle
and load exceed, for solid rubber tires, 28,000 pounds plus an additional 600
pounds for each foot or fraction thereof of spacing between the front axle and
the rear-most axle of the vehicle; nor shall the weight of the vehicle and load
imposed upon the road surface by any vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires
exceed 80% of the permissible weight of vehicle and load as provided for
pneumatic tires.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between the nearest axles of the respective
vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet. If the provisions of this
division (C) are held to exceed the weight limitations or other provisions set
forth in the “Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1958", 72 Stat. 902, 23 U.S.C. § 127,
this division (C) shall become null and void to the extent of such
inconsistency.
(R.C. § 5577.041)
   (D)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be
punished as set forth in §
74.55(B).
   (E)   Modification of load limits. The load limits established in this
section may be modified or waived upon special permission granted as provided
in R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 74.57 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT, AND LENGTH.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
such other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those
roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited
by order of the Director of Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on
such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state highways as
the Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor- semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   (a)   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route,
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route,
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount;
         (b)   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in divisions (C)(3) and (C)
(4) above, and in division (E) below.
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semi-trailers, with or without load.
   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) above shall not include
side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry and
egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) above shall not include
automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tie-down assemblies,
provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches from either
side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo- carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semi-trailers. In special
cases, vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may
operate in accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by such department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Ch. 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares.
   (H)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
§ 74.58 STATEMENT OF GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.
   (A)   No person shall issue or aid in issuing any bill of lading or other
document of like nature in lieu thereof, which bill or document is to accompany
a shipment of goods or property by truck, trailer, semitrailer, commercial
tractor, or any other commercial vehicle used for the transportation of
property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, with intent
to defraud by misrepresentation thereon the weight of such goods of property to
be so transported.
   (B)   Any driver or operator of a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer may
obtain from any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association,
including the owner, lessee, or operator of such commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer, owning and operating sealed scales in this state, a written
“statement of gross vehicle weight” showing the gross weight of the vehicle
including the cargo on the vehicle, the name and address of the person issuing
the statement, and the date and place where the vehicle and its cargo were
weighed. The driver or operator of the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
shall retain such statement of gross vehicle weight on his or her person, and
any law enforcement officer may request that such driver or operator exhibit it
to him or her. If, upon examining the statement of gross vehicle weight, the
law enforcement officer has reason to believe that the information contained
therein is correct in every respect, he or she shall endorse it with his or her
name and the date and place where it was exhibited to him or her. The law
enforcement officer may then permit such driver or operator to proceed without
weighing by a law enforcement officer. No person shall willfully issue a
written statement of gross vehicle weight and knowingly give any false
information in such statement.
(R.C. § 5577.10)
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above shall be fined not more than
$5,000 or imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than six months, or
both.
(R.C. § 5577.99(D))
§ 74.59 WHEEL PROTECTORS REQUIRED ON HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or
operated, any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the
transportation of goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load,
exceeds three tons, upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts
within the municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal
protectors or substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle
or combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following
vehicles.
      (2)   Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more
than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the
center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they
shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting.
      (3)   If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that such
requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction, or other
means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels
not covered at the top by fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall
be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to the center line
of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 74.60 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; PROSECUTION; APPLICATION OF MONIES.
   Any person violating any law relating to or regulating the use of the
improved public roads shall be liable for all damage resulting to any such
street, highway, bridge or culvert by reason of such violation. In case of any
injury to such street, highway, bridge or culvert, such damages shall be
collected by civil action for recovery of such damages brought by the proper
authorities of the municipality. All damages collected under this section shall
be paid into the treasury of the municipality and credited to any fund for the
repairs of streets, highways, roads, bridges or culverts.
(R.C. § 5577.12)
§ 74.61 WEIGHT EXCEPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COAL TRUCK. Means a truck transporting coal from the site where it is
mined when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      FARM COMMODITIES. Includes livestock, bulk milk, corn, soybeans, tobacco
and wheat.
      FARM MACHINERY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      FARM TRUCK. Means a truck used in the transportation from a farm of farm
commodities when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      LOG TRUCK. Means a truck used in the transportation of timber from the
site of its cutting when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3743.01.
      SOLID WASTE HAUL VEHICLE. Means a vehicle hauling solid waste for which a
bill of lading has not been issued.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under the
described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight provisions of
R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be imposed:
         (a)   A coal truck transporting coal, from the place of production to
the first point of delivery where title to the coal is transferred;
         (b)   A farm truck or farm machinery transporting farm commodities,
from the place of production to the first point of delivery where the
commodities are weighed and title to the commodities is transferred;
         (c)   A log truck transporting timber, from the site of its cutting to
the first point of delivery where the timber is transferred;
         (d)   A solid waste haul vehicle hauling solid waste, from the place
of production to the first point of delivery where the solid waste is disposed
of or title to the solid waste is transferred.
      (2)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of
this section and operated under the conditions described in that division does
not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
does not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than
7.5%, no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.
   (C)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of this section and
operated under the conditions described in that division exceeds the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to
the allowance provided by this division (B) of this section:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to the operation of
a farm truck, log truck, or farm machinery transporting farm commodities during
the months of February and March.
      (2)   Regardless of when the operation occurs, division (B) of this
section does not apply to the operation of a vehicle on either of the
following:
         (a)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;
         (b)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.042)
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under the described
conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and no
penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall be imposed:
      (1)   A surface mining truck transporting minerals from the place where
the minerals are loaded to any of the following:
         (a)   The construction site where the minerals are discharged;
         (b)   The place where title to the minerals is transferred;
         (c)   The place of processing.
      (2)   A vehicle transporting hot mix asphalt material from the place
where the material is first mixed to the paving site where the material is
discharged;
      (3)   A vehicle transporting concrete from the place where the material
is first mixed to the site where the material is discharged;
      (4)   A vehicle transporting manure, turf, sod, or silage from the site
where the material is first produced to the first place of delivery;
      (5)   A vehicle transporting chips, sawdust, mulch, bark, pulpwood,
biomass, or firewood from the site where the product is first produced or
harvested to first point where the product is transferred.
   (F)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this
section and operated under the conditions described in that division do not
exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01
to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and do not
exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than 7.5%, no
penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.
   (G)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this section and
operated under the conditions described in that division exceed the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(E) or (F) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to the
allowance provided by division (E) or (F) of this section:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (H)   Divisions (E) and (F) of this section do not apply to the operation of
a vehicle listed in division (E) of this section on either of the following:
      (1)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;
      (2)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.043)
   (I)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a vehicle fueled solely by compressed natural
gas or liquid natural gas or powered primarily by means of an electric battery
may exceed by not more than 2,000 pounds the gross vehicle weight provisions of
R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or the axle load limits of those sections.
   (J)   If a vehicle described in division (I) of this section exceeds the
weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the allowance provided for in
division (I) of this section, both of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (K)   Division (I) of this section does not apply to the operation of a
vehicle on a highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.044)
   (L)   Fire engine weight exemptions.
      (1)   As used in this division (L), FIRE ENGINE means a fire engine, fire
truck, or other vehicle or apparatus belonging to or used by any municipal,
township, or volunteer fire department, while in the discharge of its
functions.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a person may do both of the following without a
written permit issued under R.C. § 4513.34, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
         (a)   Operate a two-axle fire engine, with a front axle maximum weight
of 24,000 pounds and a rear axle maximum weight of 33,500 pounds and a minimum
wheelbase of 15 feet, on all roadways in the state;
         (b)   Operate a fire engine with a maximum gross vehicle weight of
86,000 pounds on the interstate highway system and within one road mile of an
interstate highway system entrance or exit ramp.
      (3)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4513.34, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for any fire engine that requires a permit, the Ohio
Director of Transportation or local authority shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Issue the permit at no cost to the municipal, township, or
volunteer fire department;
         (b)   Issue a permit that expires five years after the date of
issuance.
(R.C. § 5577.045)
CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
75.01   Bicycles; application of Title VII
   
75.02   Operation of motorized bicycle
   
75.03   Rules for bicycles, motorcycles, and snowmobiles
   
75.04   Prohibition against attaching bicycles and sleds to vehicles
   
75.05   Riding bicycles; motorcycles abreast
   
75.06   Equipment of bicycles
   
75.07   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
75.08   Parking
   
75.09   Riding on sidewalks
   75.10   Electric bicycles
Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and
All-Purpose Vehicles
   
75.25   Definitions
   
75.26   Equipment
   
75.27   Code application; prohibited operation
   
75.28   Permitted operation
   
75.29   Licensing requirements of operator
   
75.30   Maintenance of vehicles for hire
   
75.31   Accident reports
   
75.32   Impounding of vehicle
   
75.33   Local control within police power
   
75.34   Registration of vehicles
   
75.35   Certificate of title; prohibitions
Cross-reference:
   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low- speed, under-speed, or utility
vehicles, see §
73.16
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. § 4511.07(A)
(8)
   Protective eye devices required for motorcycle operators and passengers;
helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. § 4501-17-01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 75.01 BICYCLES; APPLICATION OF TITLE VII.
   (A)   The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles and
electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated upon
any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) below, a bicycle operator or
electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this title described
in division (A) above that is applicable to bicycles or electric bicycles may
be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law enforcement officer for the
violation in the same manner as the operator of a motor vehicle would be cited
for the same violation. A person who commits any such violation while operating
a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any points assessed against the
person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, or probationary license under R.C. § 4510.036.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) below in the case of a violation of
any provision of this title described in division (A) above by a bicycle
operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator when the trier
of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle operator endangered the
lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at the time of the
violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to
the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or
motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a bicycling skills
course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any penalty otherwise
prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for that violation.
   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) above do not apply to violations of R.C. §
4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4511.52) (2000 Code, § 75.01)
§ 75.02 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Ch. 4506 or a driver’s
license issued under R.C. Ch. 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle license issued
after the person has passed the test provided for in this section, except that
if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary motorized bicycle
license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person is not required to
comply with the testing requirements provided for in this section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (B) below and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (B)   (1)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Ch. 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   The test shall be as near as practicable to the examination
required for a motorcycle operator’s endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11.
      (3)   The test shall also require the operator to give an actual
demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a motorized
bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (C)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (A)(3)
above shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted by the
Director under division (B) above.
   (F)   Whoever violates divisions (A), (D), or (E) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.521) (2000 Code, § 75.02)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C.
§ 4510.34
§ 75.03 RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   As used in this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given that
term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (B)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon such bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle or electric bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(C)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         (b)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03
(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)(a) of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or
(C)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53) (2000 Code, § 75.03)
§ 75.04 PROHIBITION AGAINST ATTACHING BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self
to any vehicle upon a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy
vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.54) (2000 Code, § 75.04)
§ 75.05 RIDING BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.55) (2000 Code, § 75.05)
§ 75.06 EQUIPMENT OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be
equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (A)(2) above, the red lamp may serve as the reflector and
a separate reflector is not required.
   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (A) above, except that red lamps and red reflectors
shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle and white
lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle or
electric bicycle.
   (C)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (D)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.56) (2000 Code, § 75.06)
§ 75.07 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to vehicles,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left,
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of the sign, except where the person dismounts from the bicycle to
make the turn, in which event the person shall obey the regulations applicable
to pedestrians.
(1967 Code, § 75.12) (Ord. O-28-43, passed 12-13-1943) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.08 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle on a street other than that on the roadway
against the curb or on the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against
a building or at the curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to
pedestrian traffic.
(1967 Code, § 75.20) (Ord. O-28-43, passed 12-13-1943) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.09 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
      (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle upon
a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly authorized
temporary driveway.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
      (3)   No person shall ride a bicycle on the sidewalk on the north side of
Wooster Pike between East Street and Miami Road.
   (B)   A person operating a bicycle on a sidewalk shall yield the right-of-
way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal before overtaking and
passing such pedestrian.
(1967 Code, § 75.21) (Ord. O-28-43, passed 12-13-1943; Ord. O-6-21, passed 2-8-
2021) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 75.10 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (A)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (B)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (C)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (4)   Divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section do not apply to a law
enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic
laws of the state, using an electric bicycle while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (D)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (C) of this
section and whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (E)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4511.522)
SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
§ 75.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all- terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The
term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any
vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under R.C. Ch. 4503 or R.C. Ch. 4561, and any vehicle
excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   ELECTRONIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles designates
under R.C. § 4519.511.
   ELECTRONIC RECORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as defined
in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
5511.02.
   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a
seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that
is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street or highway.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.
   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having title
to a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or other
right to the possession thereof.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow or
ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01) (2000 Code, § 75.25)
§ 75.26 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the State
Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Ch. 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles
shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 mph, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment
specified in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) below shall not be required on
snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles operated during
the daylight hours.
(R.C. § 4519.20(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, lease, rent or otherwise furnish
for hire in this municipality any new snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all- purpose vehicle that fails to comply with any rule adopted by the State
Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4519.20 after the effective date of the
rule.
(R.C. § 4519.22(A))
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) below shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender within the
preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (B) above or of
R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (B) above shall be fined not less
than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20(C))
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (C) above shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender within the
preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (C) above or of
R.C. § 4519.22(A), whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
$15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.22(B))
(2000 Code, § 75.26)
§ 75.27 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (A)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.40) (2000 Code, § 75.27)
Cross-reference:
   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or utility
vehicles, see §
73.16
§ 75.28 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all- purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (A)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (B)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (C)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (D)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (E)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (F)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all- purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(R.C. § 4519.41) (2000 Code, § 75.28)
§ 75.29 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under R.C. Ch. 4506 or R.C. Ch. 4507 or a valid, current
driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any street or highway in this
municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on any public land
or waters.
   (B)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (A) above, except that the
State Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on state
controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16 years
of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed driver 18
years of age or older.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.44) (2000 Code, § 75.29)
§ 75.30 MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Any dealer who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire shall maintain the vehicle
in safe operating condition. No dealer, or agent or employee of a dealer, shall
rent, lease or otherwise furnish a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle for hire to any person who does not hold a license as required
by R.C. § 4519.44(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or to
any person whom the dealer or an agent or employee of the dealer has reasonable
cause to believe is incompetent to operate the vehicle in a safe and lawful
manner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500.
(R.C. § 4519.45) (2000 Code, § 75.30)
§ 75.31 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the State Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (B)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46) (2000 Code, § 75.31)
§ 75.32 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever a person is found guilty of operating a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of any rule authorized
to be adopted under R.C. § 4519.21 or § 4519.42, the trial judge of any court
of record, in addition to or independent of any other penalties provided by
law, may impound for not less than 60 days the certificate of registration and
license plate, if applicable, of that snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle. The court shall send the impounded certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles, who shall retain the certificate of registration and license plate,
if applicable, until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
   (B)   If a court impounds the certificate of registration and license plate
of an all-purpose vehicle pursuant to R.C. § 2911.21, the court shall send the
impounded certificate of registration and license plate to the Registrar, who
shall retain them until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
(R.C. § 4519.47) (2000 Code, § 75.32)
§ 75.33 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and all-
purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power,
except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under
R.C. Ch. 4519 shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48) (2000 Code, § 75.33)
§ 75.34 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in divisions (B), (C), and (D) below, no
person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with R.C. §§
4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. This division (A)(2) shall take effect on January 1, 2017.
   (B)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off- highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all- purpose vehicle that is
used primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the
current agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any
public land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(B)(2) above and operated for agricultural purposes may use public roads and
rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when such use does
not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (C)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C. Ch.
4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is
properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Ch. 4519 shall comply
with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (D)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (E)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Ch. 1547 and R.C. Ch.
1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) above shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02) (2000 Code, § 75.34)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 75.35 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C. Ch. 4519 to be
issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a physical
certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership information
related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the automated
title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off- highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle is a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in R.C. Ch. 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Ch. 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 through 4519.70 for which
no penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66) (2000 Code, § 75.36)
Statutory reference:
   Certificate of title: rules and procedures, see R.C. §§ 4519.51 et seq.
   Stolen vehicles and restrictions on sale or transfer, felony provisions, see
R.C. § 4519.67
CHAPTER 76: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
76.01   Prohibition against parking on highways
   
76.02   Condition when motor vehicle left unattended
   
76.03   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle
   
76.04   Parking prohibitions
   
76.05   Parking near curb; privileges for persons with disabilities
   
76.06   Parking on private property in violation of posted prohibition
   
76.07   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
   
76.08   Truck loading zones
   
76.09   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
76.10   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
   
76.11   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
   
76.12   Waiver
   
76.13   Continuous parking in same location
   
76.14   Recreational vehicles
   
76.15   Residential parking area requirements
   
76.16   Unattended trailers
Cross-reference:
   Unclaimed and abandoned vehicles, see
Ch. 95
   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates, see §
138.17
Statutory reference:
   Noncriminal parking infractions, local option to create, see R.C. Ch. 4521
§ 76.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such
vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a
clear and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle
shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such
stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66) (2000 Code, § 76.01)
§ 76.02 CONDITION WHEN MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED.
   (A)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         (b)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is
parked;
         (c)   An emergency vehicle ;
         (d)   A public safety vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661) (2000 Code, § 76.02)
§ 76.03 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
such officer may move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved
or main traveled part of such highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67) (2000 Code, § 76.03)
§ 76.04 PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (B) above;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic- control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or thruway;
      (17)   At any place alongside a curb which has been painted yellow. (Ord.
O-3-16, passed 1-11-2016)
   (B)   A person is permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand or park
on a sidewalk a motor- driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine not
larger than 150 cubic centimeters, a low-speed micromobility device, or a
bicycle or electric bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor
scooter, low-speed micromobility device, bicycle, or electric bicycle does not
impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division does not authorize
any person to operate a vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.711, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.68) (2000 Code, § 76.04)
§ 76.05 PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (B)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle
facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the
road or highway.
         (b)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in division (C)(2) of
this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution, or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or
park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the
Director of Transportation.
   (E)   Accessible parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided and
designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at all publicly owned parking
garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators,
and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C.
§ 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating an accessible parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the designated accessible parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
accessible parking locations provided under division (E) of this section, or at
accessible clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or accessible license plates;
or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible
license plates.
         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in an accessible marked parking
location in violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section
may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law
enforcement agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or
removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of
ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally
imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor
vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the
lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and
pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for
towing and storing motor vehicles.
         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that
the person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the
person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the
person meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to an accessible parking location
provided under division (E) of this section or at an accessible clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or accessible license plates, or when
a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a
disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible license plates, the
motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the
legal parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local
ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in
such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.
   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where accessible
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (E)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the accessible parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the
accessible locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or accessible license
plates if the parking card or accessible license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      ACCESSIBLE LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Mean any
license plates, standard removable windshield placard, permanent removable
windshield placard, or temporary removable windshield placard issued under R.C.
§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or
removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Means any person who has lost the use of one or
both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or unable to move without
the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a
permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary, or other disabling condition.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO WALK. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   (K)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (A) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (K)(2)(a) and (K)(2)(b) of this section. Except as otherwise provided
in division (K)(2)(a) of this section, an offender who violates division (F)(1)
(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more
than $500. An offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section shall be fined not more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing,
proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or accessible license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (F)(1)(a)1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or accessible
license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person neglected to
display the card or license plates as described in division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section.
         (b)   In no case shall an offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         (c)   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need
not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any
inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right
or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         (d)   The clerk of the court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in division (K)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the
fine moneys it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (E) of this section. The municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support, and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender who violates
division (F)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An
arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(2) of this section does
not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application
for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection
with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (H) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking
location that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly
maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69) (2000 Code, § 76.05)
Cross-reference:
   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates, see §
138.17
Statutory reference:
   Buildings, access for disabled persons, see R.C. § 3781.111
§ 76.06 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN VIOLATION OF POSTED PROHIBITION.
   (A)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681) (2000 Code, § 76.06)
Cross-reference:
   Towing from private property, requirements, see §
95.01
§ 76.07 SELLING, WASHING, OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.08 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.09 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (B)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (C)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of such
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (D)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.10 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic
control signal.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.11 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the State Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license
plate was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the
vehicle which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A
certified registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be
proof of such ownership.
§ 76.12 WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
§ 76.13 CONTINUOUS PARKING IN SAME LOCATION.
   No owner, agent, operator, or other person in charge of any vehicle shall
permit the vehicle to remain parked, standing, or abandoned on any street or
municipally-owned property for a continuous period longer than 12 hours in any
24-hour period without authorization. This section shall not be construed as
affecting any other parking regulation now in effect or that may hereafter
become effective, but shall be construed as an additional parking limitation.
The purpose of this section is to prohibit continuous longtime parking and the
storage of vehicles on the streets and property of the village.
(2000 Code, § 76.08) (Ord. O-15-60, passed 6-15-1960; Ord. O-6-88, passed 5-9-
1988) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.14 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   No person shall park any vehicle in excess of 21 feet in length or nine feet
in height or eight feet in width, including but not limited to house trailers,
motor homes, mobile homes, travel trailers, truck campers, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, and major recreational equipment, which includes boats, boat trailers,
and truck covers, on a public street or lane in the village except for loading
and unloading which shall not exceed 48 hours and ten days per year.
(2000 Code, § 76.07) (Ord. O-4-85, passed 2-25-1985) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Parking and storage of oversized vehicles and boats, see §
151.090
§ 76.15 RESIDENTIAL PARKING AREA REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      PARKING AREA. A permanently surfaced area, either within a structure or
in the open, exclusive of driveways or access drives, for the parking of a
motor vehicle.
      PARKING LOT. Any surface lot which provides off-street parking for
motorized vehicles.
   (B)   The surfacing requirements for parking area and access drives are as
follows.
      (1)   Parking areas shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, interlocking
masonry pavers except as otherwise authorized by the Building Commissioner.
      (2)   All access drives to parking area shall be paved with asphalt,
concrete, or interlocking masonry pavers.
      (3)   All paved parking areas or access drives shall be drained to
provide for surface water runoff.
      (4)   Nonconforming parking areas and access drives existing prior to
March 1999 may remain, but must conform to this code when replaced or repaired.
   (C)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a motor vehicle on any portion of
a front, side, or back yard in a residential district that is not a parking
area as defined in this section. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation, directly or indirectly, or any owner or occupant of land in the
residential zone, to construct, operate, or maintain a parking area, unless
required for on-side parking for multiple dwellings, in the front yard of any
lot. This does not prohibit parking in driveways which meet the requirements
herein defined. For the purpose of this section, FRONT YARD shall mean that
area between the sidewalk or street line in the event there is no sidewalk, and
the front line for the principal building, extending in both directions to the
side of lots. It shall be unlawful to use that portion of a vacant lot within
30 feet of the sidewalk lines for parking in a residential zone. Driveways in
the residential district shall not exceed 25% of the width at the front or side
lot line. Where more than one driveway opening is desired or required, that
shall be at least 70 feet apart.
   (D)   No person, being the owner of the real property or having control of
all or any parts of a building on the property, shall violate or fail to
conform to any provision of this section, or fail to obey any lawful order of
an officer charged with its enforcement. Each and every day on which any person
continues to violate the provisions of this section, after having been notified
of the violation, shall constitute a separate offense. This conviction shall
not relieve any person from thereafter complying with the provisions of the
section, and shall be sufficient cause for the Building Commissioner to refuse
further building permits to the offender until such time as the orders have
been complied with.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined an amount not to exceed
$100 and court costs.
(2000 Code, § 76.09) (Ord. O-10-86, passed 6-9-1986; Ord. O-3-99, passed 3-8-
1999) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.16 UNATTENDED TRAILERS.
   (A)   No unattended trailer shall be parked on any public street within the
village for a period greater than two hours of continuous parking in the same
location unless a prior permit has been obtained from the Village Police
Department.
   (B)   For purposes of this provision, a TRAILER shall mean any vehicle
without motive power that is designed or used for carrying property or person
wholly on its own structure and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, and
includes any such vehicle that is formed by or operated as a combination of a
semi-trailer and a vehicle of the dolly type such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm
when drawn or towed on a public road or highway at a speed greater than 25 mph,
and a vehicle that is designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between
a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed
on a public road or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed
of more than 25mph. TRAILER does not include a manufactured home or travel
trailer.
   (C)   This section shall go into effect at the earliest date allowed by law.
(Ord. O-9-07, passed 5-14-2007)
CHAPTER 77: HEAVY AND COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
77.01   Oversize or overweight vehicle operation on state routes; state permit
   
77.02   Use of local streets
   
77.03   Maximum width, height, and length
   
77.04   Route and load information
   
77.05   Wheel protectors
   
77.06   Vehicles transporting explosives
   
77.07   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
   
77.08   Loads dropping or leaking; removal required; tracking mud
   
77.09   Shifting load; loose loads
   
77.10   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains
   
77.11   Use of studded tires and chains
   
77.12   Motor transportation companies and motor carriers
   
77.13   Reduction of weight and speed during times of thaws and moisture
   
77.14   Classification of roads
   
77.15   Rules and regulations
   
77.16   Statement of gross vehicle weight
   
77.17   Liability for damages; prosecution; application of monies
   
77.18   Notice of arrest
   
77.19   Highway use permit and identification device
   
77.20   Unlawful operation; Tax Commissioner to be notified
   
77.21   Signs
   
77.22   Exceptions
Horse-Drawn Carriages
   
77.40   Definitions
   
77.41   Rules and regulations
   
77.42   License requirements
   
77.43   Liability insurance requirements
   
77.44   Carriage requirements
   
77.45   Horse-drawn carriage stands
   
77.46   Litter control for horse-drawn carriages
   
77.47   Horse requirements
   
77.48   Driver requirements
   
77.49   Time of operation
   
77.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Noncommercial vehicle use, see §
71.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 77.01 OVERSIZE OR OVERWEIGHT VEHICLE OPERATION ON STATE ROUTES; STATE PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles
of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C.
Ch. 5577 or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. Ch. 4513 upon any state route
within the municipality, except pursuant to special written permit issued by
the State Director of Transportation, or upon any local truck route. Every such
permit shall be carried in the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it
refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer.
   (B)   No holder of a permit issued by the Director of Transportation shall
be required to obtain any local permit or license or pay any local fee or
charge for movement on any state route within the municipality; however, it
shall be unlawful to operate any such vehicle or combination of vehicles upon
any roadway within the municipality which is not a state route, except as
provided in §
77.02.
(2000 Code, § 77.01) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.02 USE OF LOCAL STREETS.
   No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a size as specified in §
77.03 or exceeding a gross weight of 10,000 pounds upon any street in the
village other than Wooster Pike, except those local streets designated as a
truck route and marked as such by appropriate traffic signs, and except when
such operation is necessary to load or unload property, to go to or from the
usual place of storage of such vehicle or to perform any other legitimate
business or act other than passage through the village. Operators of vehicles
so deviating from either a state route or a designated truck route within the
village shall confine such deviation to that required in order to accomplish
the purpose of the departure.
(2000 Code, § 77.02) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.03 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT, AND LENGTH.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
such other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those
roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited
by order of the Director of Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on
such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state highways as
the Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   (a)   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route,
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route,
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount;
         (b)   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (C)(3) and (C)
(4), and in division (E) below.
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.
   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by such department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares.
   (H)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 77.03) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990)
§ 77.04 ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter shall be required, upon
request by a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route
they are following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of
delivery or removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods
being removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route.
(2000 Code, § 77.04) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.05 WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any
commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of goods
or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, upon the
public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the municipality, unless
such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or substantial flexible
flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or combination of vehicles to
prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt, water, or other
materials on the windshields of following vehicles. Such protectors or flaps
shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of the distance from
the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps under any conditions
of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as wide as the tires they
are protecting. If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that such
requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction, or other
means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels
not covered at the top by fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall
be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to the center line
of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11) (2000 Code, § 77.05) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty,
see §
77.99
§ 77.06 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a highway
shall at all times comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the rear
with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or there
shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than 24
inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches high,
or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the U.S.
Department of Transportation regulations.
   (B)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29(A), (B)) (2000 Code, § 77.06) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990)
Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.07 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a
white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         (a)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         (b)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (C)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to a person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal
or a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a
public highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site
where the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577 or to the nearest qualified repair facility.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or the civil liability
established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person towing or removing a vehicle in the
manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
(2000 Code, § 77.07) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10- 1990)
§ 77.08 LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; REMOVAL REQUIRED; TRACKING MUD.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or
water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (C)   No person shall operate on any street, alley, or other public place a
vehicle with mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter on its
wheels or other parts if such operation results in the depositing or tracking
of such mud, dirt, substances, litter, or foreign matter on any street, alley,
or other public place. No person being owner of real property or a prime
contractor in charge of a construction site shall maintain such property or
construction site so that vehicles upon such property or construction site pick
up mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter on the wheels or
other parts and deposit or track such mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or
foreign matter onto any street, alley, or other public place.
   (D)   Where mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter, or foreign matter has been
tracked or deposited on any street, alley, or other public place in violation
of this section, the Police Chief or his or her designee is authorized to cause
such mud, dirt, substances, litter, or foreign matter to be cleaned from such
street and to charge the cost thereof to person or persons responsible. The
cost of cleaning shall be collected by civil suit. The term RESPONSIBLE PERSON
as used in this section means the driver of the vehicle which deposited or
tracked the mud, dirt, substances, litter, or foreign matter on the street or
his or her employer or the owner of the real property or prime contractor in
charge of a construction site from where the deposited or tracked mud, dirt,
substances, litter, or foreign matter on the street, alley, or other public
place originated.
(2000 Code, § 77.08) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.09 SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (A)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless such vehicle
is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing
the vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the
same.
   (B)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles, and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging, or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by §
77.08.
(2000 Code, § 77.09) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.10 VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS, AND CHAINS.
   No person shall drive over the improved streets of this village a traction
engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes,
chains, or other projections of any kind extending beyond the cleats, or no
person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the improved streets
of this village, which towed or pulled vehicle has tires or wheels equipped
with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains, or other projections of any kind.
TRACTION ENGINE or TRACTOR, as used in this section, applies to all self-
propelling engines equipped with metal-tires or wheels operated or propelled by
any form of engine, motor, or mechanical power.
(2000 Code, § 77.10) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.11 USE OF STUDDED TIRES AND CHAINS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
municipality, except during the period extending from November 1 of each year
through April 15 of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is
snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or the
immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081) (2000 Code, § 77.11) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990)
Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.12 MOTOR TRANSPORTATION COMPANIES AND MOTOR CARRIERS.
   (A)   Motor transportation companies. Pursuant to R.C. Ch. 4921, in order
for a motor transportation company to commence or continue its operations
within or through the corporate limits of the village, it shall first obtain
from the State Public Utilities Commission a certificate declaring that public
convenience and necessity require such operation. No person shall conduct such
operations without having first obtained such certificate.
   (B)   Private motor carriers. Pursuant to R.C. Ch. 4923, no motor carrier
shall operate motor vehicles upon any public highway in interstate commerce
pursuant to interstate authority until the motor carrier has registered the
interstate authority with the State Public Utilities Commission, has paid the
appropriate filing fee as provided in R.C. Ch. 4923, and has been issued an
acknowledgment by the Commission which shall remain in effect until amended,
suspended, canceled, or revoked. The interstate authority shall be registered,
and acknowledgments shall be issued in a manner to be prescribed by the
Commission.
      (1)   No motor carrier shall operate motor vehicles upon any public
highway for the transportation of property for hire in interstate commerce
unless it has registered with the Commission and complied with the requirements
of R.C. Ch. 4921.
      (2)   Mutual exemptions in the payment of filing fees may be authorized
and granted by the Commission under reciprocal agreements with other states.
   (C)   Private motor carrier violations. No private motor carrier, officer,
agent, or employee of a private motor carrier, or other corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association, person, firm, or copartnership shall
violate, or procure, aid, or abet the violation of R.C. §§ 4923.02 through
4923.15 or fail to comply with any order, decision, rule, or regulation of the
Public Utilities Commission, or procure, aid, or abet any private motor carrier
in its failure to comply with such order, decision, rule, or regulation.
Information of a conviction of a violation of this division (C) shall be
reported to the Commission by the Clerk of Court in which such conviction was
obtained or if there is no Clerk, by the presiding officer of the Court. Such
report shall be made a part of the records of the Commission relating to such
private motor carrier.
   (D)   Motor transportation company violations. No motor transportation
company, officer, agent, or employee of a motor transportation company, or
other corporation, company, association, joint stock association, person, firm,
or copartnership, shall violate or procure, aid, or abet the violation of R.C.
§§ 4921.02 through 4921.32 or fail to comply with any order, decision, rule, or
regulation of the Public Utilities Commission, or procure, aid, or abet any
motor transportation company in its failure to comply with such order,
decision, rule, or regulation. Information of a conviction of a violation of
this division (D) shall be reported to the Commission by the Clerk of court in
which such conviction was obtained or, if there is no Clerk, by the presiding
officer of the court. Such report shall be made a part of the records of the
Commission relating to such motor transportation company.
(R.C. § 4921.32)
(2000 Code, § 77.13) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty, see §
77.99
Statutory reference:
   Motor carrier companies; violations, see R.C. § 4923.15
§ 77.13 REDUCTION OF WEIGHT AND SPEED DURING TIMES OF THAWS AND MOISTURE.
   (A)   When thaws or excessive moisture render the improved highways of this
village or any sections of them insufficient to bear the traffic thereon, or
when such highways would be damaged or destroyed by heavy traffic during the
period of thawing or excessive moisture, the maximum weight of vehicle and
load, or the maximum speed, or both, for motor vehicles, as prescribed by law
shall be reduced in the following manner:
      (1)   On state highways, within the village, the State Director of
Transportation or Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall prescribe such
reduction which shall not be more than 25%; and
      (2)   On improved highways and all other roads in the village, other than
state highways, the Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall prescribe such
reduction as the condition of the road or highway justifies, but in no case
shall the reduction be more than 50%.
   (B)   (1)   The schedule of the reduction of maximum weights and speeds
shall be filed, for the information of the public, in the office of the Police
Chief, or his or her designee.
      (2)   The Police Chief, or his or her designee, at least one day before
such reduction becomes effective, shall cause to be placed and retained on such
highways, at both ends and at the points of intersections by principal roads,
during the period of such reduced limitation of weight, speed, or both, signs
of substantial construction which shall conspicuously indicate the limitations
of weight and speed which are allowed on the highway and the date on which such
limitations shall go into effect.
      (3)   No person shall operate upon any such highway a motor vehicle whose
maximum weight or speed is in excess of the limitation prescribed.
(R.C. § 5577.07) (2000 Code, § 77.14) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty,
see §
77.99
§ 77.14 CLASSIFICATION OF ROADS.
   (A)   The Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall classify the improved
roads within the village limits, except state highways, with reference to the
maximum weights and speeds permitted on such roads.
   (B)   The classifications made by the Police Chief, or his or her designee,
under this section shall not apply to vehicles of a weight of 10,000 pounds or
less for vehicle and load.
   (C)   In making the classification, the Police Chief, or his or her
designee, shall take into consideration the nature of the roadbed,
construction, and any other factors which are material in the proper
classification of such roads.
   (D)   The Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall make rules and
regulations governing the weight of vehicle and load and the speed permitted on
the several classes of roads.
(2000 Code, § 77.15) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990)
§ 77.15 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   All rules and regulations as provided by §
77.14 shall be kept on file at the village office and open for inspection by
the public.
   (B)   At least two days before the rules and regulations become effective,
the Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall cause to be placed and retained
on such improved highways or sections thereof, at both ends and at the points
of intersection, signs of substantial construction which shall conspicuously
indicate the limitations of weight of vehicle, and load or speed which shall be
allowed on such highways.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to operate upon such highway a vehicle whose
maximum weight or speed is in excess of the limitations prescribed.
(2000 Code, § 77.16) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.16 STATEMENT OF GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.
   (A)   
No person shall issue or aid in issuing any bill of lading or other document of
like nature in lieu thereof, which bill or document is to accompany a shipment
of goods or property by truck, trailer, semitrailer, commercial tractor, or any
other commercial vehicle used for the transportation of property, the gross
weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, with intent to defraud by
misrepresentation thereon the weight of such goods of property to be so
transported.
   (B)   Any driver or operator of a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer may
obtain from any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association,
including the owner, lessee, or operator of such commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer, owning and operating sealed scales in this state, a written
“statement of gross vehicle weight” showing the gross weight of the vehicle
including the cargo on the vehicle, the name and address of the person issuing
the statement, and the date and place where the vehicle and its cargo were
weighed. The driver or operator of the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
shall retain such statement of gross vehicle weight on his or her person, and
any law enforcement officer may request that such driver or operator exhibit it
to him or her. If, upon examining the statement of gross vehicle weight, the
law enforcement officer has reason to believe that the information contained
therein is correct in every respect, he or she shall indorse it with his or her
name and the date and place where it was exhibited to him or her. The law
enforcement officer may then permit such driver or operator to proceed without
weighing by a law enforcement officer. No person shall willfully issue a
written statement of gross vehicle weight and knowingly give any false
information in such statement.
(R.C. § 5577.10)
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not more
than $5,000 or imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than six months,
or both.
(R.C. § 5577.99(D))
(2000 Code, § 77.17) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990)
§ 77.17 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; PROSECUTION; APPLICATION OF MONIES.
   (A)   Any person violating any law relating to or regulating the use of the
improved public roads shall be liable for all damage resulting to any such
street, highway, bridge, or culvert by reason of such violation.
   (B)   In case of any injury to such a street, highway, bridge, or culvert,
such damages shall be collected by civil action, brought in the name of the
village, on the relation of the State Director of Transportation or the Police
Chief or his or her designee with respect to highways under their jurisdiction,
and the Village Solicitor shall institute such action, when requested by the
Police Chief or his or her designee and prosecute it to final judgment.
   (C)   (1)   In case of any injury to an improved public road, bridge, or
culvert of the village, by reason of the violations of any of the rules or
regulations made by the Police Chief or his or her designee, the damages shall
be recovered by a civil action prosecuted by the Police Chief or his or her
designee.
      (2)   All damages collected under this section shall be paid into the
Treasury of the municipality.
(R.C. § 5577.12) (2000 Code, § 77.18) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty,
see §
77.99
§ 77.18 NOTICE OF ARREST.
   Whenever the driver or operator of any truck, trailer, semi-trailer,
commercial tractor, or any other commercial vehicle used for the transportation
of goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
has been arrested for a violation of any provision of this title, of R.C. §§
4511.01 through 4511.76, inclusive, and §§ 4513.01 through 4513.40, inclusive,
or R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, inclusive, the officer making such arrest
shall immediately notify, in writing, the person, firm, association, or
corporation holding the certificate of public convenience and necessity or
permit under which such vehicle is being driven or operated, and in whose name
the vehicle is registered with and licensed by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, of
the fact of such arrest. Such notifications shall describe the vehicle
involved, the name of the driver or operator thereof, and the time, place and
nature of the offense committed. Copies of such notification shall be
immediately transmitted by the arresting officer to the Public Utilities
Commission and the Superintendent of the State Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 5577.14) (2000 Code, § 77.19) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990)
§ 77.19 HIGHWAY USE PERMIT AND IDENTIFICATION DEVICE.
   (A)   A highway use permit identification device or devices shall be
displayed on the commercial car or commercial tractor for which it was issued
at all times in such manner as the State Tax Commissioner prescribes.
   (B)   The highway use permits and the identification device and devices
shall not be transferable.
(2000 Code, § 77.20) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.20 UNLAWFUL OPERATION; TAX COMMISSIONER TO BE NOTIFIED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful, on or after September 30, 1955, for any person
to operate a commercial car with three or more axles when operated alone or as
part of a commercial tandem, a commercial car with two axles that is to be
operated as part of a commercial tandem with a gross vehicle weight, or a
registered gross vehicle weight exceeding 26,000 pounds, or a commercial
tractor combination or commercial tandem on a public highway without a valid
highway use permit for such commercial car or commercial tractor.
   (B)   The judge or magistrate of any court finding any person guilty of
unlawfully operating a commercial car or commercial tractor as provided for in
this section shall immediately notify the Tax Commissioner of such violation
and shall transmit to the Commissioner the name and permanent address of the
owner of the commercial car or commercial tractor operated in violation of this
section, the registration number, the state of registration, and the
certificate of title number of the commercial car or commercial tractor.
(R.C. § 5728.04)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 5728.99(D))
(2000 Code, § 77.21) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.21 SIGNS.
   The Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall cause appropriate signs to
be erected to notify the public of the passage of any section contained in the
subchapter, and shall request the assistance of the State Department of
Transportation in carrying out the prohibitions contained herein.
(2000 Code, § 77.22) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990)
§ 77.22 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of the subchapter shall not apply when a vehicle is used to
deliver or pick up materials, equipment, or parcels to or from property located
on any street, or segment thereof, as provided in §
77.02 of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 77.23) (Ord. O-19-90, passed 9-10-1990)
HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES
§ 77.40 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   CARRIAGE. Any device in, upon, or by which any person may be transported or
drawn upon a public way, designed to be drawn upon a public way, designed to be
drawn by a horse.
   COMPENSATION. Any fare, reward, tip, donation, or other thing of value which
a driver or owner of a horse-drawn carriage accepts or receives or offers to
accept or receive in return for furnishing such service.
   HORSE. An animal of the genus equis.
   LICENSEE. Any person to whom the village has issued a license pursuant to
this subchapter.
   OWNER. The person who has good title thereto or lawful bill of sale or
certificate of title and who in the conduct of business operates or rents such
public carriage.
   PERSON. Includes person, firm, partnership, association, and corporation.
   VETERINARIAN. A practicing veterinarian licensed by the state.
(2000 Code, § 77.40) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999)
§ 77.41 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to establish rules and regulations necessary
for the enforcement of the provisions of this subchapter, including rules and
regulations pertaining to the health, safety, and well- being of animals used
to draw carriages in the village.
   (B)   Violation of any such regulation or failure to comply with a lawful
order of the Mayor shall be reason for revocation of any license issued under
authority of this subchapter.
(2000 Code, § 77.41) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.42 LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   License process. The Mayor shall gather all information as to each
application for a horse- drawn carriage license. If the Mayor finds that such
carriage is a safe and fit conveyance, and that it complies with all the
requirements of this code, the Mayor shall issue a license to the applicant
upon payment of the proper license fee and the furnishing of the insurance or
risk retention coverage required. If the applicant does not comply with the
requirements of this section within 30 days, the license shall be null and
void.
   (B)   License fee.
      (1)   No person, either as owner or agent, employee or driver for, or
lessee of, shall operate or permit to be operated any horse-drawn carriage
unless the proper license has been issued to the owner thereof and is in force.
Said license shall be available upon request.
      (2)   Every license shall expire on January 14 of the year following the
date on which the license was issued. A license fee of $25 for each horse-drawn
carriage shall be payable to the Village Fiscal Officer each year between
January 1 and January 14. The license fee required by this section shall be in
addition to any fee required by the laws of the state.
      (3)   If a license fee is issued on or after July 1 of any year, the fee
shall be half the applicable annual fee.
   (C)   License application.
      (1)   Applications for licenses for horse-drawn carriages and the horses
to be used shall be made to the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building. These
applications shall set forth the following:
         (a)   Name, address, and phone number of the applicant;
         (b)   The trade name under which business is to be conducted;
         (c)   The route and hours during which the horse-drawn carriage is to
be operated;
         (d)   The manufacturer’s name, seating capacity, and type of brake
system of the carriage which the applicant will use;
         (e)   A policy of liability insurance (see §
77.43); and
         (f)   The animals to be used in the business operation: the animals’
names, descriptions, age and date last examined by a veterinarian (see §
77.47).
      (2)   The proposed route and hours of operation for each horse-drawn
carriage shall be reviewed for public safety purposes by the Mayor and the
Police Chief.
   (D)   Appeal of the grant; denial of a license; suspension; revocation. When
the Mayor grants, denies, or suspends a license for the operation of a horse-
drawn carriage, the applicant or other interested person may appeal the
decision to the Village Council at its next scheduled meeting. Council may
affirm, disaffirm, or grant exceptions from the Mayor’s decision.
   (E)   Emergency revocation of license.
      (1)   Whenever the Mayor determines that the public safety is threatened
by the continued operation of a horse-drawn carriage, the Mayor may immediately
suspend the horse-drawn carriage’s license. In such a circumstance the Mayor
shall immediately notify the license holder who shall discontinue operation of
the horse-drawn carriage at once.
      (2)   Upon notifying the license holder of the emergency suspension, the
Mayor shall set a time and place for a hearing to determine if the suspension
shall continue. Said hearing shall be conducted within five business days of
the order of suspension.
      (3)   If, at the hearing, the Mayor determines that the public safety is
not threatened, he or she shall reinstate the license at no cost.
      (4)   If, at the hearing, the Mayor determines that the public safety is
threatened, he or she may continue the license suspension until such time as he
or she determines that the public safety is no longer threatened.
(2000 Code, § 77.42) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.43 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No license to operate any horse-drawn carriage shall be issued or
renewed by the Mayor, and no person shall operate a horse-drawn carriage, or
permit such to be operated, unless and until the applicant shall deposit with
the Village Fiscal Officer a policy of liability insurance issued by a
responsible insurance company or a risk retention group meeting the
requirements of the Liability Risk Retention Act, being R.C. §§ 3960.01 et seq.
   (B)   Each licensed horse-drawn carriage shall be covered by a combined
single limit liability policy providing coverage for death, personal injury,
and property damage in an amount of not less than $100,000 per individual and
$800,000 per occurrence.
   (C)   Said policy shall be approved as to sufficiency by the Village Fiscal
Officer, and as to form by the Village Solicitor, provide indemnity for or
protection to the insured, against loss in the amounts provided for herein, and
an agreement to pay, within the limits of the amounts fixed in said sections to
any judgement, creditor, any final judgement rendered against the insured by
reason of the liability of the insured to pay damages to others for bodily
injuries, including death at any time resulting therefrom, and for damages to
or destruction of property sustained during the term of said policy by any
person other than the insured and employees of the insured, and resulting from
negligent operation, maintenance or use of such licensed horse-drawn carriage.
   (D)   The policy of insurance shall provide that in case the horse-drawn
carriage is operated, maintained, or used with the consent or acquiescence of
the owner, by one other than the owner, the owner’s agent or employee, and an
injury results to person or property as indicated above, due to the negligent
operation, maintenance, or use of the horse-drawn carriage, that the insurer
shall pay to any judgment creditor of the person so maintaining, using or
operating the horse-drawn carriage, any final judgment rendered against the
person so maintaining, using, or operating the horse-drawn carriage.
   (E)   The policy of insurance hereinbefore required shall be valid and
effective for the same period for which the license is issued.
(2000 Code, § 77.43) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.44 CARRIAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with the following:
      (1)   A braking device capable of safely stopping said horse-drawn
carriage;
      (2)   Two head lamps capable of emitting a white light visible a distance
of at least 1,000 feet ahead of the carriage;
      (3)   Two tail lamps capable of emitting a red light visible at least
1,000 feet from the rear of the carriage;
      (4)   A triangular slow-moving horse-drawn carriage emblem (SMV)
(reflectorized) which shall be mounted so as to be visible for a distance of
500 feet to the rear; and
      (5)   Reflective materials upon the shafts of the horse-drawn carriage or
other parts of the carriage or the horse parallel thereto so as to render the
carriage and horse visible from the front and side after dark from a distance
of 500 feet.
   (B)   All carriages and drivers shall comply with any applicable
requirements of the state and this code, including, but not limited to, traffic
laws and ordinances.
   (C)   No horse-drawn carriage shall carry more passengers than the number
designated as the seating capacity in the application on which the license was
issued.
   (D)   Whenever a horse-drawn carriage is found not to be in a safe and
sanitary operating condition or not to comply fully with all the requirements
specified herein, the Mayor may suspend or revoke the license of the carriage
until the provisions herein are complied with.
(2000 Code, § 77.44) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.45 HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGE STANDS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall park a horse-drawn carriage anywhere in the
village except where designated by the Mayor and the Police Chief.
      (2)   The Mayor and the Police Chief shall designate on an individual
basis the location of space and times of use for horse-drawn carriage parking
stands.
      (3)   The driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall remain on or beside the
carriage when parked upon a stand.
   (B)   The driver of a horse-drawn carriage shall not stop such carriage upon
any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers
other than at a designated horse-drawn carriage stand or predetermined location
where safe entry or exit from the carriage can be made, other than in the case
of an emergency.
   (C)   All horse-drawn carriage stands shall be maintained clean and free of
litter by the driver.
(2000 Code, § 77.45) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.46 LITTER CONTROL FOR HORSE-DRAWN CARRIAGES.
   (A)   Each animal pulling a horse-drawn carriage operating on the village
streets shall be equipped with standard manure nets to catch and hold such
manure until such time as the operator is able to place the manure in standard
wire-tie plastic bags which the operator shall carry on each carriage.
   (B)   Each horse-drawn carriage shall be equipped with such type and
quantity of chemical product approved by the Fire Chief which, when poured upon
animal urine, will neutralize same and eliminate accumulative agents and odor.
(2000 Code, § 77.46) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.47 HORSE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Veterinary certificate.
      (1)   All animals used to pull licensed horse-drawn carriages shall have
medical examinations at yearly intervals by a licensed veterinarian at the
expense of the horse-drawn carriage license holder. Written medical records,
including records of treatment and immunization required by the state shall be
kept for each animal. These records shall be kept available for inspection at
reasonable times upon request by the Mayor. The medical examination shall
encompass all matters which are consistent with usual and customary veterinary
practice in the community for maintaining the health and well being of animals
used for the purpose of pulling horse-drawn carriages. Such examination shall
include, but not be limited to, leg and hoof exams, dental exams,
cardiovascular exam, and drug analysis at intervals sufficient to detect
inhumane treatment of the animal at the discretion of the licensed veterinarian
if drug abuse is suspected.
      (2)   At the completion of the examination, if the veterinarian
conducting the examination determines that the animal is fit for pulling a
licensed horse-drawn carriage, a certificate of fitness shall be issued and
filed with the Mayor. This certification shall state any restrictions
applicable to the animal covered by the certificate, including, but not limited
to, hours of work, load limitations, temperature limitations under which the
animal may work, and other matters which may affect the health and well being
of the animal.
      (3)   No animal may be used to pull a licensed horse-drawn carriage for
which a current certificate of fitness is not on file with the Mayor.
      (4)   Noncompliance shall be grounds for the revocation of all public
carriage licenses for horse-drawn carriages held by the violator.
   (B)   Work limits. No horse shall be placed into service for more than eight
hours per day. A rest break shall be given to each horse after a maximum of
four consecutive service hours.
   (C)   Temperature limits. No horse-drawn carriage shall be operated when the
wind chill index, as reported by the National Weather Service, is below 0°F, or
above a heat index of 90°F, except where tours have been prearranged and
documented with the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building at least ten days
in advance. When the wind chill index is below 20°F, the horse shall be
blanketed during rest periods.
   (D)   Shoeing requirements. Any horse used on concrete, asphalt, or similar
street surfaces shall be shod with metal shoes with borium beads. Each shoe
should have four to six small beads evenly distributed in such a way that the
shoe will be level between the hoof and street surface. Shoes shall be refitted
as necessary, but not less frequently than once every eight weeks. Any shoe
lost during the work period shall be replaced before the horse is brought back
into service.
   (E)   Carriage load limits. Load limits shall be not more than seven
persons, including chauffeur, except that a driver trainee may increase that
number to eight, per horse. There shall be no exceptions to the load limit
provided herein.
   (F)   Terrain limits. Carriages shall not be placed into service when
village streets are covered by ice or snow.
   (G)   Age and physical limitations. All horses used in a horse-drawn
carriage service shall be at least three and no more than 20 years old.
   (H)   Watering. Cool, potable water shall be made available to the horse at
the carriage stand.
(2000 Code, § 77.47) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.48 DRIVER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any horse upon a public street which shall be drawing a carriage shall
be driven at all times by a person licensed as a driver.
   (B)   To be licensed as a driver of a horse-drawn carriage, a person must be
18 years of age, of good moral character, and not have been convicted of any
crime or misdemeanor involving violence, physical abuse or moral turpitude, and
who has successfully completed at least 20 hours with horse-drawn carriages
which shall include:
      (1)   The proper method of fitting a harness to a horse and hitching/
unhitching a properly harnessed horse;
      (2)   The proper handling and driving of a horse-drawn carriage and the
handling of emergency situations for unexpected animal behavior; and
      (3)   Operating the horse-drawn carriage in traffic under the supervision
of a licensed carriage driver for a minimum of 16 hours.
(2000 Code, § 77.48) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.49 TIME OF OPERATION.
   No horse-drawn carriage may be driven on any village street before 9:30
a.m., nor after 11:00 p.m.
(2000 Code, § 77.49) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999) Penalty, see §
77.99
§ 77.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided shall be punished as provided in §
70.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates any section of any provision of §§
77.40 through
77.49 may be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or both such fine and imprisonment.
(2000 Code, § 77.99) (Ord. O-11-99, passed 5-10-1999)
CHAPTER 78: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Section
   
78.01   General provisions
Schedule
   
I.   Stop streets
   
II.   No passing zones
   
III.   Yield right-of-way streets
   
IV.   School zones
   
V.   One-way streets
   
VI.   Traffic-control devices
   
VII.   Speed limits
   
VIII.   Traffic prohibited
§ 78.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Regulations of the municipal streets and ways are listed in this chapter by
Schedules I through VIII. Usage of streets and ways other than as set out by
this chapter is a misdemeanor.
(1967 Code, § 76.01) (Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-2001) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE I. STOP STREETS.
   (A)   Generally.
 
Street            Between                                    Side Ord. No.
Emery Lane        At the intersection with Mt. Vernon Avenue      O-23-15
Mt. Vernon Avenue At intersection with Emery Lane                 O-23-15
Plainville Road   Between Chestnut Street and Murray Road    West O-13-68
Plainville Road   Oak Street and Murray Road                 East O-8-42
Sheldon Close                                                     O-8-72
 
(1967 Code, § 76.03)
   (B)   Full stop. All vehicles shall come to a full stop on highways before
entering intersections as follows.
Street At Intersection With Ord. No. Date
Street                         At Intersection With          Ord. No. Date
Beech Street                   Murray Avenue                 O-8-42
Bramble Hill                   Joan Place                    O-14-12  6-25-2012
Cambridge Avenue               Grove Avenue                  O-10-69
Cambridge Avenue               Rowan Hills Drive             O-8-42
Center Street                  Miami Bluff Drive             O-19-60
Cherry Lane (southeast corner) Chestnut Street               O-20-68
Chestnut Street                Plainville Pike               O-8-42
East Center Street             Crystal Springs Avenue        O-2-69
East Street                    Miami Avenue                  O-8-42
Elm Street                     Beech Street and Oak Street   O-8-42
Fieldhouse Way                 Pleasant and West             O-15-11  6-13-2011
Grace Avenue                   Rowan Hill Drive              O-8-83
Grove Avenue                   Cambridge                     O-8-42
Grove Avenue (southeast        Grace Avenue                  O-7-67
corner)
Hawthorne                      Settle Road                   O-8-42
Homewood Road                  Murray Avenue                 O-8-42
Indianview (northbound)        Rembold Avenue                O-19-01
Lytle Woods                    Miami Avenue                  O-8-42
Maple Street                   Plainville Pike               O-8-42
Maple Street (south side)      Plainville Road (approach to) O-18-48
Mariemont Avenue               Trade Street                  O-11-80
Mariemont Avenue (southeast    Cachepit Way                  O-28-48
corner)
Miami Bluff Drive              Mt. Vernon Avenue             O-31-82
Mt. Vernon Avenue              Miami Bluff Avenue            O-13-75
Mt. Vernon Avenue              Petoskey Avenue and Miami     O-31-82
                               Bluff Drive
Mt. Vernon Avenue (westbound)  Miami Road                    O-18-75
Murray Avenue                  Miami Avenue                  O-8-42
Murray Avenue                  Oak Street                    O-8-42
Murray Avenue                  Plainville Pike               O-8-42
Murray Road                    Settle Road                   O-8-42
Oak Street                     Chestnut Street               O-8-42
Oak Street                     Murray Avenue                 O-8-42
Petoskey Avenue                Hiawatha                      O-29-71
Petoskey Avenue                Mt. Vernon Avenue             O-31-82
Petoskey Avenue                Rembold Avenue                O-18-78
Pleasant Street                Mariemont Avenue              O-20-59
Pocahontas Avenue              Hiawatha Avenue               O-8-00
Rembold                        Petoskey                      O-15-11  6-13-2011
Rembold Avenue                 Indianview Avenue             O-13-43
Rembold Street                 Miami Avenue                  O-13-43
Rowan Hills Drive              Grace Avenue                  O-8-83
Settle Road                    Murray Road                   O-35-62
Thorndike Road                 Opposite Lane K               O-16-68
West Street                    Madisonville Road             O-8-42
West Street                    Miami Avenue                  O-8-42
 
   (C)   Signs.
      (1)   A stop sign shall be installed at each end of Nolen Circle;
      (2)   A stop sign shall be installed and yellow no parking stripes
painted at the intersection of Denny Place and Pleasant Street and a stop sign
shall be installed for the southbound lane of Indianview Avenue at the
intersection of Indianview and Rembold Avenues;
      (3)   The installation of a stop sign at the north end of Belmont Avenue
at Murray Avenue;
      (4)   The installation of a stop sign on the east side of the
intersection of Belmont and Bancroft;
      (5)   The installation of a stop sign at the north end of Haines Street
where it intersects with Lytle Woods Place;
      (6)   The installation of four stop signs: one on the northbound side and
one on the southbound side of Pleasant Street at Fieldhouse Way; and one on the
eastbound side and one on the westbound side of Center Street at Mt. Vernon
Avenue;
      (7)   The installation of a four-way stop sign at the intersections of
Hammerstone Way and Cachepit Way;
      (8)   The installation of two stop signs at the intersection of Miami
Bluff and Harvard Street (paper street): stop sign No. 1: on Harvard Street
(paper street) - to stop southbound traffic before turning onto Miami Bluff due
to blind curve and stop sign No. 2: on Miami Bluff- to stop eastbound traffic
before entering intersection with Harvard Street (paper street); and
      (9)   The installation of three stop signs at the intersection of Center
Street, East Center Street, and West Center Street.
(1967 Code, § 76.04) (Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-2001; Ord. O-22-10, passed 10-
11-2010; Ord. O-29-10, passed 12-13-2010; Ord. O-5-12, passed 3-12-2012; Ord.
O-6-13, passed 3-11-2013; Ord. O-16-13, passed 7-8-2013; Ord. O-23-13, passed
10-28-2013; Ord. O-16-14, passed 5-27-2014; Ord. O-24-14, passed 9-8-2014; Ord.
O-25-14, passed 9-22-2014; Ord. O-29-14, passed 11-24-2014; Ord. O-23-15,
passed 10-12-2015; Ord. O-17-24, passed 11-11-2024) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. NO PASSING ZONES.
 
Street            Description                      Direction            Ord. No
Madisonville Road From Wooster Pike, north to the  North                O-18-65
                  corporation line
Miami Road        From Wooster Pike, north to the  North                O-18-65
                  corporation line
Plainville Road   From Wooster Pike, north to the  North                O-18-65
                  corporation line
Wooster Pike      Between West and Harvard Acres   Eastbound, westbound O-8-51
                   
                  From 45 feet west of East Street
Wooster Pike      to a point 122 feet west of      Easterly             O-22-60
                  Petoskey Avenue
                  From 122 feet west of Petoskey
Wooster Pike      Avenue to a point 120 feet west  Westerly             O-22-60
                  of East Street
 
(1967 Code, § 76.05) (Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-2001) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE III. YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY STREETS.
 
Street With Right-of-Way Yield Street    Ord. No
Hammerstone Way          Cachepit Avenue O-17-62
West Street              Thorndike Road  O-27-60
 
(1967 Code, § 76.06) (Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-2001) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE IV. SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   Generally.
 
Street     Description                                                                  Ord. Date
                                                                                        No
Madison    In front of LaRosa’s at the southeast end and extending all the way to the O-   12-
Road       intersection of Madisonville Road and Plainville Road at the northwest end   24-  26-
                                                                                        12   2012
North end                                                                               O-   12-
of         All the way to intersection of Plainville Road and Madisonville Road         24-  26-
Plainville                                                                              12   2012
Road
Plainville                                                                              O-
Road       From Wooster Pike, to a point 100 feet north of Chestnut Street              11-
                                                                                        51
West end
of the
existing                                                                                O-   12-
school     All the way to the intersection of Chestnut Street and Cherry Lane           24-  26-
zone on                                                                                 12   2012
Chesnut
Street
 
   (B)   Emergency measure. Ord. O-7-01 is declared to be an emergency measure
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, and
safety and shall go into immediate effect. The reason for said emergency is to
ensure the continued safety of the school children in the village.
   (C)   Designations. The village shall designate that portion of Cherry Lane
in front of the Mariemont Community Church as a school zone and indicate such
with signage and a 20 mph zone.
(1967 Code, § 76.07) (Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-2001; Ord. O-30-14, passed 11-
24-2014) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE V. ONE-WAY STREETS.
 
Street        Description                              Direction     Ord. No
Bank Place    From Miami Road to Wooster Pike          Southerly     O-4-73
Cherry Lane   Between Oak Street and Chestnut Street   Northeasterly O-19-63
Lane K        From Madisonville Road to Thorndike Road Westerly      O-9-66
Lane L        From Miami Road to Thorndike Road        Easterly      O-9-66
Murray Avenue From Plainville Road to Settle Road      Westerly      O-8-12
 
(1967 Code, § 76.08) (Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-2001; Ord. O-8-12, passed 4-23-
2012) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE VI. TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Mayor is authorized to purchase necessary traffic-control devices and
have them installed to advise the general public that:
   (A)   Traffic-control signs requiring traffic to stop at the intersection of
Lane K and Madisonville Road shall be placed on the northeast corner to control
traffic proceeding in a westerly direction on Lane K prior to entering
Madisonville Road and no one shall disobey the traffic-control sign;
   (B)   Traffic-control signs requiring traffic to stop at the intersection of
Lane Land Miami Road shall be placed on the southwest corner to control traffic
proceeding in an easterly direction on Lane L prior to entering Miami Road. No
one shall disobey the traffic-control sign;
   (C)   Not to enter Lane L from Miami Road, not to enter Lane K from
Madisonville Road; to stop on Lane L prior to entering Miami Road; to stop on
Lane K prior to entering Madisonville Road; that parking is prohibited at all
times on Lanes L, N, K, and Lytle Woods Place, on the northeast side between
Miami Road and Haines Street extended;
   (D)   The southeastward left lane on Madisonville Road be designated as a
mandatory left turn lane at Wooster Pike intersection and the southeastward
right lane on Madisonville Road be designated as either a right turn or left
turn lane at Wooster Pike intersection; and it shall be unlawful for any person
operating a motor vehicle southeastwardly on Madisonville Road in the left lane
to make a right turn at Wooster Pike;
   (E)   The operator of a motor vehicle, when proceeding in a westerly
direction on Wooster Pike and the traffic-control signal for such traffic is
red, indicating that the traffic proceeding westward on Wooster Pike should
stop, said traffic is hereby prohibited from making a turn to the right at
Miami Road and Madisonville Road; that when the traffic-control signal for
Miami Road southbound at Wooster Pike requires said traffic to stop, no right
turn shall be permitted from Miami Road onto Wooster Pike; that when the
traffic-control signal for Madisonville Road southbound at Wooster Pike
requires said traffic to stop, no right turn shall be permitted from
Madisonville Road onto Wooster Pike;
   (F)   Two-way traffic shall be allowed on West Street at all times;
   (G)   Passage of large trucks on Lane A is prohibited. Any deliveries by
large trucks shall be made from Beech Street or Homewood Road; and
   (H)   No left turn from Plainville Road onto Wooster Pike from Monday to
Saturday during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 3:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m.
(1967 Code, § 76.09; 1967 Code, § 76.10) (Ord. O-9-66, passed 4-11-1966; Ord.
O-6-71, passed 1-25- 1971; Ord. O-11-75, passed 6-2-1975; Ord. O-4-83, passed
1-24-1983; Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-2001; Ord. O-7-06, passed 8-14-2006; Ord.
O-20-12, passed 11-26-2012; Ord. O-7-23, passed 3-13-2023) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE VII. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Generally.
 
Street        Description                        Maximum mph Ord. No Date
Maple Street  Between Oak Street and Plainville  15          O-25-64
              Road
              From the municipal corporation
Miami Road    line southwardly on Miami Road to  25          O-25-64
              a point .05 of a mile north of the
              centerline of Rowan Hills Drive
              Northerly from the center line of
              the north junction of Wooster Pike
Miami Road    to a point .05 of a mile north of  25          O-25-64
              the centerline of Rowan Hills
              Drive
              Southwardly from that point of the
Miami Road    centerline of Rowan Hills Drive to 25          O-25-64
              the centerline of the north
              junction of Wooster Pike
              Placing a 25 mph speed limit sign
U.S. Route 50 25 feet east of the intersection   25          O-10-09 8-10-2009
              of eastbound U.S. Route 50 and
              West Center Street
              Through Mariemont Square by
U.S. Route 50 placing a 25 mph speed limit at    25          O-13-09 10-12-2009
              the intersection of eastbound U.S.
              Route 50 and West Street
 
   (B)   Installation of signs. The installation of a “reduced speed 25 mph
ahead sign” 175 feet west of the new 25 mph sign of the eastbound lane of U.S.
Route 50.
(1967 Code, §
73.01; 1967 Code, § 76.11) (Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-2001)
SCHEDULE VIII. TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
   No one shall operate any vehicles designed or used for the transportation of
goods, wares, freight, or merchandise on the following streets.
Street Description Ord. No
Street            Description                                           Ord. No
East Street       Between Miami Road and Thorndike Road                 O-31-71
East Street       Between Wooster Pike and Miami Road                   O-31-71
Grace Avenue      From Grove Avenue eastwardly on Cambridge Avenue to   O-31-71
                  Rowan Hills Drive
Grace Avenue      From Grove Avenue eastwardly to Rowan Hills Drive     O-31-71
Grace Avenue      From Rowan Hills Drive on Grace Avenue westwardly to  O-31-71
                  Cambridge Avenue
Grace Avenue      From Rowan Hills Drive westwardly on Cambridge Avenue O-31-71
                  to Grove Avenue
Hiawatha Avenue   Between Pocahontas Avenue and Miami Road              O-31-71
Indianview Avenue Between Wooster Pike and Miami Road                   O-31-71
Pocahontas Avenue Between Wooster Pike and Hiawatha Avenue              O-31-71
Rembold Avenue    Between Pocahontas Avenue and Miami Road              O-31-71
Thorndike Road    Between West Street and East Street                   O-31-71
West Street       Between Madisonville Road and Murray Road
 
(1967 Code, § 76.12) (Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-2001) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 79: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   No parking
   
II.   Limited parking; parallel parking
SCHEDULE I. NO PARKING.
   (A)   Regulations of the municipal streets and ways are listed in this
chapter by
Schedules I and
II. Usage of streets and ways other than as set out by this chapter is a
misdemeanor.
(1967 Code, § 76.01)
   (B)   (1)   No person shall park at the following locations.
Street Between Side Ord. No Date
Street           Between          Side            Ord. No        Date
                 From
                 intersection
                 with Mariemont
                 Avenue a
                 distance of 37
Access road      feet from the    West            O-17-05
                 point of access
                 on Mariemont
                 Avenue to the
                 west of the
                 access road
                 A distance of 44
                 feet southeast
Albert Place     of the           West            O-23-80
                 intersection of
                 Albert Place and
                 Miami Road
                 Wooster Pike and
Bank Place       a point 20 feet  West            O-5-61
                 south
                 A distance of 40
                 feet from the
Beech Street     intersection of  West            O-23-80
                 Beech St and
                 Wooster Pike
Beech Street     Murray Avenue    East
                 and Wooster Pike
                 Murray Avenue
Berwick Avenue   and Cambridge    East            O-21-67
                 Avenue
                 Grove Avenue and
Bramble Avenue   Our Lady of      North           O-10-70
                 Mercy Hospital
                 entrance
                 On side of road
Cachepit         with fire                        O-21-15        10-12-2015
                 hydrant
Cambridge        Grove and Rowan  North           O-2-87
                 Hill Drive
                 Between Mt.
                 Vernon and Miami
Center Street    Bluff on side of                 O-19-15        8-24-2015
                 road with fire
                 hydrant
Cherry Lane      Oak Street and   North
                 Chestnut Street
                 From 7:00 a.m.
Cherry Lane      to 9:00 a.m. on                  O-3-18         1-8-2018
                 days when school
                 is in session
                 From 7:00 a.m.
                 to 9:00 a.m. on
                 the three
                 parking spaces
Cherry Lane      before the Dale                  O-8-17         4-24-2017
                 Park Parking Lot
                 Driveway on days
                 when school is
                 in session
Chestnut Street  Beech Street and North
                 Oak Street
Chestnut Street  Oak Street and   South
                 Plainville Pike
                 A point 12 feet
                 south of
                 existing fire
                 plug opposite of
Crystal Springs  the fire station West            O-20-65
                 drive and a
                 point 30 feet
                 north of
                 existing fire
                 plug
                 A distance of 44
                 feet east of the
Denny Place      intersection of  South           O-23-80
                 Denny Place and
                 Pleasant Street
                 Pleasant Street
Denny Place      and all sides of North
                 center park
East Street      Miami Avenue and West
                 Crystal Springs
Elm Street       Beech Street and North
                 Oak Street
                 On side of road
Emery Lane       with fire                        O-21-15        10-12-2015
                 hydrant
Fieldhouse Way                   South           O-18-96
                 Between Mt.
                 Vernon and Miami
Flintpoint Way   Bluff on side of                 O-19-15        8-24-2015
                 road with fire
                 hydrant
Grace Avenue     Grove Avenue and South
                 Rowan Hill Drive
                 A distance of 40
Grove Avenue     feet from the    East            O-14-88        9-12-1988
                 intersection
                 with Murray
                 North line of
                 Murray Avenue
Grove Avenue     and the south    West            O-15-75
                 line of
                 Cambridge Avenue
Harvard Acres                    East            O-3-13         1-28-2013
                 On side of road
Hammerstone      with fire                        O-21-15        10-12-2015
                 hydrant
Homewood Road    Murray Avenue    East
                 and Wooster Pike
Indianview       Rembold Avenue   East
Avenue           and Wooster Pike
Indianview       South of Wooster South           O-18-14        7-14-2014
Avenue           Pike
                 Bramble Avenue
Joan Place       and a point 400  West            O-7-72
                 feet north
                 Beginning on the
                 south side of
                 Lane D beginning
Lane D           at the western   South           O-22-01
                 most point
                 extending east
                 for a distance
                 of 25 feet
                 A distance of 15
                 feet from a
                 point, 70 feet
Lane K           northeast of the East            O-7-01         3-12-2001
                 curb line of
                 Madisonville
                 Road
                 Northeasterly on
Lane L           the street side  North           O-9-66
                 of Miami Road
                 for 30 feet
                 Intersection
                 with Wooster
Madisonville     Pike and a point West            O-5-67
Road             1,128 feet
                 northwest at
                 posted hours
Madisonville     Murray Avenue    East
Road             and Wooster Pike
                 The entrance and
Madisonville     exit of the      South           O-26-60
Road             Kroger parking
                 lot
                 A distance of 25
                 feet west from
Maple Street     its eastern      South           O-23-80
                 terminus inside
                 the archway
Maple Street     Oak Street and   South           O-30-82
                 Plainville Pike
                 Pleasant Street
                 eastbound 50
                 feet from the
Mariemont Avenue stop sign and    Both            O-3-06
                 from Pleasant
                 Street westbound
                 50 feet from the
                 stop sign
                 West from Trade
Mariemont Avenue Street to        North and south O-24-81
                 Wooster Pike
                 On side of road
Mariemont Avenue with fire                        O-21-15        10-12-2015
                 hydrant
Miami Bluff      Mariemont Avenue North and south
                 and Midden Way
Miami Bluff      Midden Way and   South
                 Cachepit Way
                 On the bluff
Miami Bluff      side of the      North /west     O-5-16         2-8-2016
                 street
                 Except within
Miami Bluff      the confines of  South           O-16-08        7-28-2008
Drive            the paved
                 Concourse
                 Center Street
                 and a point 30
Miami Road       feet south of    East            O-3-69
                 West Center
                 Street
                 Extend yellow no
                 parking line an
Miami Road       additional 20    West            O-7-18         2-12-2018
                 feet at West
                 Center Street by
                 the crosswalk
                 On side of road
Midden Way       with fire                        O-21-15        10-12-2015
                 hydrant
                 On side of road
Mound Way        with fire                        O-21-15        10-12-2015
                 hydrant
                 On side of road
Mt. Vernon       with fire                        O-21-15        10-12-2015
                 hydrant
                 A distance of 45
                 feet to the                                     9-12-1988;2-8-
Murray Avenue    intersection     South           O-14-88;O-5-21 2021
                 with Grove
                 Avenue
                 Rowan Hill Drive
                 to a point
                 approximately
                 150 feet                                        1-28-1985;2-8-
Murray Avenue    eastward from    North           O-2-85;O-5-21  2021
                 the midlines of
                 Murray Avenue
                 and Rowan Hill
                 Drive
Nolen Circle                     North           O-11-69
                 Chestnut Street
Oak Street       and Murray       West            O-9-61
                 Avenue
Park Place       West side of the West            O-3-13         1-28-2013
                 street
Petoskey Avenue  3834 to Rembold  East            O-16-93        5-10-1993
                 Avenue
Petoskey Avenue  North from       East            O-7-72
                 Hiawatha Avenue
                 On the north
Petoskey Avenue  side of Wooster  East            O-3-13         1-28-2013
                 Pike
                 On the south
Petoskey Avenue  side of Wooster  East            O-3-13         1-28-2013
                 Pike
Petoskey Avenue  Rembold Avenue   East
                 and Wooster Pike
Petoskey Avenue  Wooster Pike to  West            O-16-93        5-10-1993
                 3833
                 6 feet behind
                 the egress curve
Plainville Road  at Plainville    Northwest       O-3-69
                 Road and Maple
                 Street
                 A distance of 20
                 feet south of
                 the crosswalk at
Plainville Road  the intersection West            O-5-79
                 of Plainville
                 Road and
                 Chestnut Street
                 A distance of 55
                 feet north of
Plainville Road  the intersection West            O-5-79
                 of Plainville
                 Road and
                 Chestnut Street
                 Wooster Pike and
                 Mariemont
Pleasant Street  Avenue, except   West
                 at a provided
                 parking area
                 At the inlets
Pleasant Street  opposite         East            O-4-88         4-11-1988
                 Fieldhouse Way
                 On side of road
Pleasant Street  with fire                        O-21-15        10-12-2015
                 hydrant
Pocahontas                       East
Avenue
Pocahontas       Hiawatha Avenue                  O-7-22;
Avenue           and the north    Both            O-15-79
                 corporate limits
                 Intersection of
Pocahontas       Wooster Pike and West            O-7-72
Avenue           a point 100 feet
                 north
Pocahontas       Wooster Pike and East            O-15-79
Avenue           Hiawatha Avenue
Rowan Hill Drive Miami Road and   North           O-9-66
                 Bramble Avenue
                 The midpoint
                 intersection of
                 Murray Avenue
                 and Rowan Hill
Rowan Hill Drive Drive and a      West            O-2-85         1-28-1985
                 point
                 approximately
                 125 feet north
                 of the
                 intersection
Settle Road      Murray Avenue    East            O-13-86
                 and Belmont
                 Extending no
                 parking zone by
                 16 feet of the
Settle Road      intersection of                  O-13-16        5-9-2016
                 Settle Road,
                 Hawthorn and
                 Belmont Avenues
                 A distance of 44
                 feet southwest
                 of the
Sheldon Close    intersection of  North           O-23-80
                 Sheldon Close
                 and Crystal
                 Springs
                 West Street and
                 Lane K or the
Thorndike Road   northwest        Northeast       O-3-63
                 portion between
                 East Street and
                 Lane L
                 From                             O-8-15;        4-13- 2015;
West Street      Madisonville     North, east and O-2-22;        1-10- 2022;
                 Road to          west            O-19-22        7-25- 2022
                 Thorndike
                 Miami Avenue and
West Street      Madisonville     East            O-17-67
                 Road
                 Murray Avenue
West Street      and Thorndike    West            O-17-67
                 Road
                 No stopping,
                 standing, and
                 parking at all
West Street      times between    Both            O-7-06         8-14-2006
                 Wooster Pike and
                 Madisonville
                 Road
                 Within 15 feet
West Street      of either side   South           O-8-15         4-13-2015
                 of the fire
                 hydrant
                 From 7:00 a.m.
                 to 9:00 a.m.
                 between
West Street      Thorndike and                    O-4-18         1-8-2018
                 Madisonville
                 Road, on days
                 when school is
                 in session
                 Around center
                 parks, except
Wooster Pike     west and north
                 and east side of
                 town center park
                 Crystal Springs
Wooster Pike     and eastern      South           O-39-83        11-14-1983
                 corporation
                 limit
                 East Street and
Wooster Pike     eastern          South           O-22-20        11-23-2020
                 corporation
                 limit
                 Eastern
Wooster Pike     corporation      North           O-22-20        11-23-2020
                 limit and East
                 Street
                 Eastern
Wooster Pike     corporation      North           O-39-83        11-14-1983
                 limit and Miami
                 Road
                 Entrance and
Wooster Pike     exit of the      North           O-22-20        11-23-2020
                 Strand parking
                 lot
                 Madisonville
Wooster Pike     Road and Miami   North
                 Avenue
                 Miami Avenue and
Wooster Pike     a distance of 20 South           O-22-20        11-23-2020
                 feet from Bank
                 Place
Wooster Pike     West Street and  North           O-39-83        11-14-1983
                 Homewood Road
                 Western
Wooster Pike     corporation      South           O-39-83        11-14-1983
                 limit and West
                 Street
 
      (2)   All curbs at intersections will be painted yellow to establish
state standard parking setback.
   (C)   All alleys and service lanes, except for unloading, or for services,
in Lanes A, B, C, D, E, F, G, and H. Parking shall only be permitted in those
areas in lanes except where curbs are painted yellow or signs are erected
prohibiting parking at this particular area as designated by plan marked
“Exhibit A”, on page 58A;
   (D)   Within 100 feet of a piece of fire equipment when at the scene of an
accident or fire;
   (E)   The southern drive of the Concourse;
   (F)   (1)   There shall be no parking in public and private fire lanes as
provided for in Ord. O-8-71, the Unified Fire Code of the county, and as
designated by the Fire Chief, which are posted. Whoever violates this division
(F)(1) shall be fined not more than $100 and costs; and
      (2)   No person shall park a motor vehicle within the limits of an area
designated as a street tree planting area, defined in §
96.01, where there is a street curb or gutter, or the area between the street
and property owner’s property line where there is a street curb or gutter.
Whoever violates this division (F)(2) shall not be fined more than $100 and
court costs for each offense
   (G)   The Mayor is authorized and directed to purchase and erect the
necessary no parking signs, slow children signs, and ten mph signs, to advise
of the prohibitions in this schedule. The Clerk is authorized to pay for the no
parking signs and to charge them to Account No. 201.601.52409;
   (H)   Slow children signs, indicating curve, ten mph shall be posted as the
recommended safe speed, not speed limit, on both Rowan Hill Drive and Murray
Avenue prior to the curve;
   (I)   Whoever violates the provisions of Ord. O-39-83, Ord. O-2-85, Ord. O-
4-88, Ord. O-14-88, or Ord. O-16-93 as set forth above shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed $100 and court costs for each offense;
   (J)   (1)   Cachepit Way. Install “no parking” signs on east side between
Mt. Vernon and Miami Bluff, paint corners of curbs at intersections to state
standards for parking setback;
      (2)   Murray between West Street and Grove Avenue. Due to the absence of
curbs full length on both sides of the street, install three “no parking here
to corner” signs, two at the intersection of West and Murray and one on the
north side of Murray at the intersection of Grove. Also, install two “no
parking” signs on the north side of Murray;
      (3)   Murray between Rowan Hill Drive and Lytle Woods Place. Due to the
absence of curbs, a “no parking” sign will be installed in the center of the
block on the west side of the street and four “no parking here to intersection”
signs will be installed for the east and west sides of the street at all
intersections;
      (4)   Pocahontas (south side of Wooster Pike). Due to the absence of
curbs, two “no parking” signs will be installed on the east side of the street.
Also, a “no parking here to corner” sign will be placed on both sides of the
street near the intersection of Pocahontas and Wooster Pike. Install two “no
parking in cul-de-sac” signs in cul-de-sac. Keep existing “no parking” sign on
east side of street;
      (5)   Pocahontas (north side of Wooster Pike to Hiawatha Avenue). Install
a “no parking” sign on the east side of the street in front of the library.
Remove “no parking here to corner” sign on the west side of Pocahontas at the
intersection with Hiawatha. Paint curbs yellow to standard state parking
setback for intersections at Rembold and Hiawatha. Keep existing “no parking
here to corner” sign on east side of Pocahontas;
      (6)   Lytle Woods Place. Due to the absence of curbs on the north side of
the street and in almost all of the cul-de-sac at the west end of the street, a
“no parking here to corner” sign will be placed on the north side of the street
near the intersection with Miami Avenue. Paint the curb on the south side of
the street at the intersection with Miami to state standard for parking
setback. Install three “no parking” signs in cul-de-sac. Paint the partial curb
on the south side of the cul-de-sac yellow from the west end of the partial
curb to a point east that will ensure safe passage of emergency equipment; and
      (7)   This division (J) shall go into effect at the earliest date allowed
by law.
   (K)   Yellow “no parking” line shall be extended north by four feet on
Indianview Avenue.
   (L)   Parking on West Street is permitted on the south side only as provided
for in Ord. O-19-22; no parking is permitted on school days 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.; and no parking is permitted 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m. between Thorndike and
Madisonville Road; no parking is permitted 25 feet from the stop sign at the
corner of West Street and Thorndike, and that a sign, "No Parking Here to the
Corner" shall be set approximately 30 feet from the Madisonville Road end.
(1967 Code, § 76.02) (Ord. O-19-87, passed - -; Ord. O-24-60, passed 9-26-1960;
Ord. O-25-60, passed 10-24-1960; Ord. O-20-83, passed 5-9-1983; Ord. O-39-83,
passed 11-14-1983; Ord. O-2-85, passed 1-28- 1985; Ord. O-23-85, passed 12-9-
1985; Ord. O-4-88, passed 4-11-1988; Ord. O-14-88, passed 9-12-1988; Ord. O-4-
90, passed 1-22-1990; Ord. O-16-93, passed 5-10-1993; Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-
2001; Ord. O-3-13, passed 1-28-2013; Ord. O-5-13, passed 2-25-2013; Ord. O-18-
14, passed 7-14-2014; Ord. O-8-15, passed 4-13-2015; Ord. O-19-15, passed 8-24-
2015; Ord. O-21-15, passed 10-12-2015; Ord. O-19-22, passed 7-25-2022)
SCHEDULE II. LIMITED PARKING; PARALLEL PARKING.
   (A)   Generally. No person shall park during hours stated hereinafter at the
following places.
Street Description and Time Side Ord. No Date
Street              Description and Time    Side      Ord. No         Date
                    From Grove Avenue
                    eastwardly to the
                    property line of Our
                    Lady of Mercy Hospital,
                    between the hours of 8:
                    00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
Bramble Avenue      on weekdays, except     South     O-7-78
                    that parking shall be
                    permitted within an
                    area on the south side
                    of Bramble Avenue for a
                    distance of 100 feet
                    eastwardly from Grove
                    Avenue during this time
                    Opposite Dale Park
Chestnut Street     School between 8:00     North     O-8-42
                    a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on
                    school days
Concourse and Miami Between Cachepit and
Bluff               Mound Way after 9:00              O-8-42
                    p.m.
                    For more than two hours
Hiawatha Avenue     between the hours of 8: South     O-4-81
                    00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
                    Monday through Friday
                    2-hour parking
                    restriction on school
                    days only from 7:00
Hiawatha Avenue     a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,                O-16-05
                    Monday through Friday,
                    between Pocahontas and
                    Petoskey Avenue
                    From the west curb line
                    of Oak Street, for a
                    distance of 45 feet; 15
                    minute parking
                    restriction during
                    weekdays, including
Lane C              Saturday, from 8:00     North     O-13-59
                    a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on
                    the north side of Lane
                    C, beginning 45 feet
                    from the west curb line
                    of Oak Street and
                    extending westwardly a
                    distance of 55 feet
                    Between West Street and
                    Lane N for a period in
Madisonville Road   excess of two hours     West      O-4-64
                    between 9:00 a.m. and
                    4:00 p.m., on any day
                    except Sunday
                    From the first service
                    lane immediately north
                    of the Mariemont Inn to
                    a point 100 feet
                    southeast of the point
Madisonville Road   of curvature of         West      O-5-52
                    Madisonville Road into
                    Murray Avenue extended,
                    between 7:00 a.m. to 9:
                    00 a.m., and 5:00 p.m.
                    to 7:00 p.m.
                    Between Lytle Woods
                    Place and the village
Miami Road          corporation limits,     Northwest O-25-71
                    between the hours of 8:
                    00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
                    Between Wooster Pike
                    and East Street,
Miami Road          between the hours of 3: East      O-17-77
                    00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
                    Monday through Friday
                    Between Wooster Pike
                    and Lane L Stalls shall
Miami Road          be painted along this   West      O-15-05
                    strip and marked for 1-
                    hour parking
                    At each of the four
                    corners of the Oak and
                    Chestnut Street
Oak Street          intersection, 1-hour
                    parking from 8:00 a.m.
                    to 6:00 p.m. during
                    weekdays and Saturdays
                    Between Wooster Pike
                    and Chesnut Street by
                    restricted to a 2-hour
Oak Street          limit from 6:00 a.m. to           O-15-08         6-9-2008
                    6:00 p.m. Monday
                    through Friday,
                    replacing a previous 4-
                    hour limit
                    From the north line of
                    Chestnut Street, north
                    to the south line of
                    Maple Street extended,
Oak Street          1-hour parking shall be East
                    permitted from 8:00
                    a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
                    during weekdays and
                    Saturdays
                    From the intersection
                    of Plainville Road and
                    Wooster Pike north to
Plainville          Chestnut Street,        West      O-2-93          1-11-1993
                    between 7:00 a.m. to 9:
                    00 a.m., and between 3:
                    00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.,
                    daily except Sunday
                    From the intersection
Plainville Road     of Plainville Road and  West      O-36-80
                    Wooster Pike north to
                    Chestnut Street
                    From the intersection
                    of Plainville Road and
                    Wooster Pike north to
Plainville Road     the first driveway of   East      O-36-80
                    the Parish Center, a
                    distance of
                    approximately 200 feet
                    2-hour parking
                    restriction on school
Pocahontas Avenue   days only from 7:00     West      O-16-05
                    a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
                    Monday through Friday,
                    in the 3900 block
                    For more than two hours
Thorndike Road      between the hours of 8:           O-3-67
                    00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
                    Monday through Saturday
                    From the intersection
West Center         of Miami Road for a     Northeast O-25-71
                    distance of 200 feet
                    Between West Street and
                    Bank Place during the
Wooster Pike        hours of 8:00 a.m. and            O-12-60; O-5-21 2-8-2021
                    6:00 p.m., weekdays, 2-
                    hour parking
                    From Inn Street to West
                    Street during the hours
Wooster Pike        of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00   North     O-37-82; O-5-21 2-8-2021
                    p.m. weekdays, 2-hour
                    parking
                    On the east, south, and
                    west sides of the
Wooster Pike        square during the hours           O-5-21          2-8-2021
                    of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
                    p.m. daily, except
                    Sunday, 2-hour parking
 
   (B)   Penalty. Whoever violates the provisions of Ord. O-2-93 as set forth
above shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $100 and court costs for each
offense,
(Ord. O-21-82, passed 7-12-1982; Ord. O-39-83, passed 11-14-1983; Ord. O-4-90,
passed 1-22-1990; Ord. O-2-93, passed 1-11-1993; Ord. O-46-93, passed 12-27-
1993; Ord. O-7-01, passed 3-12-2001; Ord. O-4-21, passed 2-8-2021)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   FIREWORKS, EXPLOSIVES, AND FIRE PREVENTION
      
92.   INTOXICATING LIQUORS
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   UNCLAIMED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
95.   PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
      
96.   TREES
      
97.   INCOME TAX
      
98.   MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Animals Running at Large
   
90.01   Dogs or other animals running at large; dangerous or vicious dogs
   
90.02   Confining animal found at large; publication of notice; lien
   
90.03   Unavoidable escapes
   
90.04   Fees
   
90.05   Rabies quarantine orders of Mayor
   
90.06   Interfering with enforcement of quarantine orders
   
90.07   Reporting escape of exotic or dangerous animals required
   
90.08   Dogs may be killed for certain acts
   
90.09   Defecation
Offenses Relating to Animals
   
90.20   Abandoning animals
   
90.21   Injuring animals
   
90.22   Poisoning animals
   
90.23   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals
   
90.24   Animal fights
   
90.25   Trapshooting
   
90.26   Loud dog
   
90.27   Dog tags
   
90.28   Dangerous and vicious dog defined; transfer of ownership certificate;
form stating dog’s prior behavior
   
90.29   Failure to register dog or dog kennel
   
90.30   Hindering the capture of unregistered dog
   
90.31   Unlawful tag
   
90.32   Assistance dogs with blind, deaf, or hearing impaired person, or person
with a mobility impairment, or trainer
   
90.33   Retail sale and transportation of dogs
   
90.34   Coloring rabbits or baby poultry; regulation of sale and display
   
90.35   Jacklighting prohibited
   
90.36   Keeping of livestock
   
90.37   Sexual conduct with an animal
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Assaulting police dog, horse or assistance dog, see §
136.15
   Dead animals, improper disposal as nuisance, see §
93.038
   Horse-Drawn Carriages, see §§
77.40 through
77.49
   Nuisances, see §
93.004
Statutory reference:
   Hunting and fishing regulations, see R.C. Ch. 1533
   Law enforcement canine registration, see R.C. § 955.012
   Nuisance wild animal trapping, see O.A.C. § 1501:31-15-03
   Rabies: report of dog bite, confinement of animal, report of suspected rabid
animal, see O.A.C. §§ 3701-3-28 et seq.
ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE
§ 90.01 DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   Animals running at large.
      (1)   (a)   Any person who is the owner or has charge of any animal shall
not permit it to run at large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or
alley, or upon unenclosed land, or permit them to go upon any private yard,
lot, or enclosure. Any such time that a dog is not in an enclosed and secured
area on its owner’s property, it shall be under positive leash control of the
owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog.
         (b)   Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in division (A)(1)(a)
above, an owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog may allow the dog to run off
leash at Ann Buntin Becker Park, Dogwood Bell Tower Park, the green space on
the south side of Miami Bluff Drive between 6812 Miami Bluff and 6973 Miami
Bluff, including the Mariemont Concourse, the lower 80 acres, the grassy
boulevard between Hiawatha Avenue and Rembold Avenue, and the practice field at
Waldorf School; provided, that the dogs must be under positive leash control
while in the Tot Lot area of Dogwood Park as well as at all times in the sports
field area of Dogwood Park and the practice field by Waldorf School during
sporting activities.
         (c)   This division (A)(1) shall go into effect at the earliest date
allowed by law.
      (2)   No person shall cause animals to be herded, kept, or detained for
the purpose of grazing on premises other than those owned or occupied by the
owner or keeper thereof without the consent of the owner of the premises.
      (3)   The running at large of such animal in or upon any of the places
mentioned in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) above is prima facie evidence that it
is running at large in violation of this section.
(R.C. §§ 951.01, 951.02)
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 951.99)
      (5)   The owner or keeper of an animal described herein who permits it to
run at large in violation of this section, is liable for all damages caused by
such animal upon the premises of another without reference to the fence which
may enclose such premises.
(R.C. § 951.10)
   (B)   Dogs running at large; dangerous or vicious dogs; debarked or
surgically silenced vicious dogs.
      (1)   As used in this section, DANGEROUS DOG and VICIOUS DOG have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
      (2)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to
go beyond the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer at any time the dog is
in heat unless the dog is properly in leash.
      (3)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by
the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or
harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following:
         (a)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises
of the owner, keeper, or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence,
supervision, or secure enclosure to prevent escape; or
         (b)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person.
      (4)   Except when a dangerous or vicious dog is lawfully engaged in
hunting or training for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the owner,
keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or harborer of a
dangerous or vicious dog shall fail to do either of the following:
         (a)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper, or
harborer, securely confine it at all times in a locked pen that has a top or
other locked enclosure that has a top while the dog is unattended. If the dog
is attended while in its locked yard, the person so attending said dog must be
physically able to control the dog while it is in a locked and fenced yard and
must keep the dog on a leash at all times to ensure that the dog cannot escape
from the yard; or
         (b)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper, or
harborer, keep that dog on a chain-link leash or tether that is not more than
six feet in length and additionally do the following: keep the dog in a locked
pen that has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked enclosure that has a
top; have the leash or tether controlled by a person who is of suitable age and
discretion or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash or tether to the ground
or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is adequately restrained and
station a person in close enough proximity to that dog so as to prevent it from
causing injury to any person; and to muzzle that dog.
      (5)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a vicious dog shall fail to obtain
liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in
this state providing coverage in each occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive
of interest and costs, of not less than $300,000 because of damage or bodily
injury to or death of a person caused by the vicious dog. Each owner, keeper,
or harborer of a vicious dog shall be required to submit proof of insurance
upon the request of a law enforcement official. Failure to provide said proof
of insurance shall result in the immediate confinement of the dog, at the
owner, keeper or harborer’s expense, until such insurance coverage is shown.
      (6)   No person shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person knows or has
reason to believe is a vicious dog;
         (b)   Possess a vicious dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced; or
         (c)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian
under division (B)(7) below that the person’s dog is not a vicious dog or
otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
      (7)   (a)   Before a veterinarian debarks or surgically silences a dog,
the veterinarian may give the owner of the dog a written waiver form that
attests that the dog is not a vicious dog.
         (b)   The written waiver form shall include all of the following:
            1.   The veterinarian’s license number and current business
address;
            2.   The number of the license of the dog if the dog is licensed;
            3.   A reasonable description of the age, coloring, and gender of
the dog as well as any notable markings on the dog;
            4.   The signature of the owner of the dog attesting that the
owner’s dog is not a vicious dog;
            5.   A statement that division (F) of R.C. § 955.22 prohibits any
person from doing any of the following:
               a.   Debarking or surgically silencing a dog that the person
knows or has reason to believe is a vicious dog;
               b.   Possessing a vicious dog if the person knows or has reason
to believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced; or
               c.   Falsely attesting on a waiver form provided by the
veterinarian under division (G) of R.C. § 955.22 that the person’s dog is not a
vicious dog or otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
      (8)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division
(B)(6) above that the veterinarian, who is charged with the violation obtained,
prior to debarking or surgically silencing the dog, a written waiver form that
complies with division (B)(7) above and that attests that the dog is not a
vicious dog.
(R.C. § 955.22)
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (B)(2) or (B)(3) above shall be fined
not less than $25 or more than $100 on a first offense; and on each subsequent
offense, shall be fined not less than $75 or more than $250 and may be
imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (C)(1) above,
if the offender is guilty of a violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(3) above,
the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dog that the
offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience
training, or to do both.
      (3)   If a violation of division (B)(4) or (B)(5) above involves a
dangerous or vicious dog, whoever violates divisions (B)(4) or (B)(5) above is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and of a
misdemeanor of the first degree on each subsequent offense. Additionally, the
court shall order that the vicious or dangerous dog be removed from the
possession of the owner, keeper, or harborer upon a second conviction and
placed in an appropriate facility such as the County Dog Warden or the County
Humane Society. All costs associated with the placement of said dog shall be
the responsibility of the owner, keeper, or harborer. Additionally, the court
may order the offender to personally supervise the dangerous dog that the
offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience
training, or to do both, and the court shall order the offender to obtain
liability insurance pursuant to division (B)(5) above. In the alternative, the
court may order the dangerous and/or vicious dog to be humanely destroyed by a
licensed veterinarian, the County Dog Warden, or the County Humane Society.
      (4)   If a violation of division (B)(4) above involves a vicious dog,
whoever violates division (B)(4) above is guilty of one of the following:
         (a)   On a first offense, a misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog
causes injury other than killing or serious injury to any person or domestic
animal. The person shall be guilty of a felony on each subsequent offense and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law; however, on any subsequent
offense, the dog shall be immediately removed from the possession and control
of the owner, keeper, or harborer and placed with the County Dog Warden or
County Humane Society, at the sole expense of the owner, keeper, or harborer;
or
         (b)   A felony on a first or subsequent offense if the dog kills or
seriously injures a person and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Additionally, the court shall order that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed
by a licensed veterinarian, the County Dog Warden, or the County Humane
Society.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(5) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(6) above is guilty of a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Additionally, the court shall order
that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by as licensed veterinarian, the
County Dog Warden, or the County Humane Society.
(2000 Code, § 90.01) (Ord. O-11-03, passed 7-28-2003; Ord. O-3-14, passed 2-10-
2014; Ord. O-21-16, passed 10-24-2016; Ord. O-26-20, passed 11-23-2020)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions under state law, see R.C. § 955.99(E) through (H),
(J)
     Power of municipality to regulate animals running at large, see R.C. §§
715.23 and 955.221
§ 90.02 CONFINING ANIMAL FOUND AT LARGE; PUBLICATION OF NOTICE; LIEN.
   A person finding an animal at large in violation of §
90.01 may, and a law enforcement officer of the municipality on view or
information shall, take and confine that animal, promptly giving notice of the
taking and confining of the animal to the owner or keeper, if known, and if not
known, by publishing a notice describing the animal once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county or municipality where the animal was found.
If the owner or keeper does not appear and claim the animal and pay the
compensation prescribed in §
90.04 for so taking, advertising, and keeping it within ten days from the date
of the notice, that person or the county shall have a lien for that
compensation and the animal may be sold at public auction as provided in R.C. §
1311.49. The residue of the proceeds of sale shall be paid and deposited by the
Treasurer in the General Funds of the county.
(R.C. § 951.11)
(2000 Code, § 90.02)
§ 90.03 UNAVOIDABLE ESCAPES.
   Except for vicious dogs, if it is proven that an animal running at large in
violation of §
90.01 escaped from its owner or keeper without his or her knowledge or fault,
the animal shall be returned to its owner or keeper upon payment of the
compensation prescribed in §
90.04 for its taking, advertising, and keeping.
(2000 Code, § 90.03) (Ord. O-11-03, passed 7-28-2003)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions under state law, see R.C. § 951.12
§ 90.04 FEES.
   The person or municipality whose law enforcement officer takes an animal
running at large in violation of §
90.01 is entitled to receive from the owner, keeper, or harborer all reasonable
charges and expenses for taking each animal and for advertising and keeping
such animal.
(2000 Code, § 90.04) (Ord. O-11-03, passed 7-28-2003)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions under state law, see R.C. § 951.13
§ 90.05 RABIES QUARANTINE ORDERS OF MAYOR.
   (A)   Whenever, in the judgment of the Mayor or his or her designee, rabies
is prevalent, he or she shall declare a quarantine of all dogs in the
municipality or a part thereof. During the quarantine, the owner, keeper, or
harborer of any dog shall keep it confined on the premises of the owner,
keeper, or harborer or in a pound, kennel, or other suitable place, at the
expense of the owner, keeper, or harborer, except that a dog may be permitted
to leave the premises of its owner, keeper, or harborer if it is under leash or
under the control of a responsible person. The quarantine order shall be
considered an emergency and need not be published.
   (B)   When the quarantine has been declared, the Mayor or his or her
designee may require the vaccination for rabies of all dogs within the
municipality or part thereof.
(R.C. § 955.26)
   (C)   No person shall violate a rabies quarantine order issued under this
section or R.C. § 955.26.
(R.C. § 955.39)
   (D)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
for a first offense; for each subsequent offense such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 90.05) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 INTERFERING WITH ENFORCEMENT OF QUARANTINE ORDERS.
   (A)   No person shall hinder, obstruct, resist, or interfere with any
enforcing officer while engaged in enforcing an order issued under §
90.05.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
(2000 Code, § 90.06) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 REPORTING ESCAPE OF EXOTIC OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS REQUIRED.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of any member of a species of the animal kingdom
that escapes from the owner’s or keeper’s custody or control and that is not
indigenous to this state or presents a risk of serious physical harm to persons
or property, or both, shall, within one hour after the owner or keeper
discovers or reasonably should have discovered the escape, report it to a law
enforcement officer of the municipality and the Sheriff of the county where the
escape occurred, and the Clerk of the legislative authority where the escape
occurred.
   (B)   If the office of the Clerk of the legislative authority is closed to
the public at the time a report is required by division (A) above, then it is
sufficient compliance with division (A) above if the owner or keeper makes the
report within one hour after the office is next open to the public.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 935.16) (2000 Code, § 90.07) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 DOGS MAY BE KILLED FOR CERTAIN ACTS.
   Subject to R.C. § 955.261(A)(2) and (A)(3), a dog that is chasing or
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack that attempts
to bite or otherwise endanger, or that kills or injures a person, or a dog that
chases, threatens, harasses, injures, or kills livestock, poultry, other
domestic animal, or other animal that is the property of another person, except
a cat or another dog, can be killed at the time of that chasing, threatening,
harassment, approaching, attempt, killing, or injury. If, in attempting to kill
such a dog, a person wounds it, the person is not liable to prosecution under
the criminal laws or ordinances that punish cruelty to animals. Nothing in this
section precludes a law enforcement officer from killing a dog that attacks a
police dog as defined in R.C. § 2921.321.
(R.C. § 955.28(A)) (2000 Code, § 90.08)
§ 90.09 DEFECATION.
   No person, being the owner or in charge or control of any dog or cat shall
allow or permit such dog or cat to defecate on any school grounds, village
park, or other public property or upon any private property other than that of
the owner or person in charge or control of such animal, without the permission
of the owner of the property. The restriction in this section shall not be
applicable to public property or curb lawns where the owner or person in charge
or control of such dog or cat immediately removes all feces deposited by such
dog or cat and disposes of the same in a sanitary manner.
(1967 Code, § 136.06) (Ord. O-6-49, passed 3-28-1949; Ord. O-14-58, passed 9-
22-1958; Ord. O-29-80, passed 10-27-1980; Ord. O-15-85, passed 8-12-1985)
OFFENSES RELATING TO ANIMALS
§ 90.20 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat, or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(R.C. § 959.01)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree on each
subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(3))
(2000 Code, § 90.10) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.21 INJURING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(R.C. § 959.02)
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (B), whoever violates
division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to $300 or more, whoever
violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(B))
   (C)   This section does not apply to a person killing or injuring an animal
or attempting to do so while endeavoring to prevent it from trespassing upon
his or her enclosure, or while it is so trespassing, or while driving it away
from his or her premises; provided within 15 days thereafter, payment is made
for damages done to such animal by killing or injuring, less the actual amount
of damage done by such animal while so trespassing, or a sufficient sum of
money is deposited with the nearest judge of a county court or judge of a
municipal court having jurisdiction within such time to cover the damages. The
deposit shall remain in the custody of such judge until there is a
determination of the damage resulting from such killing or injury and from the
trespass. The judge and his or her bondsmen shall be responsible for the
safekeeping of such money and for the payment thereof as for money collected
upon a judgment.
(R.C. § 959.04)
(2000 Code, § 90.11)
§ 90.22 POISONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such
capacity, to a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(R.C. § 959.03)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))
   (C)   This section does not apply to a person killing or injuring an animal
or attempting to do so while endeavoring to prevent it from trespassing upon
his or her enclosure, or while it is so trespassing, or while driving it away
from his or her premises; provided, that within 15 days thereafter, payment is
made for damages done to such animal by killing or injuring, less the actual
amount of damage done by such animal while so trespassing, or a sufficient sum
of money is deposited with the nearest judge of a county court or judge of a
municipal court having jurisdiction within such time to cover the damages. The
deposit shall remain in the custody of such judge until there is a
determination of the damage resulting from such killing or injury and from the
trespass. The judge and his or her bondsmen shall be responsible for the
safekeeping of such money and for the payment thereof as for money collected
upon a judgment.
(R.C. § 959.04)
(2000 Code, § 90.12)
§ 90.23 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division (A)(2) does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, SHELTER means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or natural
windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development, or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep, or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk; or
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water, and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound, or kill each other.
   (B)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor. Division (A) above does not prevent the dehorning of cattle.
   (C)   All fines collected for violations of division (A) above shall be paid
to the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to animals, if
there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be paid to the
General Fund.
(R.C. § 959.13)
   (D)   Cruelty to companion animals shall be as follows.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         ANIMAL RESCUE FOR DOGS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         BOARDING KENNEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         CAPTIVE WHITE- TAILED DEER. The same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
         COMPANION ANIMAL. Any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet
store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. The term does not include livestock or any
wild animal.
         CRUELTY. The same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         DOG KENNEL. An animal rescue for dogs, a boarding kennel, or a
training kennel.
         FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. The “Laboratory Animal Act of 1966", Pub.
Law No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., as amended by
the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970", Pub. Law No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970),
the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976", Pub. Law No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417
(1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985", Pub. Law No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354
(1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         LIVESTOCK. Horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle, sheep, goats, and
other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas; llamas; captive white-
tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or maintained domestically for
food or fiber.
         PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. The same meaning as in R.C. §
4741.01.
         RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. A structure or shelter or the portion of a
structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a
habitation.
         SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain;
         TORMENT. The same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         TORTURE. The same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         TRAINING KENNEL. A establishment operating for profit that keeps,
houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the dogs in return for a
fee or other consideration.
         WILD ANIMAL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty
against a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall recklessly deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (8)   Divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), (D)(4), (D)(5), (D)(6), and (D)(7) of
this section do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         (b)   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         (c)   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         (d)   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         (e)   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (D) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
society agents under R.C. § 1717.061 or to provide additional training for
humane society agents.
(R.C. § 959.131)
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit
the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition, including, but not
limited to, the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division (E), the proceeds from the sale
first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of
the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner.
      (2)   The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to
the former owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (D)(2) or (D)(5) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(3) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (D)(4) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the first degree
on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D)(6) above is guilty of a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (D)(7) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
      (6)   (a)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (D) above to forfeit to an impounding agency,
as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion animals in that
person’s ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or place limitations on
the person’s ability to own or care for any companion animals for a specified
or indefinite period of time.
         (b)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (A) of this section or division (D) of this section
to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred
by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a
result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the
costs were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section has a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E))
(2000 Code, § 90.13)
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
§ 90.24 ANIMAL FIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Engage in cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against
another;
      (2)   Use, train, or possess any animal for seizing, detaining, or
maltreating a domestic animal.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Be employed at cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal
against another;
      (2)   Do any of the following regarding an event involving cockfighting,
bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against another:
         (a)   Wager money or anything else of value on the results of the
event;
         (b)   Pay money or give anything else of value in exchange for
admission to or being present at the event;
         (c)   Receive money or anything else of value in exchange for the
admission of another person to the event or for another person to be present at
the event;
         (d)   Use, possess, or permit or cause to be present at the event any
device or substance intended to enhance an animal’s ability to fight or to
inflict injury on another animal;
         (e)   Permit or cause a minor to be present at the event if any person
present at or involved with the event is conducting any of the activities
described in division (B)(1) or (B)(2)(a), (B)(2)(b), (B)(2)(c), or (B)(2)(d)
of this section.
   (C)   A person who knowingly witnesses cockfighting, bearbaiting, or an
event in which one animal is pitted against another when a violation of
division (B) of this section is occurring at the cockfighting, bearbaiting, or
event is an aider and abettor and has committed a violation of this division.
(R.C. § 959.15)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 959.99(C), (I))
(2000 Code, § 90.14)
Statutory reference:
   Dogfighting, felony provisions, see R.C. § 959.16
§ 90.25 TRAPSHOOTING.
   (A)   Live birds or fowl shall not be used as targets in trapshooting.
(R.C. § 959.17)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 90.15)
§ 90.26 LOUD DOG.
   (A)   No person shall own, harbor, or keep in custody a dog which disturbs
the peace by barking, yelping, howling, or making other loud noises to the
annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking, yelping,
howling, and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes by such
dog, whether confined inside a residence or building or to the outside area,
shall be deemed to have disturbed the peace and to have caused the annoyance
and discomfort of persons; provided, that at the time of the complaint, no
person or persons were trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private
property of the owner, and; provided, that the dog was not being teased or
provoked in any manner.
   (B)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be lodged, or
fed within any dwelling, building, yard, or enclosure owned or occupied by such
person shall be considered as harboring or keeping such dog.
   (C)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn the
person in writing of the violation. Upon a second such complaint within 30
days, the enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of this
section.
   (D)   Division (A) above does not apply to owners, operators, or employees
of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels, or licensed animal boarding
establishments, nor does this section apply to blind, deaf or hearing impaired,
or mobility impaired persons when the dog serves as an assistance dog.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(2000 Code, § 90.16)
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances generally, see Ch. 93
§ 90.27 DOG TAGS.
   (A)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under R.C. Ch. 955 or one licensed under R.C. Ch. 956, shall fail to
require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection with a
certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any time a valid tag
shall be prima facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any dog
found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or destruction.
(R.C. § 955.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 90.17)
§ 90.28 DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOG DEFINED; TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP CERTIFICATE;
FORM STATING DOG’S PRIOR BEHAVIOR.
   (A)   As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DANGEROUS DOG.
         (a)   A dog that, without provocation, and subject to division (b) of
this definition, has done any of the following:
            1.   Caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person;
            2.   Killed another dog;
            3.   Been the subject of a third or subsequent violation of §
90.01(A).
         (b)   DANGEROUS DOG does not include a police dog that has chased or
approached in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack, or
has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person while the police dog is
being used to assist  law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.
      MENACING FASHION. A dog that would cause any person being chased or
approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to
that person.
      POLICE DOG. A dog that has been trained and may be used to assist one or
more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      VICIOUS DOG.
         (a)   Means a dog that, without provocation and subject to division
(b) of this definition, has killed or caused serious injury to any person,
         (b)   VICIOUS DOG does not include either of the following:
            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person or that has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist law enforcement officers in
the performance of their official duties; or
            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog.
(Ord. O-19-19, passed 10-28-2019)
   (B)   (1)   Upon the transfer of ownership of any dog, the seller of the dog
shall give the buyer a transfer of ownership certificate that shall be signed
by the seller.
      (2)   The certificate shall contain the registration number of the dog,
the name of the seller, and a brief description of the dog. Blank forms of the
certificate may be obtained from the County Auditor.
   (C)   Prior to the transfer of ownership or possession of any dog, upon the
buyer’s or other transferee’s request, the seller or other transferor of the
dog shall give to the person a written notice relative to the behavior and
propensities of the dog.
   (D)   Within ten days after the transfer of ownership or possession of any
dog, if the seller or transferor of the dog has knowledge that the dog is a
dangerous or vicious dog, he or she shall give to the buyer or transferee, the
Board of Health for the district in which the buyer or other transferee
resides, and the Dog Warden of the county in which the buyer or other
transferee resides, a completed copy of a written form on which the seller
shall furnish the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the buyer or other transferee of the dog;
      (2)   The age, sex, color, breed, and current registration number of the
dog;
      (3)   In addition, the seller shall answer the following questions which
shall be specifically stated on the form as follows:
         “Has the dog ever chased or attempted to attack or bite a person? If
yes, describe the incident(s) in which the behavior occurred”.
         “Has the dog ever bitten a person? If yes, describe the incident(s) in
which the behavior occurred”.
“Has the dog ever seriously injured or killed a person? If yes, describe the
incident(s) in which the behavior occurred”.
      (4)   The Dog Warden of the county in which the seller resides furnishes
the form to the seller at no cost.
(R.C. § 955.11)
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (C) or (D) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on
each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 955.99(A))
(2000 Code, § 90.18)
§ 90.29 FAILURE TO REGISTER DOG OR DOG KENNEL.
   (A)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
nor owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by R.C. § 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(R.C. § 955.21)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 nor more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
(2000 Code, § 90.19)
§ 90.30 HINDERING THE CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(R.C. § 955.24)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
(2000 Code, § 90.20)
§ 90.31 UNLAWFUL TAG.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered, or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(R.C. § 955.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 90.21)
§ 90.32 ASSISTANCE DOGS WITH BLIND, DEAF, OR HEARING IMPAIRED PERSON, OR PERSON
WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT, OR TRAINER.
   (A)   When a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired, a person with a
mobility impairment, or a trainer of an assistance dog is accompanied by an
assistance dog, the person or trainer, as applicable, is entitled to the full
and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of all public
conveyances, hotels, and lodging places, all places of public accommodation,
amusement, or resort, and other places to which the general public is invited,
and may take the dog into such conveyances and places, subject only to the
conditions and limitations applicable to all persons not so accompanied, except
that:
      (1)   The dog shall not occupy a seat in any public conveyance;
      (2)   The dog shall be leashed while using the facilities of a common
carrier; and
      (3)   Any dog in training to become an assistance dog shall be covered by
a liability insurance policy provided by the nonprofit special agency engaged
in such work protecting members of the public against personal injury or
property damage caused by the dog.
   (B)   No person shall deprive a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing
impaired, a person who has a mobility impairment, or a trainer of an assistance
dog when the person or trainer, as applicable, is accompanied by an assistance
dog of any of the advantages, facilities, or privileges provided in division
(A) of this section, and no person shall charge the person or trainer a fee or
charge for the dog.
(R.C. § 955.43(A), (B))
   (C)   As used in this section:
      ASSISTANCE DOG. A dog that has been trained by a nonprofit or for-profit
special agency and that is one of the following:
         (a)   A guide dog;
         (b)   A hearing dog;
         (c)   A service dog.
      BLIND. Either of the following:
         (a)   Vision 20/200 or less in the better eye with proper correction;
or
         (b)   Field defect in the better eye with proper correction that
contracts the peripheral field so that the diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      GUIDE DOG. A dog that has been trained or is in training to assist a
blind person.
      HEARING DOG. A dog that has been trained or is in training to assist a
deaf or hearing- impaired person.
      INSTITUTIONS OF EDUCATION.
         (a)   Any state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.32;
         (b)   Any private college or university that holds a certificate of
authorization issued by the State Board of Regents pursuant to R.C. Ch. 1713;
         (c)   Any elementary or secondary school operated by a board of
education;
         (d)   Any chartered or nonchartered nonpublic elementary or secondary
school; or
         (e)   Any school issued a certificate of registration by the State
Board of Career Colleges and Schools.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Any person, regardless of age, who is
subject to a physiological impairment regardless of its cause, nature, or
extent that renders the person unable to move about without the aid of
crutches, a wheelchair, or any other form of support, or that limits the
person's functional ability to ambulate, climb, descend, sit, rise, or perform
any related function. The phrase includes a person with a neurological or
psychological disability that limits the person's functional ability to
ambulate, climb,  descend, sit, rise, or perform any related function. The
phrase also includes a person with a seizure disorder and a person who is
diagnosed with autism.
      SERVICE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to
assist a person with a mobility impairment.
(R.C. §§ 955.011(B), 955.43(C))
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(D))
(2000 Code, § 90.22)
Cross-reference:
   Assaulting assistance dog, see §
136.15
§ 90.33 RETAIL SALE AND TRANSPORTATION OF DOGS.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or expose for sale to the general
public at retail any dog under the age of eight weeks.
   (B)   No person shall receive or ship, for sale to the general public at
retail, any dog that is not accompanied by a certificate, issued by a licensed
veterinarian who is accredited by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and
authorized to issue health certificates for animals in interstate commerce,
certifying that the dog is sufficiently sound and healthy to be reasonably
expected to withstand the intended transportation without adverse effect.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the transportation of dogs in
interstate commerce by common carrier; provided, that neither the point of
shipment nor the point of receiving is within this state.
   (D)   No person responsible for the transportation of a pregnant dog shall
be liable in damages for any injury or illness of, or the death of, the dog or
any puppies, whenever the injuries, illness or death results from the birth of
such puppies during the time the dog is being transported.
(R.C. § 955.50)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 90.23)
§ 90.34 COLORING RABBITS OR BABY POULTRY; REGULATION OF SALE AND DISPLAY.
   (A)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell,
offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle, or give away any rabbit or baby
poultry which has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four
weeks of age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in
lots of less than three. Stores, shops, vendors, and others offering young
poultry for sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or
other heating devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health,
and shall keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(R.C. § 925.62)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 925.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 90.24)
§ 90.35 JACKLIGHTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall throw or cast the rays of a spotlight or other
artificial light from any vehicle into any field, woodland, or forest while
having in his or her possession a hunting device, or throw or cast the rays of
a spotlight or other artificial light from any vehicle into any field,
woodland, or forest for the purpose of locating a wild animal.
   (B)   This section does not apply to law enforcement officers, wildlife
officers, military personnel, and officers or employees of the Department of
Natural Resources while in the performance of their duties, or to any landowner
or lessee having a reason to use a light while engaged in surveillance or
protection of his or her property.
   (C)   An officer whose duty it is to enforce this chapter may arrest a
person whom he or she has reasonable grounds to believe is violating this
section, search the vehicle for firearms or other hunting implements in the
possession or under the control of that person, and seize the same.
(R.C. § 1533.161)
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 90.25) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.36 KEEPING OF LIVESTOCK.
   No person shall own, keep or harbor any pets within the Village of Mariemont
such as chicks, pigs, horses, mules, cows, goats, sheep or any member of the
equidae family, the bovidae family, or any fowl or poultry, and other such
alternative animals that are considered livestock. Whoever violates this
section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor, punishable by a maximum of $150
per day that said violation continues.
(Ord. O-11-16, passed 4-11-2016)
§ 90.37 SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ANIMAL. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian, either dead
or alive.
      OFFENSE. Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in violation of
R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Means either of the following committed for the purpose
of sexual gratification:
         (a)   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact
of the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis
of the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and
the penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva
of one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         (b)   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person’s body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is
not specifically provided shall be subject to the penalty as provided in §
10.99.
(2000 Code, § 90.99)
CHAPTER 91: FIREWORKS, EXPLOSIVES, AND FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fireworks and Explosives
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Possession, sale, and use of fireworks
   
91.03   Permit to use fireworks
   
91.04   Manufacturing or wholesale sale without a license; prohibitions
   
91.05   Purchasers to comply with law; unauthorized purchases
   
91.06   Exhibition without a license; prohibitions for exhibitions
   
91.07   Unauthorized transportation or shipping
   
91.08   Application of subchapter
   
91.09   Arrest of offender; seizure and forfeiture of fireworks; distribution
of fines
   
91.10   Safety requirements for fireworks showroom structures
   
91.11   Storage of explosives
   
91.12   Blasting permit
Fire Prevention
   
91.30   Removal of flammable materials or obstructions
   
91.31   Protective appliances
   
91.32   Compliance with order
   
91.33   Waste receptacles
   
91.34   Hotel to have fire warning device producing visible signal
   
91.35   Fire suppression systems
   
91.36   Violations of State Fire Code prohibited
   
91.37   Posting arson notices in hotels, motels and other places
   
91.38   Negligent burning
   
91.39   Spreading alarm of unfriendly fire
   
91.40   Unvented heaters
Open Burning
   
91.55   Definitions
   
91.56   Relations to other prohibitions
   
91.57   Open burning in restricted areas
   
91.58   Permission and notice to open burn
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance, see §
137.06
   Fire Department, see Ch. 35
   License to possess dangerous ordnance, see §
137.10
   Vehicles carrying explosives, see §
77.06
Statutory reference:
   Fire Marshal, fire safety, see R.C. Ch. 3737
   Fireworks, state law provisions, see R.C. Ch. 3743
   State Fire Code, see O.A.C. Ch. 1301:7-7
   Open burning, see O.A.C. Ch. 3745-19
   Power to regulate explosives, see R.C. § 715.60
FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   1.3G FIREWORKS. Display fireworks consistent with regulations of the U.S.
Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation “Division 1.3"
in C.F.R. Title 49.
   1.4G FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the U.S.
Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation “Division 1.4"
in C.F.R. Title 49.
   BEER. The same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
   BOOBY TRAP. A small tube that has a string protruding from both ends that
has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the ends of
the string.
   CIGARETTE LOAD. A small wooden peg that is coated with a small quantity of
explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to fire
aerial shells.
   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, except
ordinary matches and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.
   FIREWORKS INCIDENT. Any action or omission that occurs at a fireworks
exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of injury or
death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
      (1)   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or other
use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials; or
      (2)   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable requirement
imposed by this chapter or R.C. Ch. 3743, or any applicable rule adopted under
this chapter or R.C. Ch. 3743.
   FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE. A discharge site or other location at a fireworks
exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an injury or
death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location where evidence
of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a fireworks
incident is found
   FIREWORKS PLANT. All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
   FOUNTAIN DEVICE. Means a specific type of 1.4G firework that meets all of
the following criteria:
      (1)   It is nonaerial and nonreport producing.
      (2)   It is recognized and manufactured in accordance with sections 3.1.1
and 3.5 of APA standard 87-1 (2001 edition).
      (3)   It is a ground-based or hand-held sparkler with one or more tubes
containing a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition, with or without additional effects that may include a colored
flame, audible crackling effect, audible whistle effect, or smoke.
      (4)   It contains not more than 75 grams of the nonexplosive pyrotechnic
mixture in any individual tube and not more than 500 grams or less for multiple
tubes.
   HIGHWAY. Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR. The same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
   LICENSED BUILDING. A building on the licensed premises of a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy by the
building official having jurisdiction.
   LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR. A person licensed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.
   LICENSED FOUNTAIN DEVICE RETAILER or LICENSED RETAILER. Means a person
licensed pursuant to R.C. § 3743.26.
   LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.
   LIST OF LICENSED EXHIBITORS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.51(C).
   LIST OF LICENSED MANUFACTURERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.03(C).
   LIST OF LICENSED WHOLESALERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.16(C).
   MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from raw materials, none
of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the processing of
fireworks.
   NAVIGABLE WATERS. Any body of water susceptible of being used in its
ordinary condition as a highway of commerce over which trade and travel is or
may be conducted in the customary modes, but does not include a body of water
that is not capable of navigation by barges, tugboats, and other large vessels.
   NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.
      (1)   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the user,
including, but not limited to, booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers, and
snappers;
      (2)   Snakes or glow worms;
      (3)   Smoke devices; or
      (4)   Trick matches.
   PARTY POPPER. A small plastic or paper item that contains not more than 16
milligrams of friction- sensitive explosive composition that is ignited by
pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers are
expelled when the item is ignited.
   PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from materials all or part
of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not include the
mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
   RAILROAD. Any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers for
hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings installed and
primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
   RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
   SMOKE DEVICE. A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition that,
upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
   SNAKE or GLOW WORM. A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
   SNAPPER. A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of
explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when dropped,
implodes.
   STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real estate
approved by the Ohio Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or R.C. §
3743.17(F) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
   TRICK MATCH. A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small quantity of
explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small report or a
shower of sparks.
   WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLESALE. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
   WIRE SPARKLER. A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition
and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(R.C. § 3743.01) (2000 Code, § 91.01)
§ 91.02 POSSESSION, SALE, AND USE OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 to 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 to 3743.21, a
shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. § 3743.40, a licensed fountain
device retailer as authorized by R.C. § 3743.27, a person as authorized by R.C.
§§ 3743.44 and 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by
R.C. §§ 3743.50 to 3743.55, or as authorized by any municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of these statutes, and except as provided in
R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (H), R.C. §§ 3743.45 and 3743.80 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed
exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, no person shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this
municipality.
   (C)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
   (D)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18 years
of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales showroom
unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or other
responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person, other than
a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or shipping
permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.
   (F)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks
while in possession or control of, or under the influence of, any intoxicating
liquor, beer, or controlled substance.
   (G)   No person shall negligently discharge, ignite, or explode fireworks on
the property of another person without that person's permission to use
fireworks on that property.
(R.C. § 3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H))
   (H)   Purchase, use, and local regulation of consumer-grade fireworks.
      (1)   Any person who intends to obtain possession in this state of 1.4G
fireworks purchased in this state shall obtain possession of the 1.4G fireworks
only from a licensed retailer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed wholesaler
and shall be subject to this division (H).
      (2)   Any person authorized under this division (H) to possess 1.4G
fireworks in this state may discharge, ignite, or explode those fireworks on
private property, with authorization from the property owner, on the following
days each year:
         (a)   January 1st;
         (b)   Chinese new year's day;
         (c)   May 5th;
         (d)   The last Monday in May, and the Saturday and Sunday immediately
preceding that day;
         (e)   June 19th;
         (f)   July 3rd, 4th, and 5th;
         (g)   The first Friday, Saturday, and Sunday before and after July
4th;
         (h)   The first Monday of September, and the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding that day;
         (i)   Diwali;
         (j)   December 31st.
      (3)   Fireworks discharged, ignited, or exploded pursuant to this
division (H) shall not be considered a public exhibition.
      (4)   The municipality may do either of the following:
         (a)   Restrict the dates and times a person may discharge, ignite, or
explode fireworks purchased pursuant to this division (H).
         (b)   Ban the discharge, ignition, or explosion of fireworks purchased
pursuant to this division (H).
      (5)   This division (H) does not limit the enforcement of any ordinance,
resolution, or statute that regulates noise, disturbance of the peace, or
disorderly conduct.
(R.C. § 3743.45) (2000 Code, § 91.02) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony offense for disabling a fire suppression system, see R.C. § 3743.65
(F)
§ 91.03 PERMIT TO USE FIREWORKS.
   (A)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§ 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
   (B)   The approval required by division (A) above shall be evidenced by the
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or similar
chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the exhibition. Any
exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition may
obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal or, if available, from
the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer.
   (C)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
   (D)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
   (E)   If the legislative authority has prescribed a fee for the issuance of
a permit for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention
officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
their designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite
fee.
   (F)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least one million dollars with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments
that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death, or loss
to person or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of
insurance coverage of at least one million dollars for liability arising from
injury, death, or loss of persons or property emanating from the fireworks
exhibition. The legislative authority may require the exhibitor to provide an
indemnity bond or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those
required by this division (F). The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their designee,
shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the
insurance coverage required by this division (F) or by the legislative
authority.
   (G)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief, or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal. A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
   (H)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
   (I)   The legislative authority shall require that a certified fire safety
inspector, Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and
after the exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the
exhibition is to take place and determine whether the exhibition is in
compliance with this chapter and R.C. Ch. 3743.
(R.C. § 3743.54(B) through (F)) (2000 Code, § 91.03) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Notice of fireworks incident, see R.C. § 3743.541
§ 91.04 MANUFACTURING OR WHOLESALE SALE WITHOUT A LICENSE; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
knowingly fail to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.05 and 3743.18 or the requirements of R.C. §§ 3743.06
and 3743.19.
   (B)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to maintain complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as
required by R.C. §§ 3743.07 and 3743.20, or to permit an inspection of these
records or the premises of a fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.08 and 3743.21.
   (C)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to comply with an order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.01(B)(1) and 3743.21(B)(1) within the specified period of time.
   (D)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to comply with an order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.08(B)(2) and 3743.21(B)(2) until the nonconformities are eliminated,
corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72 hour period specified in those
divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
   (E)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar, or a
match, lighter, other flame- producing item, or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant or on the
premises of a wholesaler of fireworks, except as smoking is authorized in
specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer or wholesaler pursuant to
R.C. § 3743.06(C) or R.C. § 3743.19(D).
   (F)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of the fireworks plant or on the premises of a wholesaler of
fireworks.
   (G)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks or licensed wholesaler of
fireworks shall negligently fail to furnish a safety pamphlet to a purchaser of
1.4G fireworks as required by R.C. § 3743.47(A).
   (H)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks or licensed wholesaler of
fireworks shall negligently fail to have safety glasses available for sale as
required by R.C. § 3743.47(B).
(R.C. §§ 3743.60(E) through (L), 3743.61(E) through (L)) (2000 Code, § 91.04)
Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony provisions, see R.C. §§ 3743.60(A) through (D) and 3743.61(A) through
(D)
§ 91.05 PURCHASERS TO COMPLY WITH LAW; UNAUTHORIZED PURCHASES.
   (A)   No person who purchases fireworks in this municipality shall obtain
possession of the fireworks in this municipality unless the person complies
with R.C. §§ 3743.44 to 3743.46.
   (B)   Except for the purchase of 1.4G fireworks made under R.C. § 3743.45,
no person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks in this
state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than from a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G fireworks,
to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after the time of
their purchase.
   (C)   No person who purchases fireworks in this state under R.C. § 3743.45
shall give or sell to any other person in this municipality fireworks that the
person has acquired in this state.
(R.C. § 3743.63) (2000 Code, § 91.05) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.06 EXHIBITION WITHOUT A LICENSE; PROHIBITIONS FOR EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with R.C. § 3743.53(C) and (D).
   (B)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to R.C.
§ 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit so
secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation
with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or with a
designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
pursuant to those sections.
   (C)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use at
a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with the
conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or be
under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance
while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
   (E)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to assist
the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the employee
is registered with the State Fire Marshal under R.C. § 3743.56.
(R.C. § 3743.64(C) through (G)) (2000 Code, § 91.06) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony provisions, see R.C. § 3743.64(A), (B), and (H)
   Notice of fireworks incident, see R.C. § 3743.541
§ 91.07 UNAUTHORIZED TRANSPORTATION OR SHIPPING.
   (A)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.58.
   (B)   As used in this division (B), FIREWORKS includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under R.C. § 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly to
the holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
   (C)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under R.C. § 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(R.C. § 3743.66) (2000 Code, § 91.07) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.08 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter does not apply to the following:
   (A)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage, or use in
emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals for
marine, aviation, or highway use;
   (B)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
fusees, torpedoes, or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
   (C)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
   (D)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state, as recognized by the Adjutant General of Ohio, of pyrotechnic
devices;
   (E)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used; provided,
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
   (F)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms, or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
   (G)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
wire sparklers; or
   (H)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use an
explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
      (1)   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
      (2)   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet; or
      (3)   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the U.S. Department of the
Treasury and the U.S. Department of Transportation with respect to the storage
and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
(R.C. § 3743.80) (2000 Code, § 91.08)
§ 91.09 ARREST OF OFFENDER; SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF FIREWORKS; DISTRIBUTION
OF FINES.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal, an assistant fire marshal, or a certified fire
safety inspector may arrest, or may cause the arrest of, any person whom he or
she finds in the act of violating, or who he or she has reasonable cause to
believe has violated, any provision of this subchapter. Any arrest shall be
made in accordance with statutory and constitutional provisions governing
arrests by law enforcement officers.
   (B)   If the Fire Marshal, an assistant fire marshal, or certified fire
safety inspector has probable cause to believe that fireworks are being
manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in violation of this
subchapter, he or she may seize the fireworks. Any seizure of fireworks shall
be made in accordance with statutory and constitutional provisions governing
searches and seizures by law enforcement officers. The Fire Marshal’s office or
certified fire safety inspector’s office shall impound at the site or safely
keep seized fireworks pending the time they are no longer needed as evidence. A
sample of the seized fireworks is sufficient for evidentiary purposes. The
remainder of the seized fireworks may be disposed of pursuant to an order from
a court of competent jurisdiction after notice and a hearing.
   (C)   Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in
violation of this subchapter shall be forfeited by the offender. The Fire
Marshal’s office or certified fire safety inspector’s office shall dispose of
seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in R.C. §§ 2981.11 to
2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law enforcement agencies, and
the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for claims for the loss of or
damages to the seized fireworks.
   (D)   This section does not affect the authority of peace officers, as
defined in R.C. § 2935.01, to make arrests for violations of this subchapter or
to seize fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in
violation of this subchapter.
   (E)   Any fines imposed for a violation of this subchapter relating to the
sale, purchase, possession, or discharge of fireworks shall be distributed as
set forth in R.C. § 3743.68(D).
(R.C. § 3743.68) (2000 Code, § 91.09)
§ 91.10 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR FIREWORKS SHOWROOM STRUCTURES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as described in division (A)(2) below, all retail sales
of 1.4G fireworks by a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler shall only occur
from an approved retail sales showroom on a licensed premises or from a
representative sample showroom as described in this section on a licensed
premises. For the purposes of this section, a retail sale includes the transfer
of the possession of the 1.4G fireworks from the licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler to the purchaser of the fireworks.
      (2)   Sales of 1.4G fireworks to a licensed exhibitor for a properly
permitted exhibition shall occur in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio
Revised Code and rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal under R.C. Ch. 119.
Such rules shall specify, at a minimum, that the licensed exhibitor holds a
license under R.C. § 3743.51, that the exhibitor possesses a valid exhibition
permit issued in accordance with R.C. § 3743.54, and that the fireworks shipped
are to be used at the specifically permitted exhibition.
   (B)   (1)   All wholesale sales of fireworks by a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler shall only occur from a licensed premises to persons who intend to
resell the fireworks purchased at wholesale.
      (2)   A wholesale sale by a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler may occur
as follows:
         (a)   The direct sale and shipment of fireworks to a person outside of
this state;
         (b)   From an approved retail sales showroom as described in this
section;
         (c)   From a representative sample showroom as described in this
section;
         (d)   By delivery of wholesale fireworks to a purchaser at a licensed
premises outside of a structure or building on that premises. All other
portions of the wholesale sales transaction may occur at any location on a
licensed premises; or
         (e)   Any other method as described in rules adopted by the Fire
Marshal under R.C. Ch. 119.
   (C)   (1)   A licensed manufacturer or wholesaler shall only sell 1.4G
fireworks from a representative sample showroom or a retail sales showroom.
Each licensed premises shall only contain one sales structure.
      (2)   (a)   A representative sample showroom shall consist of a structure
constructed and maintained in accordance with the Nonresidential Building Code
adopted under R.C. Ch. 3781 and the Fire Code adopted under R.C. § 3737.82 for
a use and occupancy group that permits mercantile sales.
         (b)   A representative sample showroom shall not contain any
pyrotechnics, pyrotechnic materials, fireworks, explosives, explosive
materials, or any similar hazardous materials or substances.
         (c)   A representative sample showroom shall be used only for the
public viewing of fireworks product representations, including paper materials,
packaging materials, catalogs, photographs, or other similar product
depictions.
         (d)   The delivery of product to a purchaser of fireworks at a
licensed premises that has a representative sample structure shall not occur
inside any structure on a licensed premises.
         (e)   Such product delivery shall occur on the licensed premises in a
manner prescribed by rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C.
Ch. 119.
      (3)   If a manufacturer or wholesaler elects to conduct sales from a
retail sales showroom, the showroom structures, to which the public may have
any access and in which employees are required to work, on all licensed
premises, shall comply with the following safety requirements:
         (a)   A fireworks showroom that is constructed or upon which expansion
is undertaken on and after June 30, 1997, shall be equipped with interlinked
fire detection, fire suppression, smoke exhaust, and smoke evacuation systems
that are approved by the Superintendent of Industrial Compliance in the
Department of Commerce.
         (b)   1.   A fireworks showroom that first begins to operate on or
after June 30, 1997, or that resumes operations at any time after a period of
inactive status of licensure greater than one year, and to which the public has
access for retail purposes shall not exceed 7,500 square feet in floor area.
            2.   A fireworks showroom that, through construction of a new
showroom, expansion of an existing showroom, or similar means, first exceeds
5,000 square feet, to which the public has access for retail purposes, after
February 7, 2022, shall be equipped with a sprinkler system that meets the
criteria for sprinkler systems in extra hazard (group 2) occupancies under
"NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems (2019 Edition)."
            3.    Notwithstanding division (D) of this section, the State Fire
Marshal may provide a variance to the requirements of division (C)(3)(b)2. of
this section pursuant to R.C. § 3743.59 for a sprinkler system that matches or
exceeds the degree of safety provided by a sprinkler system that meets the
criteria for sprinkler systems in extra hazard (group 2) occupancies under
"NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems (2019 Edition)."
         (c)   A newly constructed or an existing fireworks showroom structure
that exists on September 23, 2008, but that, on or after September 23, 2008, is
altered or added to in a manner requiring the submission of plans, drawings,
specifications, or data pursuant to R.C. § 3791.04, shall comply with a graphic
floor plan layout that is approved by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent
of Industrial Compliance showing width of aisles, parallel arrangement of
aisles to exits, number of exits per wall, maximum occupancy load, evacuation
plan for occupants, height of storage or display of merchandise, and other
information as may be required by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent of
Industrial Compliance.
         (d)   A fireworks showroom structure that exists on June 30, 1997,
shall be in compliance on or after June 30, 1997, with floor plans showing
occupancy load limits and internal circulation and egress patterns that are
approved by the State Fire Marshal and Superintendent of Industrial Compliance,
and that are submitted under seal as required by R.C. § 3791.04.
   (D)   The safety requirements established in division (C) above are not
subject to any variance, waiver, or exclusion pursuant to this chapter or any
applicable building code.
(R.C. § 3743.25) (2000 Code, § 91.10) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.11 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.
   It shall be unlawful to store at any time within the municipality a quantity
of gunpowder or other similar explosive weighing in excess of 100 pounds.
(2000 Code, § 91.20) Penalty, see §
91.99
Statutory reference:
   Illegal manufacture or processing of explosives, felony provisions, see R.C.
§ 2923.17
§ 91.12 BLASTING PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the municipality without
making application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the Mayor or other
proper municipal officer.
   (B)   The Mayor or other proper municipal officer before granting such
permit may require the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the
municipality and all other persons against injury or damages which might result
from the proposed blasting.
(2000 Code, § 91.21) Penalty, see §
91.99
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 91.30 REMOVAL OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS OR OBSTRUCTIONS.
   Any flammable or combustible materials not arranged or stored in such a
manner as to afford reasonable safety against the danger of fire, or any matter
stored or arranged in such a manner as to impede or prevent access to, or exit
from, any premises in case of fire, shall be ordered by the Fire Chief to be
removed or rearranged in such manner as to eliminate any fire hazard. The order
shall be in writing and delivered to the owner, lessee, or occupant of the
premises.
(2000 Code, § 91.30) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.31 PROTECTIVE APPLIANCES.
   If the Fire Chief finds upon inspection that the appliances for protection
against fire are wholly wanting or are inadequate in number, condition, size,
arrangement, or efficiency for the reasonable protection of the premises
against fire, he or she shall cause an order in writing to be delivered to the
owner, lessee, or occupant requiring the installation, replacement, or repair
of appliances adequate for the reasonable protection of the premises in case of
fire.
(2000 Code, § 91.31) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.32 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER.
   An order to correct the hazardous conditions specified in either §
91.30 or
91.31 shall be directed to the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises,
building, or structure, or to the person in control of the articles, material,
goods, wares, or merchandise, or to the owner thereof, as the circumstances may
require. It is made the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises,
building, or structure, and of the person in control of such articles,
materials, goods, wares, and merchandise, or the owner thereof, to comply with
the order with all reasonable dispatch and diligence.
(2000 Code, § 91.32) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.33 WASTE RECEPTACLES.
   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any material of a
similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar or any other
portion of any building of any kind. Proper fireproof receptacles shall be
provided for such hazardous materials.
(2000 Code, § 91.33) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.34 HOTEL TO HAVE FIRE WARNING DEVICE PRODUCING VISIBLE SIGNAL.
   (A)   Every hotel shall have available at least one operational single
station automatic fire warning device approved by the Fire Chief that produces
a visible warning signal when activated by every product of combustion. The
device, at the discretion of the owner, may also be activated by an early
warning fire protection system. Hotels having fewer than 75 rooms shall have at
least one warning device available for its guests. Hotels having more than 75
rooms shall have available for its guests one device for every group of 75
rooms. Upon the request of a guest, such a device, if available, shall be
installed in the guest’s room.
   (B)   As used in this section, HOTEL means every establishment kept, used,
maintained, advertised, or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are offered to guests in which five or more rooms are used for
accommodation of such guests, whether the rooms are in one or several
structures, except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 5739.091.
(R.C. §§ 3781.107, 5739.01(M))
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not
more than $1,000.
(R.C. §§ 3791.02, 3791.03)
(2000 Code, § 91.34)
§ 91.35 FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Every building constructed in this municipality with floors used for
human occupancy located more than 75 feet in height above the lower level of
fire department vehicle access shall have a fire suppression system installed
and in operation in conformity with the rules of the state Board of Building
Standards adopted pursuant to R.C. § 3781.10.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM. A system that includes devices and equipment to
detect a fire, actuates an alarm, and suppress or control a fire.
      HUMAN OCCUPANCY. Does not include floors of buildings where occupancy by
humans is limited to ingress, egress, and limited access for maintenance and
repair.
(R.C. § 3781.108(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not
more than $1,000.
(R.C. §§ 3791.02, 3791.03)
(2000 Code, § 91.35)
§ 91.36 VIOLATIONS OF STATE FIRE CODE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the State Fire Code
or any order made pursuant to it.
   (B)   Except as a violation of R.C. § 2923.17, regarding the felonies of
unlawful possession of a dangerous ordnance and illegal manufacture or
processing of explosives, involves subject matter covered by the State Fire
Code, whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing contained in this section shall in any way modify the
provisions of the State Fire Code, except as expressly set form herein.
      (2)   (a)   The storage and use of electric grills is permitted on
balconies of multi-family units, provided, the grills are inspected and
approved by the Fire Department for the village. For purposes of this section,
a MULTI-FAMILY UNIT shall be defined as when multiple separate units for
dwellings are located within one or several buildings within a complex.
         (b)   A few examples of multi-family housing are duplexes, town homes,
condominiums, and apartments.
      (3)   The use of open flame grills of any size, whether gas or charcoal
is not permitted on the balconies, porches, or patios of multi-unit structures,
unless the grill is permanently installed with a natural gas line and the unit
is equipped with a sprinkler system. In addition, the balcony must have a
mounted fire extinguisher.
      (4)   The storage of gas or charcoal grills and their related fuels is
not permitted in multi-dwelling structures, either on balconies or in the
building itself.
      (5)   No outdoor fire pits of any kind are permitted on the balconies or
porches of multi-unit structures. Outdoor fire pits are permitted on first
floor patios, provided said fire pits are at least ten feet away from the
premises.
      (6)   This division (C) shall go into effect at the earliest date allowed
by law.
(2000 Code, § 91.36) (Ord. O-2-13, passed 1-14-2012; Ord. O-31-20, passed 12-
21-2020)
Statutory reference:
   Fire Code violations, see R.C. §§ 3737.41 et seq.
   State Fire Code, see O.A.C. Ch. 1301:7-7
§ 91.37 POSTING ARSON NOTICES IN HOTELS, MOTELS AND OTHER PLACES.
   (A)   The owner, operator or lessee of any hotel, motel or transient
residential building shall post the provisions of R.C. §§ 2909.02 and 2909.03,
regarding aggravated arson and arson, in a conspicuous place in each room
occupied by guests in such building. The owner, operator or lessee of any
nontransient residential building, institution, school or place of assembly
shall post the provisions of such sections in conspicuous places upon such
premises. No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(R.C. § 3737.61)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3737.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 91.37)
§ 91.38 NEGLIGENT BURNING.
   (A)   No person shall set, kindle, or cause to be set or kindled any fire
which, through his or her negligence, spreads beyond its immediate confines to
any structure, field or wooded lot.
(R.C. § 3737.62)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(D))
(2000 Code, § 91.38)
Cross-reference:
   Arson, see §
131.02
§ 91.39 SPREADING ALARM OF UNFRIENDLY FIRE.
   (A)   The owner, operator or lessee, an employee of any owner, operator or
lessee, an occupant, and any person in direct control of any building regulated
under the state building code, upon the discovery of an unfriendly fire, or
upon receiving information that there is an unfriendly fire upon the premises,
shall immediately, and with all reasonable dispatch and diligence, call or
otherwise notify the fire department concerning the fire, and shall spread an
alarm immediately to all occupants of the building.
   (B)   As used in this section, UNFRIENDLY FIRE means a fire of a destructive
nature as distinguished from a controlled fire intended for a beneficial
purpose.
(R.C. § 3737.63)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(E))
(2000 Code, § 91.39)
§ 91.40 UNVENTED HEATERS.
   (A)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply with the
following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed, and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings which are
provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (A)(1) above or
used with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
   (B)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (C)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.
   (D)   Division (A) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
   (E)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (A) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings, and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division (E).
   (F)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division (F).
   (G)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale, or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (H)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered
for sale, or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas, or liquid
petroleum gas space heater.
   (I)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas- fired heater that is not exempt from division (A)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use”.
   (J)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 91.40)
OPEN BURNING
§ 91.55 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General definitions. For the purpose of this subchapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGRICULTURAL WASTE. Any waste material generated by crop, horticultural,
or livestock production practices, and includes such items as woody debris and
plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural materials, and
landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities, but does not
include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/fallen barns);
garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts thereof; nor
economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer has identified
open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
      AIR CURTAIN BURNER. An engineered apparatus consisting of a motorized
high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in the
efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure and
for which a permit- to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C. Ch.
3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C. Ch.
3745-77.
      AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR. An engineered apparatus consisting of a motorized
high- velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in the
efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
      ECONOMIC POISONS. Include but are not restricted to pesticides such as
insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and fumigants;
herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
      EMERGENCY BURNING. The burning of clean wood waste or deceased animals
caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the following:
         (a)   A tornado;
         (b)   High winds;
         (c)   An earthquake;
         (d)   An explosion;
         (e)   A flood; or
         (f)   A hail storm, a rain storm, or an ice storm.
      GARBAGE. Any waste material resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food or food products.
      INHABITED BUILDING. Any inhabited private dwelling house and any public
structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly, education,
entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture, repair, storage, traffic, or
occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not limited to,
highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
      LAND CLEARING WASTE. Plant waste material which is removed from land,
including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing
waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
      LANDSCAPE WASTE. Any plant waste material, except garbage, including
trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
      OHIO EPA. The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or agencies
delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency District Office.
      OPEN BURNING. The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without
passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the burning of any
refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or designed
specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or O.A.C.
3745-17-10.
      RESIDENTIAL WASTE. Any waste material, including landscape waste,
generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result
of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
      RESTRICTED AREA. The area within the boundary of the municipality, plus a
zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a municipality having a
population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone extending one mile beyond any
municipality having a population of 10,000 persons or more according to the
latest federal census.
      UNRESTRICTED AREA. All areas outside the boundaries of a restricted area
as defined in this section.
   (B)   Referenced materials. This subchapter includes references to certain
matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not included in
the legislation contained in this subchapter. Information on the availability
of the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the particular
edition or version of the material is included in this legislation. For
materials subject to change, only the specific versions specified in this
legislation are referenced. Material is referenced as it exists on the
effective date of this legislation. Except for subsequent annual publication of
existing (unmodified) C.F.R. compilations, any amendment or revision to a
referenced document is not applicable unless and until this section has been
amended to specify the new dates.
      (1)   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows.
         (a)   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by writing
to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh,
PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also available in
electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is also available
for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State Library.
         (b)   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies may
be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO
Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library.
         (c)   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library.
      (2)   Referenced materials.
         (a)   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2012 Code of
Federal Regulations.
         (b)   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2012 Code of
Federal Regulations.
         (c)   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Ch. 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
         (d)   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. § 7429:
“Solid waste combustion” published January 2, 2006 in Supplement V of the 2000
Edition of the U.S.C.
(2000 Code, § 91.55) (O.A.C. § 3745-19-01)
§ 91.56 RELATIONS TO OTHER PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Ch. 3745-19, no open burning
shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency under
O.A.C. Ch. 3745-25 is in effect.
   (B)   No provisions of O.A.C. Ch. 3745-19 permitting open burning, and no
permission to open burn granted by the State EPA, shall exempt any person from
compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of any
state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(2000 Code, § 91.56) (O.A.C. § 3745-19-02) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.57 OPEN BURNING IN RESTRICTED AREAS.
   (A)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (B) to (D) below or in R.C. §
3704.11.
   (B)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the State EPA:
      (1)   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs;
      (2)   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational, or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
         (b)   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
         (c)   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
      (3)   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d);
      (4)   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for commercial
or industrial fire prevention;
      (5)   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state, or local law enforcement officials; or
      (6)   Fires allowed by divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), and (B)(4) above shall
not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of minimum size sufficient
for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to minimize the generation
and emission of air contaminants.
   (C)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the State EPA in accordance with §
91.58(B):
      (1)   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or verbal
verification to the State EPA from the State Department of Health or local
health department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, State Department of Agriculture, or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
      (2)   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not meet
the requirements of this division (B)(2), provided the following conditions are
met:
         (a)   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
         (b)   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
         (c)   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
      (3)   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
         (a)   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
         (b)   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks, or air fields;
         (c)   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on said premises;
         (d)   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best practicable
condition for efficient burning; and
         (e)   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
   (D)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon receipt
of written permission from the State EPA, in accordance with §
91.58(A); provided, that any conditions specified in the permission are
followed:
      (1)   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the State EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (B)(3) above;
      (2)   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the State
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Ch. 4, Acquired Structures;, provided, that the
application required in §
91.58(A)(1) is submitted by the commercial or public entity responsible for the
instruction;
      (3)   (a)   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any
purpose determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified
in the appendix to O.A.C. 3745-19-03.
         (b)   If deemed necessary, the open burning may be authorized with
prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance of a written
permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral approval;
      (4)   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range, or
wildlife management practices; and
      (5)   Fires and/or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(2000 Code, § 91.57) (O.A.C. § 3745-19-03) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.58 PERMISSION AND NOTICE TO OPEN BURN.
   (A)   Permission.
      (1)   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to State EPA. The applicant shall allow State EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from State EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the State EPA.
      (2)   Except as provided in divisions (A)(6) and (A)(7) below, such
applications shall contain, as a minimum, information regarding:
         (a)   The purpose of the proposed burning;
         (b)   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
         (c)   The date or dates when such burning will take place;
         (d)   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields, and other
pertinent landmarks; and
         (e)   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
      (3)   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the State EPA that open burning is
necessary to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place, and
manner as to minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric
conditions are appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon
adjacent properties or the occupants thereof. The State EPA may impose such
conditions as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Ch. 3745-19.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (A)(6) below, permission to open
burn must be obtained for each specific project. In emergencies where public
health or environmental quality will be seriously threatened by delay while
written permission is sought, the fire may be set with oral permission of the
State EPA.
      (5)   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the State EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of such
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
      (6)   The State Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the State Fire
Academy’s mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training
sites in the state. The annual application required pursuant to division (A)(1)
above shall contain information as required in division (A)(2) above, except
the information required in divisions (A)(2)(c) and (A)(2)(d) above need not be
provided unless it is available at the time of submittal of the application.
The Academy shall contact the appropriate State EPA District Office or local
air agency at least five working days before each training session of the date
or dates when the training session will take place and its location. Saturday,
Sunday, and legal holidays shall not be considered a working day.
      (7)   For open burning defined under paragraph §
91.57(D)(2) and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be
granted unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to
demolish received by the appropriate State EPA field office in accordance with
O.A.C. 3745-20-03.
   (B)   Notification.
      (1)   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the State EPA.
      (2)   Such notification shall inform the State EPA regarding:
         (a)   The purpose of the proposed burning;
         (b)   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
         (c)   The date or dates when such burning will take place; and
         (d)   The location of the burning site.
      (3)   The State EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that the
open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Ch. 3745-19 and the State EPA shall
notify the applicant to this effect.
(2000 Code, § 91.58) (O.A.C. § 3745-19-05) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to the penalty as
provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) below,
whoever violates any provisions of §§
91.01 through
91.08 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 3743.60(I) or R.C. § 3743.61(I), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of §
91.04(E) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates §
91.06(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any
other penalties that may be imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under
this division and unless the third sentence of this division applies, the
person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of
fireworks shall be suspended. If the violation of §
91.06(A) results in serious physical harm to persons or serious physical harm
to property, the person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an
assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be revoked.
      (4)   Whoever violates §
91.02(F) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary, a person may be convicted at the same
trial or proceeding of a violation of §
91.02(F) and a violation of R.C. § 2917.11(B), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the violation
of §
91.02(F).
      (5)   Whoever violates §
91.04(G) or (H) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates §
91.02(G) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H)) (2000 Code, § 91.99)
Statutory reference:
   Civil penalties for violations of State Fire Code, see R.C. § 3737.51(B)
through (H)
CHAPTER 92: INTOXICATING LIQUORS
Section
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Exemptions from chapter
   
92.03   Restrictions applicable to sale of beer and intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises
   
92.04   Restrictions on sale of beer and liquor
   
92.05   Permit required; activities prohibited without permit
   
92.06   Illegal transportation prohibited
   
92.07   Open container prohibited; exception
   
92.08   Underage person shall not purchase intoxicating liquor or beer
   
92.09   Prohibitions; minors under 18 years; low-alcohol beverages
   
92.10   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited
   
92.11   Misrepresentation to obtain alcoholic beverage for a minor prohibited
   
92.12   Misrepresentation by a minor under 21 years
   
92.13   Sale to underage persons prohibited
   
92.14   Posting of card
   
92.15   Good faith acceptances of spurious identification
   
92.16   Consumption in motor vehicle prohibited
   
92.17   Hours of sale or consumption
   
92.18   Obstructing search of premises prohibited
   
92.19   Illegal possession of intoxicating liquor prohibited
   
92.20   Sale or possession of diluted liquor and refilled containers prohibited
   
92.21   Keeping place where beer or intoxicating liquors are sold in violation
of law
   
92.22   Intoxicating liquors shall not be sold in brothels
   
92.23   Use of intoxicating liquor in a public dance hall prohibited;
exceptions
   
92.24   Poisonously adulterated liquors
   
92.25   Tavern keeper permitting rioting or drunkenness
   
92.26   Notice of action to prohibit liquor business
   
92.27   Procedure when injunction violated
   
92.28   Liquor transaction scans
   
92.29   Affirmative defenses
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Driving while intoxicated or drugged, implied consent, see §§
73.01 and
73.02
Statutory reference:
   Liquor permits, see R.C. Ch. 4303
   Local option elections, see R.C. §§ 4301.32 et seq.
   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C. §
4510.33
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not,
whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term does
not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   BEER.
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that contain
0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight that are
made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe
apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling, or carbonated cider
and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good faith
for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports, or entertainment facility or complex, or
any combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public
and that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency,
or a political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state, or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to R.C. § 351.02; or
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to R.C. § 4301.80.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container, either
refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the interior
of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a key,
magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages, or food may be sold.
   HOTEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the exceptions
mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than beer,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage
purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever
name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary, or patented. The
terms include cider and alcohol, and all solids and confections which contain
0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any product
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume. The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.
   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is produced,
whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending, fermentation,
brewing, or in any other manner.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer or
intoxicating liquor.
   MIXED BEVERAGES. Include bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not  less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The phrase
includes the contents of a pod.
   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is served for
consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are provided or
permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover charge or may
be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both, purchased by
patrons.
   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   PHARMACY. An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is under the
management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with R.C. §
4729.27.
   POD. Means a sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a
combination thereof to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
      (2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer’s processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with space and
accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot meals are
habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as the principal
business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies, confectionery
stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.
   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
R.C. § 4301.21. Such terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders for
beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the State
Liquor Control Commission authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating
liquor, but no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been
registered with the Division pursuant to R.C. § 4303.25.
   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that is
assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or more
political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land with
readily identifiable geographic boundaries. The term does not include, however,
any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic area or territory
that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before April 9, 2001.
   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128 fluid
ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21% of
alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a pod.
   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for such transportation.
   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the business of
selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less than
0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume, that is
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244) (2000 Code, § 92.01)
§ 92.02 EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter do not prevent the following:
   (A)   The storage of intoxicating liquor in bonded warehouses, established
in accordance with the Acts of Congress and under the regulation of the United
States, located in the municipality, or the transportation of intoxicating
liquor to or from bonded warehouses of the United States wherever located;
   (B)   A bona fide resident of this state who is the owner of a warehouse
receipt from obtaining or transporting to the resident’s residence for the
resident’s own consumption and not for resale spirituous liquor stored in a
government bonded warehouse in this state or in another state prior to December
1933, subject to such terms as are prescribed by the State Liquor Control
Commission;
   (C)   The manufacture of cider from fruit for the purpose of making vinegar,
and nonintoxicating cider and fruit juices for use and sale;
   (D)   A licensed physician or dentist from administering or dispensing
intoxicating liquor or alcohol to a patient in good faith in the actual course
of the practice of the physician’s or dentist’s profession;
   (E)   The sale of alcohol to physicians, dentists, druggists, veterinary
surgeons, manufacturers, hospitals, infirmaries, or medical or educational
institutions using the alcohol for medicinal, mechanical, chemical, or
scientific purposes;
   (F)   The sale, gift, or keeping for sale by druggists and others of any of
the medicinal preparations manufactured in accordance with the formulas
prescribed by the U.S. Pharmacopoeia and National Formulary, patent or
proprietary preparations, and other bona fide medicinal and technical
preparations, which contain no more alcohol than is necessary to hold the
medicinal agents in solution and to preserve the same, which are manufactured
and sold as medicines and not as beverages, are unfit for use for beverage
purposes, and the sale of which does not require the payment of a United States
liquor dealer’s tax;
   (G)   The manufacture and sale of tinctures or of toilet, medicinal, and
antiseptic preparations and solutions not intended for internal human use nor
to be sold as beverages, and which are unfit for beverage purposes, if upon the
outside of each bottle, box, or package of which there is printed in English,
conspicuously and legibly, the quantity by volume of alcohol in the preparation
or solution;
   (H)   The manufacture and keeping for sale of the food products known as
flavoring extracts when manufactured and sold for cooking, culinary, or
flavoring purposes, and which are unfit for use for beverage purposes;
   (I)   The lawful sale of wood alcohol or of ethyl alcohol for external use
when combined with other substances as to make it unfit for internal use;
   (J)   The manufacture, sale, and transport of ethanol or ethyl alcohol for
use as fuel. As used in this division, ETHANOL has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 122.075.
   (K)   The purchase and importation into the municipality or the purchase at
wholesale from A or B permit holders in this state of beer and intoxicating
liquor for use in manufacturing processes of non- beverage food products under
terms prescribed by the Division; provided, that the terms prescribed by the
Division shall not increase the cost of the beer or intoxicating liquor to any
person, firm, or corporation purchasing and importing it into this municipality
or purchasing it from an A or B permit holder for that use;
   (L)   Any resident of this state or any member of the armed forces of the
United States who has attained the age of 21 years from bringing into this
municipality for personal use and not for resale not more than one liter of
spirituous liquor, four and one- half liters of wine, or 288 ounces of beer in
any 30-day period, and the same is free of any tax consent fee when the
resident or member of the armed forces physically possesses and accompanies the
spirituous liquor, wine or beer on returning from a foreign country, another
state, or an insular possession of the United States;
   (M)   Persons at least 21 years of age who collect ceramic commemorative
bottles containing spirituous liquor that have unbroken federal tax stamps on
them from selling or trading the bottles to other collectors. The bottles shall
originally have been purchased at retail from the Division, legally imported
under division (L) above, or legally imported pursuant to a supplier
registration issued by the Division. The sales shall be for the purpose of
exchanging a ceramic commemorative bottle between private collectors and shall
not be for the purpose of selling the spirituous liquor for personal
consumption. The sale or exchange authorized by this division (M) shall not
occur on the premises of any permit holder, shall not be made in connection
with the business of any permit holder, and shall not be made in connection
with any mercantile business;
   (N)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor without a liquor permit at a
private residence, not more than five times per calendar year at a residence
address, at an event that has the following characteristics:
      (1)   The event is for a charitable, benevolent, or political purpose,
but shall not include any event the proceeds of which are for the profit or
gain of any individual;
      (2)   The event has in attendance not more than 50 people;
      (3)   The event shall be for a period not to exceed 12 hours;
      (4)   The sale of beer and intoxicating liquor at the event shall not
take place between 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.;
      (5)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or consume beer or
intoxicating liquor at the event and no beer or intoxicating liquor shall be
sold to any person under 21 years of age at the event; and
      (6)   No person at the event shall sell or furnish beer or intoxicating
liquor to an intoxicated person.
   (O)   The possession or consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor by a
person who is under 21 years of age and who is a student at an accredited
college or university; provided, that both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is required to taste and expectorate the beer or
intoxicating liquor for a culinary, food service, or hospitality course; and
      (2)   The person is under the direct supervision of the instructor of the
culinary, food service, or hospitality course.
(R.C. § 4301.20) (2000 Code, § 92.02)
§ 92.03 RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO SALE OF BEER AND INTOXICATING LIQUOR FOR
CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES.
   (A)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises is subject to the following restrictions, in addition to those imposed
by the rules and orders of the State Liquor Control Commission.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Ch. 4301,
beer or intoxicating liquor may be served to a person not seated at a table
unless there is reason to believe that the beer or intoxicating liquor so
served will be consumed by a person under 21 years of age.
      (2)   Beer or intoxicating liquor may be served by a hotel in the room of
a bona fide guest, and may be sold by a hotel holding a D-5a permit, or a hotel
holding a D-3 or D-5 permit that otherwise meets all of the requirements for
holding a D-5a permit, by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage
cabinet that shall be located only in the hotel room of a registered guest. A
hotel may sell beer or intoxicating liquor as authorized by its permit to a
registered guest by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet
in accordance with the following requirements:
         (a)   Only a person 21 years of age or older who is a guest registered
to stay in a guestroom shall be provided a key, magnetic card, or other similar
device necessary to obtain access to the contents of a controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guestroom.
         (b)   The hotel shall comply with R.C. § 4301.22, or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance, in connection with the handling, restocking, and
replenishing of the beer and intoxicating liquor in the controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet.
         (c)   The hotel shall replenish or restock beer and intoxicating
liquor in any controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet only during the
hours during which the hotel may serve or sell beer and intoxicating liquor.
         (d)   The registered guest shall verify in writing that the guest has
read and understands the language that shall be posted on the controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet as required by division (A)(2)(e) below.
         (e)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating liquor pursuant
to division this (A)(2) shall post on the controlled access alcohol and
beverage cabinet, in conspicuous language, the following notice:
“The alcoholic beverages contained in this cabinet shall not be removed from
the premises”.
         (f)   The hotel shall maintain a record of each sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor made by the hotel by means of a controlled access alcohol
and beverage cabinet for any period in which the permit holder is authorized to
hold the permit pursuant to R.C. §§ 4303.26 and 4303.27 and any additional
period during which an applicant exercises its right to appeal a rejection by
the State Liquor Control Commission to renew a permit pursuant to R.C. §
4303.271. The records maintained by the hotel shall comply with both of the
following:
            1.   Include the name, address, age, and signature of each hotel
guest who is provided access by the hotel to a controlled access alcohol and
beverage cabinet pursuant to division (A)(2)(a) above; and
            2.   Be made available during business hours to authorized agents
of the State Liquor Control Commission pursuant to R.C. § 4301.10(A)(6) or to
enforcement agents of the Department of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. §§
5502.13 to 5502.19.
         (g)   The hotel shall observe all other applicable rules adopted by
the State Liquor Control Commission and the Liquor Control Commission.
      (3)   The seller shall not require the purchase of food with the purchase
of beer or intoxicating liquor; nor shall the seller of beer or intoxicating
liquor give away food of any kind in connection with the sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor, except as authorized by rule of the State Liquor Control
Commission.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.62(B)(8), the seller
shall not permit the purchaser to remove beer or intoxicating liquor so sold
from the premises.
      (5)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating liquor pursuant to
division (A)(2) above shall provide a registered guest with the opportunity to
refuse to accept a key, magnetic card, or other similar device necessary to
obtain access to the contents of a controlled access alcohol and beverage
cabinet in that guest room. If a registered guest refuses to accept such key,
magnetic card, or other similar device, the hotel shall not assess any charges
on the registered guest for use of the controlled access alcohol and beverage
cabinet in that guest room.
(R.C. § 4301.21)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 92.03)
§ 92.04 RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OF BEER AND LIQUOR.
   (A)   Restrictions on sales. Sales of beer and intoxicating liquor under all
classes of permits and from liquor stores are subject to the following
restrictions, in addition to those imposed by the rules or orders of the State
Liquor Control Commission.
      (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Ch.
4301, no beer or intoxicating liquor shall be sold to any person under 21 years
of age.
         (b)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18
years of age. No permit issued by the Division shall be suspended, revoked, or
cancelled because of a violation of this division (A)(1)(b).
         (c)   Except as provided in division (A)(1)(d) of this section, all of
the following apply to the handling, serving, and selling of beer and
intoxicating liquor by a person employed by a permit holder:
            1.   No person under 19 years of age shall sell beer across a bar.
            2.   No person under 21 years of age shall sell wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor across a bar.
            3.   No person under 18 years of age shall otherwise handle, serve,
or sell beer or intoxicating liquor.
         (d)   Any person employed by a permit holder may handle beer or
intoxicating liquor in sealed containers in connection with manufacturing,
storage, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading, and
may handle beer or intoxicating liquor in open containers in connection with
cleaning tables or handling empty bottles or glasses.
      (2)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
      (3)   (a)   No sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made after 2:30 a.m.
on Sunday, except under either of the following circumstances.
            1.   Intoxicating liquor may be sold on Sunday under authority of a
permit that authorizes Sunday sale.
            2.   Spiritous liquor may be sold on Sunday by any person awarded
an agency contract under R.C. § 4301.17 if the sale of spiritous liquor is
authorized in the applicable precinct as the result of an election on question
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of R.C. § 4301.351 and if the agency contract authorizes the
sale of spiritous liquor on Sunday.
         (b)   This section does not prevent the municipality from adopting a
closing hour for the sale of intoxicating liquor earlier than 2:30 a.m. on
Sunday or to provide that no intoxicating liquor may be sold prior to that hour
on Sunday.
      (4)   (a)   No holder of a permit shall give away any beer or
intoxicating liquor of any kind at any time in connection with the permit
holder’s business. However, with the exception of an A-1-A permit holder that
also has been issued an A-2 or A-2f permit, an A-1-A, A-1c, or D permit holder
may provide to a paying customer not more than a total of four tasting samples
of beer, wine, or spirituous liquor, as authorized by the applicable permit, in
any twenty-four-hour period. The permit holder shall provide the tasting
samples free of charge, at the permit holder’s expense, only to a person who is
21 years of age or older. The person shall consume the tasting samples on the
premises of the permit holder. A distributor is not responsible for the costs
of providing tasting samples authorized under division (A)(4) of this section.
         (b)   As used in division (A)(4) of this section:
            TASTING SAMPLE. Means one of the following, as applicable:
               a.   An amount not to exceed two ounces of beer;
               b.   An amount not to exceed two ounces of wine;
               c.   An amount not to exceed a quarter ounce of spirituous
liquor.
            D PERMIT HOLDER. Means a person that has been issued a D-1, D-2, D-
2x, D-3, D-3a, D-3 x, D-4, D-5, D-5a, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i,
D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-6, or D-7 permit.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (A)(6), no retail
permit holder shall display or permit the display on the outside of any
licensed retail premises, on any lot of ground on which the licensed premises
are situated, or on the exterior of any building of which the licensed premises
are a part, any sign, illustration, or advertisement bearing the name, brand
name, trade name, trademark, designation, or other emblem of, or indicating the
manufacturer, producer, distributor, place of manufacture, production, or
distribution of, any beer or intoxicating liquor. Signs, illustrations, or
advertisements bearing the name, brand name, trade name, trademark,
designation, or other emblem of or indicating the manufacturer, producer,
distributor, place of manufacture, production, or distribution of beer or
intoxicating liquor may be displayed and permitted to be displayed on the
interior or in the show windows of any licensed premises, if the particular
brand or type of product so advertised is actually available for sale on the
premises at the time of that display. The Liquor Control Commission shall
determine by rule the size and character of those signs, illustrations, or
advertisements.
      (6)   (a)   No retail permit holder shall possess on the licensed
premises any barrel or other container from which beer is drawn, unless there
is attached to the spigot or other dispensing apparatus the name of the
manufacturer of the product contained in the barrel or other container;
provided, that if the beer is served at a bar, the manufacturer’s name or brand
shall appear in full view of the purchaser.
         (b)   The Commission shall regulate the size and character of the
devices provided for in this section.
      (7)   The sale of gift certificates for the purchase of beer, wine, or
mixed beverages shall be permitted for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed
beverages for on- or off-premises consumption. Limitations on the use of a gift
certificate for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed beverages for on- or off-
premises consumption may be expressed by clearly stamping or typing on the face
of the certificate that the certificate may not be used for the purchase of
beer, wine, or mixed beverages for on-premises consumption.
(R.C. § 4301.22)
   (B)   Division (A)(1) not modified or affected. The provisions of R.C. §§
4301.633 through 4301.637, or substantially equivalent municipal ordinances,
shall not be deemed to modify or affect division (A)(1) above or R.C. § 4301.22
(A).
(R.C. § 4301.638)
   (C)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(b) or (A)(3) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(c), or (A)(2) above is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H))
(2000 Code, § 92.04)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
§ 92.05 PERMIT REQUIRED; ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep, or possess for sale,
furnish, or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or intoxicating
liquor in this state, or transport, import, or cause to be transported or
imported any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in or into this municipality
for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully complied with R.C. Chs.
4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued by the State Liquor Control
Commission and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker, or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain,
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor, or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders, or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Ch.
4301 or R.C. Ch. 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function, event, or party
shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit premises where any
person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders, or receive offers to
purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor to or
from any person, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Ch. 4301 or R.C. Ch.
4303 or rules adopted thereunder.
(R.C. § 4303.25)
   (B)   Activities prohibited without permit.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization described under section 501
(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and exempt from federal income taxation
under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         FUNDRAISER. Means a raffle, silent auction, or event where a door
prize is awarded.
         POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. Means a political organization defined under §
527 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         RAFFLE. Means a raffle conducted in accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915.
         SILENT AUCTION. Means a method of submitting bids in writing by one or
more persons and, after a review of all the bids received, personal property is
awarded to the highest and most responsive bidder.
      (2)   No person, personally or by the person's clerk, agent, or employee,
who is not the holder of an A permit issued by the Ohio Division of Liquor
Control, in force at the time, and authorizing the manufacture of beer or
intoxicating liquor, or who is not an agent or employee of the Division
authorized to manufacture such beer or intoxicating liquor, shall manufacture
any beer or intoxicating liquor for sale, or shall manufacture spirituous
liquor.
      (3)   No person, personally or by the person's clerk, agent, or employee,
who is not the holder of an A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, or S permit issued by the
Division, in force at the time, and authorizing the sale of beer, intoxicating
liquor, or alcohol, or who is not an agent or employee of the Division or the
Tax Commissioner authorized to sell such beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol,
shall sell, keep, or possess beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol for sale to
any persons other than those authorized by R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 to
purchase any beer or intoxicating liquor, or sell any alcohol at retail.
      (4)   No person, personally or by the person's clerk, agent, or employee,
who is the holder of a permit issued by the Division, shall sell, keep, or
possess for sale any intoxicating liquor not purchased from the Division or
from the holder of a permit issued by the Division authorizing the sale of such
intoxicating liquor unless the same has been purchased with the special consent
of the Division. The Division shall revoke the permit of any person convicted
of a violation of division (B)(3) of this section.
      (5)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
         (a)   The sale or possession for sale of any low-alcohol beverage;
         (b)   Beer and intoxicating liquor that is given away if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The beer or intoxicating liquor is given away by a charitable
or political organization to a participant in a fundraiser.
            2.   Any beer, wine, or mixed beverages given away via the
fundraiser is purchased from a person issued a permit under R.C. Chapter 4303.
            3.   Any spirituous liquor given away via the fundraiser is
purchased from an agency store located in this state.
            4.   Regarding any spirituous liquor donated to the charitable or
political organization for purposes of the fundraiser, the donor is not an
agency store located in this state and submits to the charitable or political
organization receipts showing that the donor purchased the spirituous liquor
from an agency store located in this state.
            5.   The charitable or political organization submits purchase
receipts for the spirituous liquor given away via a fundraiser to the Division
of Liquor Control as proof that the spirituous liquor was purchased from an
agency store located in this state. The charitable or political organization
shall submit the receipts in accordance with procedures that the Division shall
establish.
(R.C. § 4301.58)
   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 92.05)
§ 92.06 ILLEGAL TRANSPORTATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, who is not the holder of an H permit shall transport beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in this municipality. This section does not
apply to the transportation and delivery of beer, alcohol, or intoxicating
liquor purchased or to be purchased from the holder of a permit issued by the
State Liquor Control Commission, in force at the time, and authorizing the sale
and delivery of the beer, alcohol, or intoxicating liquor so transported, or to
the transportation and delivery of beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol
purchased from the Department or the Tax Commissioner, or purchased by the
holder of an A or B permit outside this state, and transported within this
municipality by them in their own trucks for the purpose of sale under their
permits.
(R.C. § 4301.60)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 92.06)
§ 92.07 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. Means a vehicle registered under R.C. § 4503.24.
      HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (B)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(e) of this section, in a
state liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (C) or (J) of this section, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section, while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway,
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section, while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway, or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (C)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         (a)   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, D-9, E, F,
F-2, F-5, F-7, or F-8 permit;
         (b)   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2, A-2f, S-1, or S-2 permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         (c)   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;
         (d)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         (e)   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting
sample, as defined in R.C. § 4301.171.
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued. As used in this division (C)(2), MUSIC FESTIVAL means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(3)(a) of this section:
            ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE. Means a concert comprised of a group of not
fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER. Means an outdoor performing arts
center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for
performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (C)(3)(b)
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the person is
attending either of the following:
            1.   An orchestral performance and the F-9 permit holder grants
permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in
certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-
9 permit is issued;
            2.   An outdoor performing arts event or orchestral performance
that is free of charge and the F-9 permit holder annually hosts not less than
25 other events or performances that are free of charge on the permit premises.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(5) of this section, ORCHESTRAL
PERFORMANCE has the same meaning as in division (C)(3)(b) of this section.
      (6)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(6)(a) of this section:
            OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to which all of
the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            RACING EVENT. A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one or
more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the opened container
of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-1c, A-2, A-
2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         (b)   Division (C)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to
do either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the possession is otherwise authorized under division (D) or (E) of this
section.
         (c)   As used in division (C)(7) of this section, “D class permit
holder” does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).
         (b)   As used in division (C)(8) of this section, MARKET means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway, or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (E)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (E)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
   (F)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
division (F)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the
commercial quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         (b)   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         (c)   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         (d)   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL QUADRICYCLE means a vehicle
that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that
meets all of the following requirements:
         (a)   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         (b)   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         (c)   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         (d)   It is used for commercial purposes.
         (e)   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (G) of this section, MARKET means an
establishment that:
         (a)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3717;
         (b)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         (c)   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
   (H)   (1)   As used in this section, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4303.185.
      (2)   An alcoholic beverage in a closed container being transported under
R.C. § 4303.185 to its final destination is not an opened container for the
purposes of this section if the closed container is securely sealed in such a
manner that it is visibly apparent if the closed container has been
subsequently opened or tampered with after sealing.
   (I)   This section does not apply to a person who has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in a public-use
airport, as described in R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a)(iii), when both of the
following apply:
      (1)   Consumption of the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
occurs in the area of the airport terminal that is restricted to persons taking
flights to and from the airport; and
      (2)   The consumption is authorized under R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (J)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person's
possession an opened container of homemade beer or wine that is served in
accordance with R.C. § 4301.201(E).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
(2000 Code, § 92.07)
§ 92.08 UNDERAGE PERSON SHALL NOT PURCHASE INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR BEER.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Ch. 4301, no
person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(R.C. § 4301.63)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of this section may
order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable
hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the time within
which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
(2000 Code, § 92.08)
§ 92.09 PROHIBITIONS; MINORS UNDER 18 YEARS; LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under 18 years
of age.
   (B)   No underage person shall purchase any low- alcohol beverage.
   (C)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt
to purchase any low- alcohol beverage.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (F)   No person shall sell or furnish any low- alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (G)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low- alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low- alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (G)(1) above that are committed by a lessee
of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts
or omissions.
   (H)   No permit issued by the State Liquor Control Commission shall be
suspended, revoked, or canceled because of a violation of either divisions (F)
or (G) above.
   (I)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (J)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(R.C. § 4301.631)
   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no
other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) above shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (B) above may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public
work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court.
         (b)   The court shall designate the time within which the public work
shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
(2000 Code, § 92.09)
§ 92.10 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a machine or
other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (C)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(R.C. § 4301.65)
   (D)   (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (b)   For a second or subsequent violation occurring within a period
of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
(2000 Code, § 92.10)
§ 92.11 MISREPRESENTATION TO OBTAIN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE FOR A MINOR PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Ch. 4301, no
person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age, or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 92.11)
§ 92.12 MISREPRESENTATION BY A MINOR UNDER 21 YEARS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Ch. 4301, no
person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any place in
this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a permit
issued by the State Liquor Control Commission, or sold by the State Liquor
Control Commission.
(R.C. § 4301.634)
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of division (A) above,
the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a
false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued
by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not more than
$1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six
months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operation privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. Except as provided in this division (B)(3), the court also may
impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified
in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension or denial
remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The court, in
lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary
driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to
perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court
determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service
the offender shall perform.
(R.C. § 4301.99(F))
(2000 Code, § 92.12)
§ 92.13 SALE TO UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Ch. 4301, no
person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall buy
beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to an
underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division (A) shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division (B) that are committed by a
lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s
acts or omissions.
   (C)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   Beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage person
on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses, unless
the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the underage
person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal guardian of
all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating liquor on the
premises and that person is on the premises at all times when beer or
intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person; or
      (2)   A drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person or for an
underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason
to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person
possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be
present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by
the underage person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (E)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division (E) against an underage person
knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or
intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or
intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is charged with violating division (E)(1) above
in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court may order the child into a
diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in abeyance
pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is ineligible
to enter into a diversion program under this division (E) if the child
previously has been diverted pursuant to this division (E). If the child
completes the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court
shall dismiss the complaint and order the child’s record in the case sealed
under R.C. §§ 2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to satisfactorily
complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         (b)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (E)(1) above, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense, except that a
person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the person previously
has been diverted pursuant to division (E)(2)(a) above or this division (E)(2)
(b). If the person completes the diversion program to the satisfaction of the
court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the record in the case
sealed under R.C. § 2953.33. If the person fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or R.C. §§
4301.63, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      DRUG OF ABUSE. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
      HOTEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.
      LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. The same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
      PRESCRIPTION. The same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      UNDERAGE PERSON. A person under the age of 21 years.
(R.C. § 4301.69)
   (I)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4301.633 through 4301.637, or substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances, shall not be deemed to modify or affect
divisions (A) through (H) above or R.C. § 4301.69.
(R.C. § 4301.638)
   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C), (D), or (F) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If an offender who violates division (E)(1) of
this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the
offense occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a
motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon
the offender, shall suspend the offender's temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver's license for a period of not less than six months and not
more than one year. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older
and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver's
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor,
shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and in addition to the
fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than six months.
(R.C. § 4301.99(I))
(2000 Code, § 92.13)
Statutory reference:
   Changes to law if federal uniform drinking age repealed or declared
unconstitutional, see R.C. § 4301.691
§ 92.14 POSTING OF CARD.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691, every place in
this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any low-alcohol beverage
is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a prominent place
on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the State
Liquor Control Commission and which shall read substantially as follows:
WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating liquor
in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or other
identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or imprisonment up
to six months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or wine that
contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one percent of alcohol by
volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the name, age,
or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or to
imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display
this card.
   (B)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Ch. 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the State Liquor
Control Commission that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Ch. 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may be
subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the State Liquor Control Commission or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department
shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(R.C. § 4301.637) (2000 Code, § 92.14) Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed weapon, felony, see R.C. § 2923.12
   Possessing firearm in liquor permit premises, exceptions, defenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.121
§ 92.15 GOOD FAITH ACCEPTANCES OF SPURIOUS IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   No permit holder, agent or employee of a permit holder, or any other
person may be found guilty of a violation of any section of this chapter in
which age is any element of the offense, if any court of record finds all of
the following:
      (1)   That the person buying, at the time of so doing, exhibited to the
permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder, or the other person
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card as defined
in R.C. § 4301.61, a military identification card issued by the United States
Department of Defense, or a United States or foreign passport, that displays a
picture of the individual for whom the license, card, or passport was issued
and shows that the person buying was then at least 21 years of age if the
person was buying beer as defined in R.C. § 4301.01 or intoxicating liquor, or
that the person was then at least 18 years of age if the person was buying any
low-alcohol beverage;
      (2)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder,
or the other person made a bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the
person buying by checking the identification presented at the time of the
purchase to ascertain that the description on the identification compared with
the appearance of the buyer and that the identification presented had not been
altered in any way.
      (3)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder,
or the other person had reason to believe that the person buying was of legal
age.
   (B)   The defense provided by division (A) of this section is in addition to
the affirmative defense provided by §
92.29.
(R.C. § 4301.639(A), (C))
(2000 Code, § 92.15)
§ 92.16 CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. § 4301.62(D)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4301.64)
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18
years at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties
it imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
      (2)   If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older and has
not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 92.16)
§ 92.17 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor.
   (B)   (1)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be
sold or delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-
1, D-2, D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-
1, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder from Monday to
Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. and on Sunday between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless statutorily authorized
otherwise.
      (2)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or sp0irituous liquor
is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (C)   (1)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be
sold or delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-
5B, D-5C, D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-
7 permit holder from Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m. and on Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight, unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (2)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (D)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (B) above,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (E)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. § 4301:1-1-49)
   (F)   (1)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit.
      (2)   This division (F) imposes strict liability on the holder of such
permit and on any officer, agent, or employee of such permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))
   (G)   (1)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor
beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit.
      (2)   This division (G) imposes strict liability on the holder of an F-
8 permit and on any officer, agent, or employee of that permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.208(C))
   (H)   Whoever violates divisions (F) or (G) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4303.99(D))
(2000 Code, § 92.17) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18 OBSTRUCTING SEARCH OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall hinder or obstruct any agent or employee of the State
Liquor Control Commission, any enforcement agent of the Department of Public
Safety or any officer of the law from making an inspection or search of any
place, other than a bona fide private residence, where beer or intoxicating
liquor is possessed, kept, sold, or given away.
(R.C. § 4301.66)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
(2000 Code, § 92.18)
§ 92.19 ILLEGAL POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall have possession of any spirituous liquor, in excess of
one liter, in one or more containers, which was not purchased at wholesale or
retail from the State Liquor Control Commission or otherwise lawfully acquired
pursuant to this chapter, R.C. Chs. 4301 and 4303, or any other intoxicating
liquor or beer, in one or more containers, which was not lawfully acquired
pursuant to those chapters.
(R.C. § 4301.67)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 92.19)
§ 92.20 SALE OR POSSESSION OF DILUTED LIQUOR AND REFILLED CONTAINERS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or possess with the intent to
sell intoxicating liquor in any original container which has been diluted,
refilled, or partly refilled.
(R.C. § 4301.68)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 92.20)
§ 92.21 KEEPING PLACE WHERE BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS ARE SOLD IN VIOLATION
OF LAW.
   (A)   No person shall keep a place where beer or intoxicating liquors are
sold, furnished, or given away in violation of law. The court, on conviction
for a subsequent violation of this section, shall order the place where the
beer or intoxicating liquor is sold, furnished, or given away to be abated as a
nuisance or shall order the person so convicted to give bond payable to the
state in the sum of $1,000, with sureties to the acceptance of the court, that
the person will not sell, furnish, or give away beer or intoxicating liquor in
violation of law and will pay all fines, costs, and damages assessed against
the person for that subsequent violation of this section. The giving away of
beer or intoxicating liquors, or any other device to evade this section,
constitutes unlawful selling.
   (B)   As used in this section, BEER has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4301.01.
   (C)   Division (A) above does not apply to any premises for which a permit
has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 while that permit is in effect.
(R.C. § 4399.09)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500 on a first offense and shall be fined not less than $200 nor
more than $500 on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4399.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 92.21)
§ 92.22 INTOXICATING LIQUORS SHALL NOT BE SOLD IN BROTHELS.
   (A)   No person shall sell, exchange, or give away intoxicating liquor in a
brothel.
(R.C. § 4399.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500 and imprisoned not less than one nor more than six months.
(R.C. § 4399.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 92.22)
§ 92.23 USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR IN A PUBLIC DANCE HALL PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) below, no person
who is the proprietor of, or who conducts, manages, or is in charge of any
public dance hall shall allow the use of any intoxicating liquor or the
presence of intoxicated persons in the public dance hall or on the premises on
which it is located.
      (2)   The prohibition against the use of any intoxicating liquor
contained in division (A)(1) above does not apply to establishments that are
holders of a D-1, D-2, D-3, D-4, or D-5 permit whose principal business
consists of conducting a hotel, a restaurant, a club, or a nightclub, all as
defined in R.C. § 4301.01.
(R.C. § 4399.14)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 4399.99(D))
(2000 Code, § 92.23)
§ 92.24 POISONOUSLY ADULTERATED LIQUORS.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sale, shall adulterate spirituous
liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer used or intended for drink or medicinal or
mechanical purposes, with cocculus indicus, vitriol, opium, alum, capsicum,
copperas, laurel water, logwood, brazilwood, cochineal, sugar of lead, aloes,
glucose, tannic acid, or any other substance that is poisonous or injurious to
health, or with a substance not a necessary ingredient in the manufacture of
the spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer, or sell, offer, or keep for
sale spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer that is so adulterated.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (C) below, a person
convicted of violating this section shall pay all necessary costs and expenses
incurred in inspecting and analyzing liquors so adulterated, sold, kept, or
offered for sale.
(R.C. § 4399.15)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $20 nor
more than $100, imprisoned not less than 20 nor more than 60 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4399.99(E))
(2000 Code, § 92.24)
§ 92.25 TAVERN KEEPER PERMITTING RIOTING OR DRUNKENNESS.
   (A)   No tavern keeper shall permit rioting, intoxication, or drunkenness in
or on his or her premises.
(R.C. § 4399.16)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $5 nor more
than $100.
(R.C. § 4399.99(A))
(2000 Code, § 92.25)
§ 92.26 NOTICE OF ACTION TO PROHIBIT LIQUOR BUSINESS.
   Any party bringing an action to prohibit the operation of a business under a
liquor permit issued pursuant to R.C. Ch. 4303 shall, upon filing the complaint
in the action, notify the Division of Liquor Control of the filing of the
complaint.
(R.C. § 4303.40) (2000 Code, § 92.26)
§ 92.27 PROCEDURE WHEN INJUNCTION VIOLATED.
   (A)   Any person subject to an injunction, temporary or permanent, granted
pursuant to R.C. § 3767.05(D) or (E) involving a condition described in R.C. §
3767.01(C)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall obey
the injunction. If the person violates the injunction, the court, or in
vacation a judge thereof, may summarily try and punish the violator. The
proceedings for punishment for contempt shall be commenced by filing with the
Clerk of the Court from which the injunction issued, information under oath
setting out the alleged facts constituting the violation, whereupon the court
shall cause a warrant to issue under which the defendant shall be arrested. The
trial may be had upon affidavits, or either party may demand the production and
oral examination of the witnesses.
(R.C. § 4301.74)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 92.27)
§ 92.28 LIQUOR TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (A)   As used in this section and §
92.29:
      CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a permit holder, or an agent or
employee of a permit holder, for either of the purposes listed in under
divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
      IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 through 4507.52 or an equivalent identification card issued by another
state.
      PERMIT HOLDER. Means the holder of a permit issued under R.C. Chapter
4303.
      TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a permit holder or an agent
or employee of a permit holder checks, by means of a transaction scan device,
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card that is presented as a condition for doing either of the following:
         (a)   Purchasing any beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol
beverage;
         (b)   Gaining admission to a premises that has been issued a liquor
permit authorizing the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on
the premises where sold, and where admission is restricted to persons 21 years
of age or older.
      TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
   (B)   (1)   A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder may
perform a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by a card holder for either of the purposes listed in divisions (a)
or (b) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
      (2)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (B)(1) of this section fails to match the information printed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information so
printed is false or fraudulent, neither the permit holder nor any agent or
employee of the permit holder shall sell any beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-
alcohol beverage to the card holder.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not preclude a permit holder
or an agent or employee of a permit holder from using a transaction scan device
to check the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or
magnetic strip that may be scanned by the device, as a condition of a sale
beer, intoxicating liquor, or a low-alcohol beverage or of granting admission
to a premises described in the definition for “transaction scan” in this
section.
   (C)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles, with the approval of the Liquor
Control Commission, shall adopt, and may amend or rescind, rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that do both of the following:
      (1)   Govern the recording and maintenance of information described in
R.C. § 4301.61(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b), R.C. § 2925.57(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b),
and R.C. § 2927.021(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b);
      (2)   Ensure quality control in the use of transaction scan devices under
R.C. §§ 2925.57, 2925.58, 2927.021, 2927.022, 4301.61, and 4301.611.
   (D)   (1)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
         (a)   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder;
         (b)   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
      (2)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall use
the information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to
be recorded and maintained under division (D)(1) of this section, except for
purposes of R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (3)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall use
a transaction scan device for a purpose other than a purpose listed in
divisions (a) or (b) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
      (4)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall sell
or otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by R.C. § 4301.611, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or another section of this code
or the Ohio Revised Code.
   (E)   Nothing in this section or R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, relieves a permit holder or an agent or
employee of a permit holder of any responsibility to comply with any other
applicable local, state or federal laws or rules governing the sale of beer,
intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverages.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) or (D) of this section is guilty of
an illegal liquor transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender
a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court
shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into
the County Treasury.
(R.C. § 4301.61) (2000 Code, § 92.28)
§ 92.29 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.
   (A)   A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder may not be
found guilty of a charge of a violation of this chapter or any rule of the
Liquor Control Commission in which the age of the purchaser of any beer,
intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage is an element of the alleged
violation, if the permit holder, agent, or employee raises and proves as an
affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
      (1)   A card holder attempting to purchase any beer, intoxicating liquor,
or low-alcohol beverage presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card;
      (2)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid; and
      (3)   The beer, intoxicating liquor, or low- alcohol beverage was sold to
the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan.
   (B)   (1)   In determining whether a permit holder or an agent or employee
of a permit holder has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (A)
above, the Liquor Control Commission or the trier of fact in a court of record
shall consider any written policy that the permit holder has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of R.C. §§ 4301.22(A)(1)
or (A)(2), 4301.63 to 4301.636, 4301.69, and 4301.691, or any substantially
similar municipal ordinances.
      (2)   For purposes of division (A)(3) above, the Commission or trier of
fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented
and the completed transaction scan may require a permit holder or an agent or
employee of a permit holder to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and
that the use of a transaction scan device does not excuse a permit holder or an
agent or employee of a permit holder from exercising reasonable diligence to
determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the permit holder or agent or employee
of a permit holder sells any beer or intoxicating liquor is 21 years of age or
older or sells low-alcohol beverage is 18 years of age or older; or
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
   (C)   The affirmative defense provided by division (A) above is in addition
to the defense provided by R.C. § 4301.639, or any substantially similar
municipal ordinance.
   (D)   In any hearing before the Liquor Control Commission and in any
criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by division (A) above
is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar who issued an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records of that issuance in lieu of the
testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles
in the hearing or action.
(R.C. § 4301.611) (2000 Code, § 92.29)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty
has been provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
(2000 Code, § 92.99)
Statutory reference:
   Liquor Director to be notified of court decision regarding permit holder,
employee or agent, see R.C. § 4301.991
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
93.001   Application of the chapter
   
93.002   Definitions
   
93.003   Nuisances generally; injunctions; violation; contempt
   
93.004   Maintaining certain nuisances
   
93.005   Collection of cost of abating dangerous property condition;
injunction; rehabilitation
   
93.006   Trimming of trees and shrubbery to prevent obstruction
Unclean Habitations
   
93.020   Permitting unclean habitations
   
93.021   When habitations are deemed unsanitary
   
93.022   Order for abatement or vacation of premises
   
93.023   Enforcement of vacation order by Fire Chief or Police Chief
   
93.024   Enforcement through court proceedings
Septic Tanks, Cesspools, and Refuse
   
93.035   Location of privy vaults, cesspools, and septic tanks
   
93.036   Unsanitary vaults
   
93.037   Removal of contents of vault
   
93.038   Deposit of dead animals, offal upon land or water
   
93.039   Defiling spring or well prohibited
   
93.040   Dumping of refuse in municipality prohibited
   
93.041   Abandoned refrigerators
   
93.042   Discarding litter prohibited
   
93.043   Power of municipality to fill or drain land
Weeds and Litter on Private Property
   
93.055   Keeping down weeds
   
93.056   Notice to owner to cut noxious weeds, remove litter; service
   
93.057   Fees for service and return
   
93.058   Procedure when owner fails to comply with notice
   
93.059   Written return to County Auditor; amount as a lien upon property
Refuse, Rubbish, and Scrap
   
93.070   Definitions
   
93.071   Nuisances prohibited
   
93.072   Order for removal
   
93.073   Exclusions
   
93.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Duty to keep sidewalks free from nuisances, see Ch. 51, Sidewalks
   Obscenity, injunction, and abatement, see § 133.15
   Operating a gambling house as nuisance, see § 134.03
   Places where intoxicating liquor sold as nuisances, see §§
92.21,
92.27, and 93.002
   Public gaming as nuisance, see § 134.04
   Unauthorized signs and signals as nuisance, see § 70.35
   Unclaimed and abandoned motor vehicles, see Ch. 94
Statutory reference:
   Authority to enact building code regulations, see O.A.C. § 4101:2-1-09
   Issuance of adjudication orders and stop work orders, see R.C. § 3781.031
   Noise, certain nuisance immunity regarding noise at shooting ranges, see
R.C. § 1533.85
     State Basic Building Code, see O.A.C. § 4101:1-1
   Power to abate and prevent nuisances, see R.C. § 715.44
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.001 APPLICATION OF THE CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable within this municipality
concurrently with the state and federal laws relative to sanitation and health
and the ordinances or orders of the local health district relative thereto, and
shall not be construed as modifying, repealing, limiting, or affecting in any
manner such laws, ordinances, or orders.
(2000 Code, § 93.01)
§ 93.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   That which is defined and declared by statutes or ordinances to be
a nuisance.
      (2)   (a)   Any place in or upon which lewdness, assignation, or
prostitution is conducted, permitted, continued, or exists, or any place in or
upon which lewd, indecent, lascivious, or obscene films or plate negatives,
film or plate positives, films designed to be projected on a screen for
exhibition films, or glass slides either in negative or positive form designed
for exhibition by projection on a screen, are photographed, manufactured,
developed, screened, exhibited, or otherwise prepared or shown, and the
personal property and contents used in conducting and maintaining any such
place for any such purpose.
         (b)   This chapter shall not affect any newspaper, magazine, or other
publication entered as second class matter by the post office department.
      (3)   (a)   Any room, house, building, boat, vehicle, structure, or place
where beer or intoxicating liquor is manufactured, sold, bartered, possessed,
or kept in violation of law and all property kept and used in maintaining the
same, and all property designed for the unlawful manufacture of beer, or
intoxicating liquor and beer, or intoxicating liquor contained in the room,
house, building, boat, structure, or place described in this division (3) where
the operation of that place substantially interferes with public decency,
sobriety, peace, and good order.
         (b)    “Violation of Law” includes, but is not limited to, sales to
any person under the legal drinking age prohibited in R.C. § 4301.22(A) or R.C.
§ 4301.69(A), and any violation of R.C. § 2913.46 or R.C. § 2925.03.
      (4)   Any place in which a pattern of continuous or repeated violations
of R.C. § 2927.02(B)(1) has occurred.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, corporation, association, partnership,
trustee, lessee, agent, or assignee.
   PLACE. Includes any building, erection, or place or any separate part or
portion thereof or the ground itself.
(R.C. § 3767.01) (2000 Code, § 93.02)
Cross-reference:
   Penalty and procedure when injunction issued pursuant to division (3) of the
definition of nuisance is violated, see § 92.27
§ 93.003 NUISANCES GENERALLY; INJUNCTIONS; VIOLATION; CONTEMPT.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who uses, occupies, establishes, or conducts a
nuisance, or aids and abets in the use, occupancy, establishment, or conduct of
a nuisance; the owner, agent, or lessee of an interest in any such nuisance;
any person who is employed in that nuisance by that owner, agent, or lessee;
and any person who is in control of that nuisance is guilty of maintaining a
nuisance and shall be enjoined as provided in R.C. §§ 3767.03 through 3767.11.
      (2)   (a)   A criminal gang that uses or occupies any building, premises,
or real estate, including vacant land, on more than two occasions within a one-
year period to engage in a pattern of criminal gang activity is guilty of
maintaining a nuisance and shall be enjoined as provided in R.C. §§ 3767.03
through 3767.11.
         (b)   As used in this division (A)(2), CRIMINAL GANG and PATTERN OF
CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2923.41.
(R.C. § 3767.02)
      (3)   Any building, premises, or real estate, including vacant land, that
is used or occupied by a criminal gang on more than two occasions within a one-
year period to engage in a pattern of criminal gang activity constitutes a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. §§ 3767.01 through 3767.11.
(R.C. § 2923.43)
   (B)   (1)   In case of the violation of any injunction or closing order
granted under R.C. §§ 3767.01 through 3767.11, or of a restraining order or the
commission of any contempt of court in proceedings under such sections, the
court or, in vacation, a judge thereof, may summarily try and punish the
offender.
      (2)   The trial may be had upon affidavits or either party may demand the
production and oral examination or witnesses.
(R.C. § 3767.07)
   (C)   Whoever is guilty of contempt under this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(A))
(2000 Code, § 93.03)
Statutory reference:
   Abatement of nuisance, bond, and notice, see R.C. § 3767.03
   Content of judgment and order, disposition of property seized, see R.C. §
3767.06
   Criminal gang activity, see R.C. §§ 2923.41 et seq.
   Priority of actions, evidence, costs; nuisances relating to liquor permit
premises, see R.C. § 3767.05
   Procedure in injunction action, see R.C. § 3767.04
§ 93.004 MAINTAINING CERTAIN NUISANCES.
   (A)   No person shall erect, continue to use, or maintain a building,
structure, or place for the exercise of a trade, employment, or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort, or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (B)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth, or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (C)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water, or unlawfully divert such
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (D)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture- related activities, as
AGRICULTURE is defined in R.C. § 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety, or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (A) and (B) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(R.C. § 3767.13)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 93.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 93.005 COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATING DANGEROUS PROPERTY CONDITION;
INJUNCTION; REHABILITATION.
   (A)   Collection of costs of abating dangerous property conditions.
      (1)   As used in this division (A):
         ABATEMENT ACTIVITY. Each instance of any of the following:
            1.   Removing, repairing, or securing insecure, unsafe,
structurally defective, abandoned, deserted, or open and vacant buildings or
other structures;
            2.   Making emergency corrections of hazardous conditions; or
            3.   Abatement of any nuisance by the municipality or its agent
pursuant to division (A)(5) below.
         TOTAL COST. Any costs incurred due to the use of employees, materials,
or equipment of the municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5)
below, any costs arising out of contracts for labor, materials, or equipment,
and costs of service of notice or publication required under this section.
      (2)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) below may
collect the total cost of abatement activities by any of the methods prescribed
in divisions (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), or (A)(2)(c) below.
         (a)   For each abatement activity in which costs are incurred, the
Clerk of the legislative authority of the municipality or its agent pursuant to
division (A)(5) below may certify the total costs of each abatement activity,
together with the parcel number or another proper description of the lands on
which the abatement activity occurred, the date the costs were incurred for
each abatement activity, and the name of the owner of record at the time the
costs were incurred for each abatement activity, to the County Auditor who
shall place the costs as a charge upon the tax list and duplicate. The costs
are a lien upon such lands from and after the date the costs were incurred. The
costs shall be collected as other taxes and returned to the municipality or its
agent pursuant to division (A)(5) below, as directed by the Clerk of the
legislative authority in the certification of the total costs or in an
affidavit from the agent delivered to the County Auditor or County Treasurer.
The placement of the costs on the tax list and duplicate relates back to, and
is effective in priority, as of the date the costs were incurred; provided,
that the municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) below certifies
the total costs within one year from the date the costs were incurred. If a
lien placed on a parcel of land pursuant to this division (A)(2) is
extinguished as provided in division (A)(8) below, the municipality may pursue
the remedy available under division (A)(2)(b) below to recoup the costs
incurred with respect to that parcel from any person that held title to the
parcel at the time the costs were incurred.
         (b)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) below
may commence a civil action to recover the total costs from the person that
held title to the parcel at the time the costs were incurred.
         (c)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) below
may file a lien on a parcel of land for the total costs incurred under this
section with respect to the parcel by filing a written affidavit with the
County Recorder of the county in which the parcel is located that states the
parcel number, the total costs incurred with respect to the parcel, and the
date such costs were incurred. The municipality or its agent may pursue a
foreclosure action to enforce the lien in a court of competent jurisdiction or,
pursuant to R.C. §§ 323.65 to 323.79, with the Board of Revision. The
municipality or its agent may elect to acquire the parcel by indicating such an
election in the complaint for foreclosure or in an amended complaint. Upon the
entry of a decree of foreclosure, the County Sheriff shall advertise and offer
the property for sale on at least one occasion. The minimum bid with regard to
the sale of the foreclosed property shall equal the sum of the taxes,
penalties, interest, costs, and assessments due and payable on the property,
the total costs incurred by the municipality or its agent with respect to the
property, and any associated court costs and interest as authorized by law. An
owner of the property may redeem the property by paying the minimum bid within
ten days after the entry of the decree of foreclosure. If an owner fails to so
redeem the property, and if the parcel is not sold for want of a minimum bid,
the property shall be disposed of as follows:
            1.   If the municipality or its agent elects to acquire the
property, the parcel shall be transferred to the municipality or its agent as
if the property were transferred by all owners in title to the municipality or
its agent in lieu of foreclosure as provided in R.C. § 5722.10;
            2.   If the municipality or its agent does not elect to acquire the
property, the parcel shall be forfeited to the state or to a political
subdivision or school district as provided in R.C. Ch. 5723; or
            3.   When the municipality or its agent acquires property as
provided in this division (A)(2)(c), the property shall not be subject to
foreclosure or forfeiture under R.C. § 323.25 or R.C. Ch. 5721 or 5723, and any
lien on the property for costs incurred under this division (A) or for any
unpaid taxes, penalties, interest, charges, or assessments shall be
extinguished.
      (3)   This division (A) applies to any action taken by the municipality
or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) below pursuant to R.C. § 715.26 or
pursuant to § 3 of Art. XVIII, State Constitution.
      (4)   (a)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5)
below shall not certify to the County Auditor for placement upon the tax list
and duplicate and the County Auditor shall not place upon the tax list and
duplicate as a charge against the land the costs of any abatement activity
undertaken under division (A)(2) below if any of the following apply:
            1.   The abatement activity occurred on land that has been
transferred or sold to an electing subdivision as defined in R.C. § 5722.01,
regardless of whether the electing subdivision is still the owner of the land,
and the abatement activity occurred on a date prior to the transfer or
confirmation of sale to the electing subdivision;
            2.   The abatement activity occurred on land that has been sold to
a purchaser at sheriff’s sale or auditor’s sale, the abatement activity
occurred on a date prior to the confirmation of sale, and the purchaser is not
the owner of record of the land immediately prior to the judgment of
foreclosure nor any of the following:
               a.   A member of that owner’s immediate family;
               b.   A person with a power of attorney appointed by that owner
who subsequently transfers the land to the owner;
               c.   A sole proprietorship owned by that owner or a member of
that owner’s immediate family; or
               d.   A partnership, trust, business trust, corporation, or
association of which the owner or a member of the owner’s immediate family owns
or controls directly or indirectly more than 50%.
            3.   The abatement activity is taken on land that has been
forfeited to this state for delinquent taxes, unless the owner of record
redeems the land.
         (b)   Upon valid written notice to the County Auditor by any owner
possessing an ownership interest of record of the land or by an electing
subdivision previously in the chain of title of the land that the costs of an
abatement activity undertaken under division (A)(2) above was certified for
placement or placed upon the tax list and duplicate as a charge against the
land in violation of this division (A)(4), the County Auditor shall promptly
remove such charge from the tax duplicate. This written notice to the County
Auditor shall include all of the following:
            1.   The parcel number of the land;
            2.   The common address of the land;
            3.   The date of the recording of the transfer of the land to the
owner or electing subdivision; or
            4.   The charge allegedly placed in violation of this division (A)
(4).
      (5)   The municipality may enter into an agreement with a County Land
Reutilization Corporation organized under R.C. Ch. 1724 wherein the County Land
Reutilization Corporation agrees to act as the agent of the municipality in
connection with removing, repairing, or securing insecure, unsafe, structurally
defective, abandoned, deserted, or open and vacant buildings or other
structures, making emergency corrections of hazardous conditions, or abating
any nuisance, including high weeds, overgrown brush, and trash and debris from
vacant lots. The total costs of such actions may be collected by the
corporation pursuant to division (A)(2) above, and shall be paid to the
corporation if it paid or incurred such costs and has not been reimbursed by
the owner of record at the time of the action or any other party with a
recorded interest in the land.
      (6)   In the case of the lien of a County Land Reutilization Corporation
that is the agent of the municipality, a notation shall be placed on the tax
list and duplicate showing the amount of the lien ascribed specifically to the
agent’s total costs. The agent has standing to pursue a separate cause of
action for money damages to satisfy the lien or pursue a foreclosure action in
a court of competent jurisdiction or with the Board of Revision to enforce the
lien without regard to occupancy. For purposes of a foreclosure proceeding by
the County Treasurer for delinquent taxes, this division (A)(6) does not affect
the lien priority as between a County Land Reutilization Corporation and the
County Treasurer, but the corporation’s lien is superior to the lien of any
other lienholder of the property. As to a direct action by a County Land
Reutilization Corporation, the lien for the taxes, assessment, charges, costs,
penalties, and interest on the tax list and duplicate is in all cases superior
to the lien of a County Land Reutilization Corporation, whose lien for total
costs shall be next in priority as against all other interests, except as
provided in division (A)(7) below.
      (7)   A County Land Reutilization Corporation acting as an agent of the
municipality under an agreement under this division (A) may, with the County
Treasurer’s consent, petition the court or Board of Revision with jurisdiction
over an action undertaken under division (A)(6) above pleading that the lien of
the corporation, as agent, for the total costs shall be superior to the lien
for the taxes, assessments, charges, costs, penalties, and interest. If the
court or Board of Revision determines that the lien is for total costs paid or
incurred by the corporation as such an agent, and that subordinating the lien
for such taxes and other impositions to the lien of the corporation promotes
the expeditious abatement of public nuisances, the court or board may order the
lien for the taxes and other impositions to be subordinate to the corporation’s
lien. The court or board may not subordinate the lien for taxes and other such
impositions to any other liens.
      (8)   (a)   When a parcel of land upon which a lien has been placed under
divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(c) above is transferred to a County Land
Reutilization Corporation, the lien on the parcel shall be extinguished if the
lien is for costs or charges that were incurred before the date of the transfer
to the corporation and if the corporation did not incur the costs or charges,
regardless of whether the lien was attached or the costs or charges were
certified before the date of transfer. In such a case, the County Land
Reutilization Corporation and its successors in title shall take title to the
property free and clear of any such lien and shall be immune from liability in
any action to collect such costs or charges.
         (b)   If a County Land Reutilization Corporation takes title to
property before any costs or charges have been certified or any lien has been
placed with respect to the property under divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(c)
above, the corporation shall be deemed a bona fide purchaser for value without
knowledge of such costs or lien, regardless of whether the corporation had
actual or constructive knowledge of the costs or lien, and any such lien shall
be void and unenforceable against the corporation and its successors in title.
      (9)   (a)   The municipality or County Land Reutilization Corporation may
file an affidavit with the County Recorder under R.C. § 5301.252 stating the
nature and extent of any proceedings undertaken under this division (A).
         (b)   Such an affidavit may include a legal description of a parcel
or, in lieu thereof, the common address of the parcel and the permanent parcel
number to which such address applies.
(R.C. § 715.261)
   (B)   Injunction may be granted for failure to comply.
      (1)   No person shall erect, alter, repair, or maintain any residential
building, office, mercantile building, workshop or factory, including a public
or private garage, or other structure, within the municipality unless all
ordinances or resolutions enacted pursuant to R.C. §§ 715.26 through 715.30 are
fully complied with.
      (2)   In the event any building or structure is being erected,
constructed, altered, repaired, or maintained in violation of such ordinances
or resolutions, or there is imminent threat of violation, the municipality or
the owner of any contiguous or neighboring property who would be especially
damaged by such violation, in addition to any other remedies provided by law,
may institute a suit for injunction to prevent or terminate such violation.
(R.C. § 715.30)
   (C)   Appropriation of property to rehabilitate; demolition or sale.
      (1)   In order to rehabilitate a building or structure that the
municipality has determined to be a blighted property as defined in R.C. §
1.08, the municipality may appropriate, in the manner provided by R.C. §§
163.01 through 163.22, any such building or structure and the real property of
which it is a part. The municipality shall rehabilitate the building or
structure or cause it to be rehabilitated within two years after the
appropriation so that the building or structure is no longer a public nuisance,
insecure, unsafe, structurally defective, unhealthful or unsanitary, or a
threat to the public health, safety, or welfare, in violation of a building
code or ordinance adopted under R.C. § 731.231. Any building or structure
appropriated pursuant to this division (C)(1) which is not rehabilitated within
two years shall be demolished.
      (2)   If, during the rehabilitation process, the municipality retains
title to the building or structure and the real property of which it is a part,
then within 180 days after the rehabilitation is complete, the municipality
shall appraise the rehabilitated building or structure and the real property of
which it is a part, and shall sell the building or structure and property at
public auction. The municipality shall advertise the public auction in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality once a week for three
consecutive weeks, or as provided in R.C. § 7.16, prior to the date of sale.
The municipality shall sell the building or structure and real property to the
highest and best bidder. No property that the municipality acquires pursuant to
this division (C)(2) shall be leased.
(R.C. § 719.012)
(2000 Code, § 93.05)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical ordinances and codes by reference, see R.C. § 731.231
§ 93.006 TRIMMING OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, grow, or maintain any
shade tree or trees or shrubbery which will obstruct the proper distribution of
light from street lamps or which will obstruct the view of traffic approaching
an intersection by operators of vehicles approaching such intersection from
another direction.
   (B)   All trees shall be trimmed so as to have a clear height of ten feet
above the surface of sidewalks and 12 feet above the surface of the street or
roadway, and the branches of all trees in front of and along lots or lands near
which street lights are placed shall be trimmed so as not to obstruct the free
passage of light from such street lights to the street and sidewalk.
   (C)   The legislative authority shall cause a written notice to be given to
property owners ordering them to trim or remove trees and shrubbery so that the
trees and shrubbery conform to divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (D)   If the property owner fails to trim or remove the trees and shrubbery
as ordered, the legislative authority may cause the trees and shrubbery to be
trimmed or removed as ordered, and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
(2000 Code, § 93.06) Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate shade trees, see R.C. § 715.20
UNCLEAN HABITATIONS
§ 93.020 PERMITTING UNCLEAN HABITATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to lease, let, permit the occupancy of,
permit the continuation of the occupancy of, or continue the occupancy of a
structure or building or any portion thereof used for human habitation, unless
such structure or building or portion thereof is free from unclean and
unsanitary conditions as defined in §
93.021 and unless the provisions of the subsequent sections are complied with.
(2000 Code, § 93.10) Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Duties of the landlord, see R.C. § 5321.04
   Duties of the tenant, see R.C. § 5321.05
   Injunction for failure to comply, see R.C. § 715.30
   Regulating occupied buildings, see R.C. § 715.29
§ 93.021 WHEN HABITATIONS ARE DEEMED UNSANITARY.
   A structure, building, or any portion thereof used for human habitation
shall be deemed to be in an unclean and unsanitary condition when any of the
following conditions exist:
   (A)   Infection with communicable disease;
   (B)   Absence of the toilet facilities required by law or ordinance;
   (C)   Presence of sewer gas;
   (D)   Dampness or wetness due to lack of repair;
   (E)   Accumulation of dirt, filth, litter, refuse, or other offensive or
dangerous substances likely to cause sickness among the occupants; or
   (F)   Defective or improperly used drainage, plumbing, or ventilation
facilities likely to cause sickness.
(2000 Code, § 93.11)
§ 93.022 ORDER FOR ABATEMENT OR VACATION OF PREMISES.
   If the local Board of Health ascertains from examination or reports of its
inspectors or sanitary officers or otherwise determines that a public nuisance,
as defined in §
93.021, exists in or upon any structure or building, or portion thereof, and
has notified the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the premises to abate
the nuisance or vacate the premises, it shall be unlawful to occupy or permit
the occupancy of the premises or portion thereof until the nuisance has been
completely abated and the building or portion thereof has been rendered clean
and sanitary in accordance with the terms of the notices of the Board of
Health.
(2000 Code, § 93.12)
§ 93.023 ENFORCEMENT OF VACATION ORDER BY FIRE CHIEF OR POLICE CHIEF.
   When the notice or order of vacation has not been complied with, and the
Board of Health certifies such fact to the Fire Chief or Police Chief, together
with a copy of the order of notice, it shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or
Police Chief to enforce such notice or order of vacation and to cause the
premises to be vacated in accordance with the terms of the notice or order.
(2000 Code, § 93.13)
§ 93.024 ENFORCEMENT THROUGH COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   (A)   Whenever the Board of Health certifies to the municipal legal officer
any failure to comply with any order or notice of vacation, with the request
that civil proceedings for the enforcement thereof be instituted, the municipal
legal officer shall institute any and all proceedings, either legal or
equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of the
order or notice and the abatement of the nuisance against which the order or
notice was directed.
   (B)   These suits or proceedings shall be brought in the name of the
municipality.
   (C)   Proceedings under this section shall not relieve any party defendant
from criminal prosecution or punishment under this code of ordinances or any
other criminal law or ordinance in force within the municipality.
(2000 Code, § 93.14)
SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS, AND REFUSE
§ 93.035 LOCATION OF PRIVY VAULTS, CESSPOOLS, AND SEPTIC TANKS.
   No owner, occupant, or person in charge of any premises situated as to
permit connection with any sanitary sewer shall maintain or permit to be
maintained on or in connection with such premises any privy vault, cesspool,
septic tank, or other repository for human excreta.
(2000 Code, § 93.20) Penalty, see §
93.999
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate privies, see R.C. § 715.40
   Power to regulate refuse disposal, see R.C. § 715.43
§ 93.036 UNSANITARY VAULTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner, lessor, occupant, or
person in charge of any premises upon which a privy vault, cesspool, or septic
tank is located to permit such vault, pool, or tank, or any building, fixture,
or device appurtenant thereto, to become foul, noisome, filthy, or offensive to
neighboring property owners.
(2000 Code, § 93.21) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.037 REMOVAL OF CONTENTS OF VAULT.
   Whenever any part of the waste in any privy vault or cesspool extends to a
point less than three feet below the surface of the ground adjacent thereto, or
whenever use of any such vault or cesspool is abandoned or where such use or
maintenance is prohibited by ordinance or health order, the owner, lessor,
occupant or person in charge of such premises shall cause the vault or cesspool
to be emptied of its contents, thoroughly cleaned, and disinfected, and if
abandoned, to be filled with clean earth or mineral matter to the level of the
adjacent ground.
(2000 Code, § 93.22) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.038 DEPOSIT OF DEAD ANIMALS, OFFAL UPON LAND OR WATER.
   (A)   No person shall put the carcass of a dead animal or the offal from a
slaughter house, butcher’s establishment, packing house or fish house, or
spoiled meat, spoiled fish, or other putrid substance or the contents of a
privy vault, upon or into a lake, river, bay, creek, pond, canal, road, street,
alley, lot, meadow, public ground, market place, or common. No owner or
occupant of such place shall knowingly permit such thing to remain therein to
the annoyance of any citizen or neglect to remove or abate the nuisance
occasioned thereby within 24 hours after knowledge of the existence thereof, or
after notice thereof in writing from the designated municipal official.
(R.C. § 3767.16)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
(2000 Code, § 93.23) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.039 DEFILING SPRING OR WELL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously put a dead animal, carcass, or part
thereof, or other putrid, nauseous, or offensive substance into, or befoul, a
well, spring, brook, or branch of running water, or a reservoir of a
waterworks, of which use is or may be made for domestic purposes.
(R.C. § 3767.18)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
(2000 Code, § 93.24) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.040 DUMPING OF REFUSE IN MUNICIPALITY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, cause to be dumped or permit to
be dumped on any publicly- or privately-owned land or water in the municipality
any paper, brush, rubbish, tin cans, vegetation, garbage, or refuse of any
kind, without first having obtained a written license from the Mayor or other
designated municipal officer to do so. The Mayor or other designated municipal
officer shall issue a license permitting dumping of designated materials when
it appears that filling of the land is necessary and that the material
deposited will be immediately covered with earth or will not be objectionable
to the citizens of the neighborhood, or injurious to health, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens.
(2000 Code, § 93.25) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.041 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a
hinge, latch, or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid,
without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges,
latches, or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein.
This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other air-tight or
semi-air-tight container located in that part of a building occupied by a
dealer, warehouse, or repairer.
(R.C. § 3767.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 93.26)
§ 93.042 DISCARDING LITTER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause litter
to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned by the
person, or in or on waters of the state, unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B) below, the person deposits the
litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being carried away
by the elements; or
      (3)   The person is issued a permit or license covering the litter
pursuant to R.C. Ch. 3734 or 6111.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit litter,
or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any public
property or on any private property not owned by the person, unless one of the
following applies:
      (1)   The litter was generated or located on the property on which the
litter receptacle is located;
      (2)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive;
      (3)   The person is directed to do so by a person whom the person
reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle; or
      (4)   The litter consists of any of the following:
         (a)   The contents of a litter bag or container of a type and size
customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle;
         (b)   The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily installed or
carried and used in a motor vehicle;
         (c)   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings, and containers of
a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be generated during
routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a motor vehicle; or
         (d)   Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings, containers, and
other materials of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to
be generated during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter
receptacle by a casual passerby.
   (C)   (1)   As used in division (B)(1) above, PUBLIC PROPERTY includes any
private property open to the public for the conduct of business, the provision
of a service, or upon the payment of a fee but does not include any private
property to which the public otherwise does not have a right of access.
      (2)   As used in division (B)(4) above, CASUAL PASSERBY means a person
who does not have depositing litter in a litter receptacle as the person’s
primary reason for traveling to or by the property on which the litter
receptacle is located.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUXILIARY CONTAINER. Means a bag, can, cup, food or beverage service
item, container, keg, bottle, or other packaging to which all of the following
apply:
         (a)   It is designed to be either single use or reusable.
         (b)   It is made of cloth, paper, plastic, foamed or expanded plastic,
cardboard, corrugated material, aluminum, metal, glass, postconsumer recycled
material, or similar materials or substances, including coated, laminated, or
multilayered substrates.
         (c)   It is designed for consuming, transporting, or protecting
merchandise, food, or beverages from or at a food service operation, retail
food establishment, grocery, or any other type of retail, manufacturing, or
distribution establishment.
      DEPOSIT. To throw, drop, discard, or place.
      LITTER. Includes garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles,
wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass, auxiliary
containers, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
      LITTER RECEPTACLE. A dumpster, trash can, trash bin, garbage can, or
similar container in which litter is deposited for removal.
   (E)   This section may be enforced by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police
officer of a municipal corporation, police constable or officer of a township,
or township or joint police district, wildlife officer designated under R.C. §
1531.13, natural resources officer appointed under R.C. § 1501.24, forest-fire
investigator appointed under R.C. § 1503.09, conservancy district police
officer, inspector of nuisances of a county, or any other law enforcement
officer within the law enforcement officer’s jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 3767.32)
   (F)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. The sentencing court may, in addition to or in
lieu of the penalty provided in this division (F), require a person who
violates this section to remove litter from any public or private property or
in or on waters of the state.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 93.27)
§ 93.043 POWER OF MUNICIPALITY TO FILL OR DRAIN LAND.
   (A)   The municipality may fill or drain any lot or land within its limits
on which water at any time becomes stagnant, remove all putrid substances from
any lot, and remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains, or private
property, laid in any natural watercourse, creek, brook, or branch, which
obstruct the water naturally flowing therein, causing it to flow back or become
stagnant, in a way prejudicial to the health, comfort, or convenience of any of
the citizens of the neighborhood. If such culverts or drains are of
insufficient capacity, the municipality may make them of such capacity as
reasonable to accommodate the flow of such water at all times.
   (B)   The legislative authority may, by resolution, direct the owner to fill
or drain such lot, remove such putrid substance or other obstructions, and if
necessary, enlarge such culverts or covered drains to meet the requirements
thereof.
   (C)   After service of a copy of such resolution, or after a publication
thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality or as
provided in R.C. § 7.16, for two consecutive weeks, the owner, or the owner’s
agent or attorney, shall comply with the directions of the resolution within
the time therein specified.
   (D)   In case of the failure or refusal of such owner to comply with the
resolution, the work required thereby may be done at the expense of the
municipality, and the amount of money so expended shall be recovered from the
owner before any court of competent jurisdiction. This expense from the time of
the adoption of the resolution shall be a lien on such lot, which may be
enforced by suit in the Court of Common Pleas, and like proceedings may be had
as directed in relation to the improvement of streets.
   (E)   The officers connected with the Health Department of the municipality
shall see that this section is strictly and promptly enforced.
(R.C. § 715.47) (2000 Code, § 93.28)
WEEDS AND LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 93.055 KEEPING DOWN WEEDS.
   Within the municipality shall keep such property free and clear from all
noxious weeds and rank vegetation and shall be required to cut all such weeds
and vegetation on the lots owned or controlled by him or her at least twice in
every year, once between June 1 and July 1 and once between August 1 and
September 1.
   (B)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include, but not be limited
to:
      (1)   Shatter cane (Sorghum bicolor).
      (2)   Russian thistle (Salsola Kali var. tenuifolia).
      (3)   Johnsongrass (Sorghum halepense).
      (4)   Wild parsnip (Pastinaca sativa).
      (5)   Grapevines (Vitis spp.), when growing in groups of 100 or more and
not pruned, sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two consecutive
years.
      (6)   Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense).
      (7)   Poison hemlock (Conium maculatum).
      (8)   Cressleaf groundsel (Senecio glabellus).
      (9)   Musk thistle (Carduus nutans).
      (10)   Purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria).
      (11)   Mile-a-minute weed (Polygonum perfoliatum).
      (12)   Giant hogweed (Heracleum mantegazzianum).
      (13)   Apple of Peru (Nicandra physalodes).
      (14)   Marestail (Conyza canadensis)
      (15)   Kochia (Bassia scoparia).
      (16)   Palmer amaranth (Amaranthus palmeri).
      (17)   Kudzu (Pueraria montana var. lobata).
      (18)   Japanese knotweed (Polygonum cuspidatum).
      (19)   Yellow groove bamboo (Phyllostachys aureasculata), when the plant
has spread from its original premise of planting and is not being maintained.
      (20)   Field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis).
      (21)   Heart-podded hoary cress (Lepidium draba sub. draba).
      (22)   Hairy whitetop or ballcress (Lepidium appelianum).
      (23)   Perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis).
      (24)   Russian knapweed (Acroptilon repens).
      (25)   Leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula).
      (26)   Hedge bindweed (Calystegia sepium).
      (27)   Serrated tussock (Nassella trichotoma).
      (28)   Columbus grass (Sorghum x almum).
      (29)   Musk thistle (Carduus nutans).
      (30)   Forage kochia (Bassia prostrata).
      (31)   Water hemp (Amaranthus tuberculatus).
(O.A.C. §§ 901:5-27-06, 901:5-37-01)
      (32)   Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European barberry,
further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
      (33)   Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or
other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches.
(2000 Code, § 93.40)
§ 93.056 NOTICE TO OWNER TO CUT NOXIOUS WEEDS, REMOVE LITTER; SERVICE.
   (A)   Upon written information that noxious weeds are growing on lands in
the municipality and are about to spread or mature seeds, the legislative
authority shall cause written notice to be served on the owner, lessee, agent,
or tenant having charge of such land, notifying him or her that noxious weeds
are growing on such lands and that they must be cut and destroyed within five
days after service of such notice.
   (B)   Upon a finding by the legislative authority that litter has been
placed on lands in a municipality and has not been removed, and constitutes a
detriment to public health, the legislative authority shall cause a written
notice to be served upon the owner and, if different, upon the lessee, agent,
or tenant having charge of the littered land, notifying him or her that litter
is on the land, and that it must be collected and removed within 15 days after
the service of the notice.
   (C)   As used in this section and §
93.058, LITTER includes any garbage, waste, peelings of vegetables or fruits,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, parts of
automobiles, wagons, furniture, glass, oil of an unsightly or unsanitary
nature, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (D)   If the owner or other person having charge of the land is a
nonresident of the municipality whose address is known, the notice shall be
sent to his or her address by certified mail. If the address of the owner or
other person having charge of the land is unknown it is sufficient to publish
the notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
   (E)   This section does not apply to land being used under a municipal
building or construction permit or license, a municipal permit or license, or a
conditional zoning permit or variance to operate a junkyard, scrap metal
processing facility, or similar business, or a permit or license issued
pursuant to R.C. Ch. 3734, §§ 4737.05 to 4737.12, or R.C. Ch. 6111.
(R.C. § 731.51) (2000 Code, § 93.41)
§ 93.057 FEES FOR SERVICE AND RETURN.
   The Police Chief, any police officer, or Clerk of the legislative authority
may make service and return of the notice provided for in §
93.056 and shall be allowed the same fees as that provided for service and
return of summons in civil cases before a magistrate.
(R.C. § 731.52) (2000 Code, § 93.42)
§ 93.058 PROCEDURE WHEN OWNER FAILS TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
   (A)   If the owner, lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of the lands
mentioned in §
93.056 fails to comply with the notice required by such section, the
legislative authority shall cause such noxious weeds to be cut and destroyed or
such litter removed and may employ the necessary labor to perform the task.
   (B)   All expenses incurred shall, when approved by the legislative
authority, be paid out of the money in the treasury of the municipality not
otherwise appropriated.
(R.C. § 731.53) (2000 Code, § 93.43)
§ 93.059 WRITTEN RETURN TO COUNTY AUDITOR; AMOUNT AS A LIEN UPON PROPERTY.
   The legislative authority shall make a written return to the County Auditor
of their action under §§
93.056 through
93.058, with a statement of the charges for their services, the amount paid for
labor, the fees of the officers serving the notices, and a proper description
of the premises. These amounts, when allowed, shall be entered upon the tax
duplicate and be a lien upon such lands from and after the date of entry and be
collected as other taxes and returned to the municipality with the General
Fund.
(R.C. § 731.54) (2000 Code, § 93.44)
REFUSE, RUBBISH, AND SCRAP
§ 93.070 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMOBILE PARTS. Any portion or part of any motor-driven vehicle as
detached from the vehicle as a whole.
   MOTOR VEHICLE IN AN INOPERATIVE CONDITION. Any style or type of motor-driven
vehicle used or useful for the conveyance of persons or property which is
unable to move under its own power due to defective or missing parts, and which
has remained in such condition for a period not less than ten consecutive days.
   MOTOR VEHICLE UNFIT FOR FURTHER USE. Any style or type of motor-driven
vehicle used for conveyance of persons or property which is in such a condition
generally as to be unfit for further use as a conveyance.
   REFUSE. Such matters as are either in fact noxious or have been refused and
abandoned by their owner as worthless.
   RUBBISH. Wire, chips, shavings, bottles, broken glass, crockery, tin, cast
or wooden ware, boxes, rags, dead weeds, grass clippings, paper circulars, hand
bills, boots, shoes, ashes, or any other waste materials.
   SCRAP METAL. Pieces of or parts of steel, iron, tin, zinc, copper, aluminum,
or any alloy thereof whether covered with porcelain or other material, whether
intact or in parts which has served its usefulness in its original form and can
no longer be used or useful for its originally intended purpose.
   USED BUILDING MATERIALS. Any materials such as wood, stone, brick, cement
blocks, or any composition or combination thereof used or useful in the
construction of any building or structure or driveway which has been used
previously for such construction by the same person or other persons.
(1967 Code, § 92.14) (Ord. O-5-70, passed 2-23-1970)
§ 93.071 NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   Except as provided in §
93.073 herein, it shall be unlawful and is declared a nuisance for any person
to store, place, or allow to remain used building materials, motor vehicles in
an inoperative condition, motor vehicles unfit for further use, automobile
parts, scrap metal, refuse, or rubbish on any lot, lots, parts of lots, or
parcel of land within the corporate limits of the municipality.
(1967 Code, § 92.15) (Ord. O-5-70, passed 2-23-1970) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.072 ORDER FOR REMOVAL.
   (A)   In the event of a violation of any provision of this subchapter, the
Mayor shall give notice to the owner, occupant, or person having charge of the
premises on which the violation occurs to cease such violation. The notice
shall be in writing and shall be served on the owner, occupant, or person
having charge of those premises by registered or certified mail addressed to
that person’s last place of residence.
   (B)   No person served with the notice as provided in this section shall
fail to cause that violation to cease within ten days of the date on which the
notice was issued.
(1967 Code, § 92.16) (Ord. O-5-70, passed 2-23-1970) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.073 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of §
93.071 herein, it shall not be unlawful for any person to purchase used
building materials and place or store them on any lot, lots, parts of lots, or
parcels of land when those materials are to be used by the purchaser or owner
in later construction on the same lot or any lot owned or controlled by that
person; provided, that the materials shall not remain on that lot, lots, parts
of lots, or parcels of land for a period of more than 30 days unless the
construction or erection plan for the use of those materials has commenced; and
provided further, that the materials are used or consumed in the construction
or removed from the premises within the period of four months from the time the
materials are first placed on the lot, lots, parts of lots, or parcel of land.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move any materials so stored or
placed to another location within the municipality for the purpose of avoiding
the intent of this section, except that any such materials may be moved to
another lot, lots, parts of lots, or parcels of land when the same have been
sold to a bona fide purchaser for value for the purchaser’s own use.
(1967 Code, § 92.17) (Ord. O-5-70, passed 2-23-1970) Penalty, see §
93.999
§ 93.999 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in §
10.99.
(2000 Code, § 93.99)
CHAPTER 94: UNCLAIMED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
94.01   Impounding motor vehicle on private property; requirements
   
94.02   Impounding motor vehicle on public property; notice; disposition
   
94.03   Disposition of vehicle ordered into storage
   
94.04   Disposition of abandoned junk motor vehicles
   
94.05   Abandonment of junk motor vehicle prohibited
   
94.06   Junk motor vehicle; order to cover or remove; notice; exceptions
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances generally, see
Ch. 93
Statutory reference:
   Abandonment of vessels or outboard motors upon private property and mooring
of vessels at private docks or mooring facilities, see R.C. § 1547.30
§ 94.01 IMPOUNDING MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into
storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has been left on private residential or private
agricultural property for at least four hours without the permission of the
person having the right to the possession of the property. The chief, upon
complaint of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any
motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left
at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon.
When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the chief
may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall
designate a storage facility.
      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division (A)(1) of
this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that division.
The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed from the
private property, unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor
vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or
other event that is not within the power of the towing service.
      (3)   Subject to division (B) of this section, the owner of a motor
vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the vehicle
only in accordance with division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As used in this section, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means private
property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home,
residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than three
separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. The phrase
does not include any private property on which is located one or more
structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by two or more
persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure
or structures.
   (B)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section arrives after
the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner
or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal
of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal
corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall
give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or
operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the
motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the
towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction.
      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give
the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally
assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to
the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately
shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private
agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to
possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without
the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable.
   (C)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency in the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of motor vehicles that the chief orders
into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section. The record shall
include an entry for each such motor vehicle that identifies the motor
vehicle's license number, make, model, and color, the location from which it
was removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the
person from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it
has been taken and from which it may be recovered. The chief shall provide any
information in the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any
person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information
pertaining to its location.
      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
chief's order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under division (A)
(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency
with which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies self as
the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining
to its location.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of
the following:
         (a)   Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the vehicle
was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle
removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the
municipal corporation.
         (b)   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for
the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.
      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the
vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle
shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor
vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under
R.C. § 4513.611.
      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under division
(D)(1)(b) of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage under division (A)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items
from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after-hours
retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours,
unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice
required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if applicable. The owner of a motor
vehicle shall not do either of the following:
         (a)   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the chief
to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
         (b)   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
      (4)   For purposes of division (D)(3) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (A)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the
procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor
vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other
than in accordance with division (A)(1) of this section or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to
4513.65.
      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (F)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (H) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.60)
   (H)   Private tow-away zones.
      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         (a)   The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:
            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away zone;
            2.   A description of persons authorized to park on the property.
If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property
may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in
the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the
property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may
include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private
tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in
the private tow- away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on
the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property designated
as a private tow-away zone.
            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times,
the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced;
            4.   The telephone number and the address of the place from which a
towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night;
            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may
result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in R.C. § 4505.101(B).
            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of division (H)(1)(a)
of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by
affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the
sign.
         (b)   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this
division (H) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that
complies with all of the following:
            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the location of the
private tow-away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a
place of storage within 25 linear miles.
            2.   It is well- lighted.
            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly
scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public
transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which
the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   (a)   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is
established as a private tow- away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of
this section, without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the
private property may cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The
towing service shall remove the vehicle in accordance with this division (H).
The vehicle owner and the operator of the vehicle are considered to have
consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the
applicable fees established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25, and to the right of a towing service to obtain title to
the vehicle if it remains unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner
or lienholder of a vehicle that has been removed under this division (H),
subject to division (H)(3) of this section, may recover the vehicle in
accordance with division (H)(7) of this section.
         (b)   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck
operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the
municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to division (H)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or
unlicensed tow truck operator.
         (c)   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away
zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered
into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone
is located.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under
authority of division (H)(2) of this section arrives after the vehicle has been
prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written
notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may
pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle
established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25 in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.
Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or
operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the
actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator.
Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so
that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private
tow- away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation.
      (4)   (a)   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (H)(2) of this
section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many
photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on
private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under
division (H)(1) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under this division (H). The towing service shall
retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or
printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is
recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on
which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.
         (b)   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under division
(H)(2) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more
than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone,
unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two
hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is
not within the power of the towing service.
      (5)   (a)   If an owner of a private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of this section causes
the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under division
(H)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the
vehicle, shall provide notice to the law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation concerning all of the following:
            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color;
            2.   The location from which the vehicle was removed;
            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;
            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may
be recovered;
            5.   The address of the place from which the vehicle may be
recovered.
         (b)   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of any vehicle removed from private
property in the chief's jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away
zone of which the chief has received notice under this division (H). The record
shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The chief shall
provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular vehicle to
a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner, operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and requests information
pertaining to the vehicle.
      (6)   (a)   When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance
with this section, within three business days of the removal, the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause
a search to be made of either of the following to ascertain the identity of the
owner and any lienholder of the vehicle:
            1.   The records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles;
            2.   The records of any vendor or vendors, approved by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, that are capable of providing real-time access to
owner and lienholder information.
         (b)   The towing service or storage facility may search the National
Motor Vehicle Title Information System in order to determine the state in which
the vehicle is titled. The entity that provides the record of the owner and any
lienholder under this division shall ensure that such information is provided
in a timely manner.
         (c)   Subject to division (H)(6)(f) of this section, the towing
service or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any
known lienholder as follows:
            1.   Within five business days after the applicable entity provides
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle, if the
vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner's and lienholder's last known address
by certified or express mail with return receipt requested, by certified mail
with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service utilizing any form
of delivery requiring a signed receipt;
            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (H)(6)(c)1. of this
section.
         (d)   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to division (H)(6)(c)
of this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or
the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not
possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under R.C. §
4505.101(B), may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle as provided in that section.
         (e)   A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a
signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible,
shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).
         (f)   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or
storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C. § 4505.101, the
towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice
required under division (H)(6)(c)1. of this section.
      (7)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under
division (H)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following:
            1.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;
            2.   Payment of the following fees:
               a.   All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except that the lienholder of
a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the
period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or
storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent
under division (H)(6)(a)1. of this section;
               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as
described in division (H)(6) of this section, a processing fee of $25.
         (b)   A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle
that is removed under authority of division (H)(2) of this section shall show
the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests the removal of the
vehicle all photographs taken under division (H)(4) of this section. Upon
request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all
photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper,
electronic, or otherwise.
         (c)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves
the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the
vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the
motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action
under R.C. § 4513.611.
         (d)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced
by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed
under authority of division (H)(2) of this section may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a
vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees
to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of division (H)(7)(d) of this
section, “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.
      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
division (H) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this
division (H), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of
this division (H).
      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of divisions
(A) through (G) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65
as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a
private tow- away zone under division (H)(1) of this section.
      (10)   Whoever violates division (H)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private property” or “owner
of the private property” includes, with respect to a private property, any of
the following:
         (a)   Any person who holds title to the property;
         (b)   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease
or sublease agreement for the property;
         (c)   A person who is authorized to manage the property;
         (d)   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in divisions (H)
(11)(a) to (H)(11)(c) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.601)
(2000 Code, § 95.01)
§ 94.02 IMPOUNDING MOTOR VEHICLE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; NOTICE; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   The Police Chief, upon notification to the Police Chief of such action
and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Police Chief as a result of the
performance of the Police Chief's duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place. However, when
such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may be ordered
into storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         (a)   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to R.C. §
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (b)   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the Police Chief shall allow the owner or operator of
the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle
within a period of time specified by the Police Chief. If the Police Chief
determines that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of
time, the Police Chief shall order the removal of the vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (C) of this section, the Police Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
   (B)   If the Police Chief issues an order under division (A) of this section
and arranges for the removal of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing
service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the
Police Chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed.
   (C)   (1)   The Police Chief shall cause a search to be made of the records
of an applicable entity listed in R.C. § 4513.601(F)(1) to ascertain the
identity of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into
storage by the Police Chief within five business days of the removal of the
vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the Police Chief shall send or cause to
be sent to the owner and any lienholder at the owner's and any lienholder's
last known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested,
by certified mail with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service
utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt. The notice shall
inform the owner and any lienholder that the motor vehicle will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of the
sending of the notice.
      (2)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle is responsible
for payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage and
may reclaim the motor vehicle upon payment of those expenses or charges, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon presentation of
proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of the motor vehicle
also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the
vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage
facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner
retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage
facility fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Police Chief to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         (b)   For purposes of division (C)(2) of this section, PERSONAL ITEMS
do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the applicable records has been conducted and after notice has been
sent to the owner and any lienholder as described in this section, and the
search was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice was sent to the
motor vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or lienholder shall pay
to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or
charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
   (D)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of sending the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police Chief, without charge
to any party, shall file with the clerk of courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the clerk,
without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances, to the Police Chief. If the vehicle is to be
disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in
R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police
Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was
disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been complied with.
The Police Chief shall retain the original of the affidavit for the Police
Chief's records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor vehicle salvage
dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the
motor vehicle salvage dealer, the clerk of courts, within 30 days of the
presentation, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances.
   (E)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer's or facility's own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
clerk of courts.
   (F)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(R.C. § 4513.61) (2000 Code, § 95.02)
§ 94.03 DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE ORDERED INTO STORAGE.
   An unclaimed motor vehicle ordered into storage pursuant to §
94.01(A)(1) or §
94.02 is subject to one of the following:
   (A)   The Police Chief may dispose of it with a motor vehicle salvage dealer
or scrap metal processing facility as defined in R.C. § 4737.05, or with any
other facility owned by or under contract with the municipality for the
disposal of such motor vehicles.
   (B)   The Police Chief or a licensed auctioneer may sell the motor vehicle
at public auction, after giving notice thereof by advertisement, published once
a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county or as provided in R.C. § 7.16.
   (C)   A towing service or storage facility may obtain title to the motor
vehicle in accordance with R.C. § 4505.104.
   (D)   Money accrued pursuant to division (A) or (B) of this section that are
in excess of the expenses resulting from the removal and storage of the vehicle
shall be credited to the general fund of the municipality.
(R.C. § 4513.62) (2000 Code, § 95.03)
§ 94.04 DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section, ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor
vehicle meeting all of the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle is left on private property for 48 hours or longer
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property, on a public street or other property open to the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road
or highway for 48 hours or longer;
      (2)   The vehicle is three years old or older;
      (3)   The vehicle is extensively damaged, such damage including, but not
limited to, any of the following: missing wheels; tires; motor; or
transmission;
      (4)   The vehicle is apparently inoperable; and
      (5)   The vehicle has a fair market value of $1,500 or less.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall order any abandoned junk motor vehicle to be
photographed by a law enforcement officer. The officer shall record the make of
motor vehicle, the serial number when available, and shall also detail the
damage or missing equipment to substantiate the value of $1,500 or less. The
Police Chief shall thereupon immediately dispose of the abandoned junk motor
vehicle to a motor vehicle salvage dealer as defined in R.C. § 4738.01 or a
scrap metal processing facility as defined in R.C. § 4737.05 which is under
contract to the municipality, or to any other facility owned by or under
contract with the municipality for the destruction of such motor vehicles. The
records and photographs relating to the abandoned junk motor vehicle shall be
retained by the Police Department for a period of at least two years. The
Police Department shall execute in quadruplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in
which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of R.C. § 4513.63 have been
complied with, and, within 30 days of disposing of the vehicle, shall sign and
file the affidavit with the clerk of courts of the county in which the motor
vehicle was abandoned. The clerk of courts retains the original of the
affidavit for the clerk's files, furnishes one copy thereof to the Registrar,
one copy to the motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility handling the
disposal of the vehicle, and one copy to the Police Department, who shall file
such copy with the records and photograph relating to the disposal.
   (C)   Any monies arising from the disposal of an abandoned junk motor
vehicle shall be deposited in the general fund of the municipality.
   (D)   Notwithstanding §
94.02, any motor vehicle meeting the requirements of division (A)(3), (A)(4)
and (A)(5) of this section which has remained unclaimed by the owner or
lienholder for a period of ten days or longer following notification as
provided in §
94.02 may be disposed of as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.63) (2000 Code, § 95.04)
§ 94.05 ABANDONMENT OF JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor vehicle
as defined in §
94.04 on private property for more than 72 hours without the permission of the
person having the right to the possession of the property, or on a public
street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway for 48 hours
or longer without notification to the Police Chief of the reason for leaving
the motor vehicle in such place.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the fact that a motor vehicle has
been so left without permission or notification is prima facie evidence of
abandonment.
      (3)   Nothing contained in §§
94.01,
94.02, and
94.04 and R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61 and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the
enactment of further provisions of municipal ordinances regulating or
prohibiting the abandonment of motor vehicles on streets, highways, public
property, or private property within the municipality.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing of
the abandoned junk motor vehicle that is the basis of the violation, less any
money accruing to the municipality from the disposal of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.64)
(2000 Code, § 95.05)
§ 94.06 JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE; ORDER TO COVER OR REMOVE; NOTICE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section, JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor
vehicle meeting the requirements of §§
94.04(A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5) that is left uncovered in the open on
private property for more than 72 hours with the permission of the person
having the right to possession of the property, except if the person is
operating a junk yard  or scrap metal processing facility licensed under the
authority of R.C. §§ 4737.05 through 4737.12, or otherwise regulated under
authority of a political subdivision; or if the property on which the motor
vehicle is left is not subject to licensure or regulation by any governmental
authority, unless the person having the right to the possession of the property
can establish that the motor vehicle is part of a bona fide commercial
operation; or if the motor vehicle is a collector’s vehicle.
      (2)   The municipality shall not prevent a person from storing or
keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping, any
collector’s vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
municipality may require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain, or other suitable obstruction, and
unlicensed collector’s vehicle stored in the open.
      (3)   The Police Chief, the Legislative Authority, or the zoning
authority may send notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to
the person having the right to the possession of the property on which a junk
motor vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk
motor vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other
suitable structure, or shall be removed from the property.
      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in
the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of 30
days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate
offense.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.65)
(2000 Code, § 95.06)
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Scope
   
95.02   Meetings
   
95.03   Flags
   
95.04   Sports
   
95.05   Liquor
   
95.06   Fountains
   
95.07   Cycles
   
95.08   Signs
   
95.09   Permits
   
95.10   Hunting, cutting timber, and firearms in Dogwood Park
   
95.11   Garden plot fee
   
95.12   Park Maintenance and Acquisition Fund
   
95.13   Boathouse rules and regulations
Municipal Swimming Pool
   
95.25   Schedule
   
95.26   Liability
   
95.27   Swimming Pool Manager
   
95.28   Compliance with rules
Cross-reference:
   Recreation Director, see §
37.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 SCOPE.
   The rules and regulations promulgated in this chapter are to be applied to
parks and recreation areas owned by the municipality and are to have full force
and effect of law.
(1967 Code, § 93.01) (Ord. O-2-71, passed 1-11-1971)
§ 95.02 MEETINGS.
   No person except with the written permission of the Mayor shall hold or
attend any public meeting, discussion, debate, picnic, or other gathering of
any kind on or within park premises or recreational area, or recreational
property.
(1967 Code, § 93.02) (Ord. O-2-71, passed 1-11-1971) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.03 FLAGS.
   No person, except with the written consent of the Mayor, shall display any
banner, flag, target, sign, or device on or within any park or recreational
area.
(1967 Code, § 93.04) (Ord. O-2-71, passed 1-11-1971) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.04 SPORTS.
   No person shall throw or bat a hard ball, or drive, putt, or play with a
golf ball or use or operate any power-driven model airplane on or within any
park or recreational premises or property, except at such places as may be set
aside therefor by the Mayor.
(1967 Code, § 93.05) (Ord. O-2-71, passed 1-11-1971) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.05 LIQUOR.
   No person or persons shall take or imbibe any intoxicating liquor, beer, or
wine as defined in R.C. § 4301.01 on or within park or recreational premises or
property of the municipality, except as permitted for outdoor dining as per §
151.063(A)(7)(c).
(1967 Code, § 93.06) (Ord. O-2-71, passed 1-11-1971; Ord. O-5-85, passed 3-25-
1985; Ord. O-3-98, passed 1-12-1998) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.06 FOUNTAINS.
   No person or persons shall bathe or wade in any fountain.
(1967 Code, § 93.07) (Ord. O-2-71, passed 1-11-1971) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.07 CYCLES.
   No person shall use or ride any bicycle, motorcycle, or motor bike on any
walk or foot path within park or recreational premises or property, except on
paths or roads provided for that purpose.
(1967 Code, § 93.08) (Ord. O-2-71, passed 1-11-1971) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles and motorcycles, see
Ch. 75
§ 95.08 SIGNS.
   Signs posted by the municipality on or within park or recreational premises
or property shall be complied with by all persons entering on park or
recreational premises.
(1967 Code, § 93.09) (Ord. O-2-71, passed 1-11-1971) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.09 PERMITS.
   (A)   All permissions and consents issued and granted by the Mayor shall be
subject to the rules and regulations of this chapter the same as though these
rules and regulations were fully set forth in each and every permit or consent.
   (B)   Every person claiming to have a permit or consent from the Mayor shall
produce and exhibit that permit or consent on the request of any official or
employee of the municipality, and that official or employee shall have the
right to examine same.
(1967 Code, § 93.10) (Ord. O-2-71, passed 1-11-1971) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.10 HUNTING, CUTTING TIMBER, AND FIREARMS IN DOGWOOD PARK.
   (A)   Dogwood Park, which for purposes of this section, as well as any other
reference in the Mariemont Code of Ordinances to Dogwood Park, shall be
described as follows:
      (1)   Dogwood Park is Mariemont's largest green space, which includes the
Dogwood Park Nature Trail, a hiking trail through old growth parkland along
Whiskey Run Creek, the historic Boathouse, Bell Tower, and Carillon, the Tot
Lot (a modern children's playground), ball fields, swimming pool, the
Madisonville, Joseph Ferris Mill, and Joseph Ferris Distillery archaeological
sites.
      (2)   Dogwood Park encompasses all of the land located from the
intersection of US 50 (Wooster Pike) and Pleasant Street and extends west to
intersection of US 50 and Park Lane. Its boundary continues south of the
intersection US 50 and Park Lane for 269.4 feet around a private parcel
(southeast 81.9 feet, southwesterly for 147.55 feet, and northwest 90.23 feet
to Park Lane). It then continues southwest 344.69 feet, then southeast 105.44
feet, southwest 473.57 feet, north 74.28 feet, and west 533.89 feet to the
corporation line. Following the corporation line, the park boundary continues
south 372.55 feet, then southwest 452.01 feet, south 141.66 feet, east 105.89
feet, south 210.05 feet, east 193.39 feet, and south 336.78 feet to the Norfolk
Southern (NS) Railway, Ohio. Following the NS line, the park boundary extends
east-northeast 545.97 feet, then north 202.73 feet, and east 2,428.57 feet to
Clare Road. From Clare Road, the park boundary extends northwest to Harvard
Street 2,464.65 feet, then west on Mariemont Avenue 706.66 feet to the swimming
pool parking lot. The park boundary then extends eastward back 748.53 feet to
the first private residence, then northwest 355.74 feet along the private
residence property line. Following the private property parcel markings, the
park boundary goes east 342.94 feet. It continues north 120.83 feet along the
private property parcel line and east 384.64 feet along the private property
parcel line, and south on the eastern private property parcel line 196.84 feet
to Mariemont Avenue. The park boundary then extends east along Mariemont Avenue
to the intersection Pleasant Street 1,063.89 feet from the intersection, the
park boundary extends north along Pleasant Street to US 50 for 977.91 feet from
the intersection of Pleasant Street and US 50, the park boundary extends west
to Park Avenue for 1,219.84 feet.
      (3)   Dogwood Park is established and constituted as a forest, bird, and
wildlife preserve and sanctuary.
   (B)   No person shall take, hunt, trap, kill, or pursue, or be in possession
of any wild animal or wild fowl in Dogwood Park, or be in possession outside
such land of any wild animal or wild fowl taken therefrom, except as provided
by law. This provision shall not prevent any peace officer, game warden, or any
officer lawfully exercising the functions of peace officers or game wardens
from killing or pursuing any wild animal therein, in the performance of the
duties of such officers.
   (C)   No person shall enter Dogwood Park with intent to cut timber growing
therein, or otherwise commit waste.
   (D)   No person shall enter Dogwood Park while in possession of any gun or
other firearm, explosive air rifle, sling shot, net, snare, trap of any
description, axe or sheath knife, or any cutting instruments other than pocket
knives; however, any peace officer or game warden may enter the park while
carrying firearms on duty. This provision shall not prevent village maintenance
persons from cutting any timber growing in the park in connection with
maintenance work.
(1967 Code, § 92.13) (Ord. O-15-65, passed 9-27-1965; Ord. O-16-17, passed 9-
11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.11 GARDEN PLOT FEE.
   (A)   Each person who obtains a garden in the south 80 acres of the village
shall pay a fee as set by Council.
   (B)   The funds from the fees shall be deposited into the General Fund.
(2000 Code, § 96.12) (Ord. O-7-81, passed 4-13-1981; Ord. O-18-83, passed 4-11-
1983)
§ 95.12 PARK MAINTENANCE AND ACQUISITION FUND.
   (A)   Fund No. B4, Park Maintenance and Acquisition, is hereby established
to enable the village to receive assets and to expend funds for the maintenance
and acquisition of parks.
   (B)   The proper village officials are authorized to make expenditures from
the Fund for any lawful purpose which is consistent with the purpose for which
the Fund is established.
(2000 Code, § 96.13) (Ord. O-9-92, passed 2-24-1992)
§ 95.13 BOATHOUSE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The rules and regulations governing the use of the Boathouse are
incorporated and adopted herein by reference.
   (B)   The application for use of facilities which incorporates the rules and
regulations for the use of the Boathouse are incorporated and adopted herein by
reference.
   (C)   The Boathouse Board of Overseers, as set forth in the by-laws of said
Board, which are is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein, are hereby recognized and
accepted.
(2000 Code, § 96.14) (Ord. O-16-01, passed 5-14-2001)
MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL
§ 95.25 SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Municipal swimming pool facilities will be open to members and guests
in accordance with a schedule recommended by the Mayor and approved by Council.
   (B)   The Pool Manager is authorized to close the pool during inclement
weather.
(1967 Code, § 51.01) (Ord. O-8-65, passed 5-10-1965; Ord. O-8-1966, passed 2-
28-1966; Ord. O-5-99, passed 4-12-1999; Ord. O-12-21, passed 3-1-2021)
§ 95.26 LIABILITY.
   The village shall not be liable or responsible for any injury, accident, or
loss occurring on or near the swimming pool areas arising out of or caused by
recreational, athletic, or swimming activities.
(1967 Code, § 51.06) (Ord. O-8-65, passed 5-10-1965; Ord. O-5-99, passed 4-12-
1999; Ord. O-12-21, passed 3-1-2021)
§ 95.27 SWIMMING POOL MANAGER.
   (A)   There is created the position Swimming Pool Manager.
   (B)   The following are the established duties of the Pool Manager.
      (1)   The Manager will be in charge of the care, maintenance, and control
of the swimming pool property and the equipment thereto.
      (2)   The Manager will be in charge of staffing and supervising the
employees engaged in the operation of the swimming pool and the. concession
stand.
      (3)   The Manager is to maintain order and see that the pool is safely
operated, as well as any additional facilities adjacent thereto.
      (4)   The Manager is responsible for ordering all supplies necessary for
the operation of the pool and concession stand.
      (5)   The Manager will maintain and provide monthly records and provide
reports to Council by the fifth working day of the following month.
      (6)   In addition to the above, the Manager shall perform any and all
other duties that may from time to time be assigned by the Mayor in order that
the swimming pool can be properly operated.
(1967 Code, § 51.07) (Ord. O-13-74, passed 5-13-1974; Ord. O-12-21, passed 3-1-
2021)
§ 95.28 COMPLIANCE WITH RULES.
   It is further provided that all memberships shall be subject to all the
rules and regulations set forth by the Pool Manager and Pool Commission, and
that all members shall abide by all such rules and regulations that the Pool
Manager shall set forth for the safety, protection and orderly use of such
facilities, and members thereof. Any changes to the rules and regulations for
the pool should be approved first by the Pool Commission, and then presented to
the Mayor, who may, at his or her discretion, seek the input of Council before
providing final approval.
(1967 Code, § 93.99) (Ord. O-2-71, passed 1-11-1971; Ord. O-12-21, passed 3-1-
2021)
CHAPTER 96: TREES
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Control of street trees
   
96.02   Sidewalk area
   
96.03   Rules, regulations, and permits
   
96.04   Acts requiring permits
   
96.05   Height limitations of trees and plants
   
96.06   Hedges and shrubbery at street corners
   
96.07   Trees obstructing street lamps
Removal; Trimming
   
96.20   Definitions
   
96.21   Permit required to remove certain trees
   
96.22   Conditions for tree removal
   
96.23   Permits authorizing removal
   
96.24   Diseased and infested trees
   
96.25   Trimming; pruning
   
96.26   Dangerous trees
   
96.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 CONTROL OF STREET TREES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, STREET TREE and STREET PLANT shall
mean trees or plants located within the limits of a public street or other
public way, including the area between the property line and the curb or
gutter, hereinafter designated as the sidewalk area.
   (B)   The Mayor shall control supervision of planting, care, and protection
of all street trees and plants.
(1967 Code, § 92.01) (Ord. O-25-46, passed 10-14-1946)
§ 96.02 SIDEWALK AREA.
   Trees in a sidewalk area shall be planted or maintained at intervals of not
less than 40 feet. Near street intersections, no tree trunk shall be closer
than 20 feet to the property line, projected and extending along the
intersecting alley, or to a private driveway.
(1967 Code, § 92.02) (Ord. O-25-46, passed 10-14-1946) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.03 RULES, REGULATIONS, AND PERMITS.
   The Mayor shall formulate and adopt rules and regulations governing the
performance of acts and operations affecting street trees and street plants,
and the granting of permits authorizing property owners or other individuals to
perform such acts or operations. Permit fees shall be established by Council.
(1967 Code, § 92.03) (Ord. O-25-46, passed 10-14-1946)
§ 96.04 ACTS REQUIRING PERMITS.
   Unlawful acts or operations affecting street trees or plants, except when
performed in accordance with the terms of a permit issued by the Mayor, are:
   (A)   Planting new trees or plants.
   (B)   Pruning, trimming, or topping.
   (C)   Removing or transplanting.
(1967 Code, § 92.04) (Ord. O-25-46, passed 10-14-1946) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.05 HEIGHT LIMITATIONS OF TREES AND PLANTS.
   No owner, lessee, or occupant of any premises shall permit bushes or
branches of trees to extend from the premises over a sidewalk at a height of
less than eight feet, or over a roadway at a height of less than 12 feet. These
heights may be increased by written order of the Mayor served on the owner,
lessee, or occupant of property in particular locations, in order to promote
effective street lighting.
(1967 Code, § 92.05) (Ord. O-25-46, passed 10-14-1946) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.06 HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY AT STREET CORNERS.
   No lessees, occupants, or owners of property shall permit hedges or
shrubbery thereon to grow higher than three feet above the street level within
a space of 25 feet from the intersection of the property lines at a street
corner.
(1967 Code, § 92.06) (Ord. O-25-46, passed 10-14-1946; Ord. O-12-77, passed 7-
9-1977)
Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.07 TREES OBSTRUCTING STREET LAMPS.
   If any trees obstruct street lamp reflection, the Mayor shall notify the
owner of the premises on which the trees stand to trim the same in a manner
specified in the notice. If the owner refuses or neglects to comply with the
notice, the Mayor shall order the trees trimmed. The owner neglecting or
refusing the notice shall pay the trimming costs and an additional fee as
established by Council for each tree the owner was notified to trim.
(1967 Code, § 92.07) (Ord. O-25-46, passed 10-14-1946)
REMOVING; TRIMMING
§ 96.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). The diameter of the tree measured 54 inches
above the ground.
   DISCRETIONARY. Removal of trees not falling into §§
96.21,
96.24 or
96.26.
   FRONT YARD. As determined by §
151.085.
   GOOD FORESTRY PRACTICE. Established best practices.
   PUBLIC REALM. The area which includes the public right-of-way and the front
yards abutting them.
   REAR YARD. As determined by §
151.085.
   SIDE YARD. As determined by §
151.085.
(2000 Code, § 97.20) (Ord. O-3-05, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 96.21 PERMIT REQUIRED TO REMOVE CERTAIN TREES.
   (A)   Except as may be necessary in furtherance of a community redevelopment
project initiated by the village, it shall be unlawful to remove any tree, any
greater than 12 inches DBH, whether on public or private property, without
first obtaining a village permit, the cost of which shall be determined by the
village.
   (B)   Permits will not be issued in the following circumstances, except as
allowed in §
96.23:
      (1)   Removal of trees from a tree preservation or no disturbance area
such as, but not limited to, the Beech Grove; and
      (2)   Removal of a heritage tree. For purposes of this provision, a
HERITAGE TREE is defined as any tree having a 25-inch or larger DBH as defined
in §
96.20.
(2000 Code, § 97.21) (Ord. O-3-05, passed 1-10-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.22 CONDITIONS FOR TREE REMOVAL.
   (A)   Any tree removal on private property shall not encroach upon or damage
any trees located in protected areas, on neighboring properties or in the
village’s right-of-way.
   (B)   Any permit authorizing removal may be subject to such conditions that
the village may deem necessary or appropriate to minimize damage to other trees
or vegetation.
(2000 Code, § 97.22) (Ord. O-3-05, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 96.23 PERMITS AUTHORIZING REMOVAL.
   (A)   Issuance of permits. Permits authorizing removal may be issued by the
Building Commissioner under the following conditions.
      (1)   The tree is dead or dying.
      (2)   The tree is diseased.
      (3)   The removal of the tree is consistent with established good
forestry practices of the Village Arborist.
      (4)   Removal of trees associated with a lot improvement and/or building
permit must clearly identify all trees that equal or exceed 25 inches DBH in
the front yard, 18 inches DBH in the side yard or 12 inches DBH in the rear
yard.
   (B)   Application process.
      (1)   Application will be made to the Building Commissioner’s office with
the name, location and size of the identified trees clearly marked on the
property location via photographs, site maps or otherwise clearly marked
evidence of the specific tree(s) submitted for removal.
      (2)   The application shall include a written statement indicating the
reason and need for the removal of the tree, as well as the type, location and
size of a replacement tree(s). A written report from a certified arborist shall
be required for removal of all heritage trees.
      (3)   Appeals for negative determinations may be made to the Planning
Commission and require the same appeal fees as defined in the building permit
process.
(2000 Code, § 97.23) (Ord. O-3-05, passed 1-10-2005)(Ord. O-3-05, passed 1-10-
2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
Cross-reference:
   Building permit schedule of fees, see §
150.16
§ 96.24 DISEASED AND INFESTED TREES.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the removal of
trees or parts thereof which have been identified by the Village Arborist as
being infected with contagious, threatening diseases, or infested with pests
either which threaten the health and vitality of the village’s urban forest.
(2000 Code, § 97.24) (Ord. O-3-05, passed 1-10-2005)
§ 96.25 TRIMMING; PRUNING.
   (A)   All tree pruning conducted within the village boundaries shall be done
in a manner that is consistent with the guidelines set forth by the
International Society of Arboriculture as currently exists or as may hereafter
be amended or adopted for purposes of protecting the health of trees and
property values.
   (B)   Non-emergency pruning of all tree species shall be permitted year
round except as follows.
      (1)   All species of elms and white oak shall not be pruned from March
through October.
      (2)   All species in the red oak group shall not be pruned from April
through July, unless the pruning wounds are treated with a tree-wound dressing
at the time of pruning.
      (3)   Excessive pruning to create the death of a healthy tree.
(2000 Code, § 97.25) (Ord. O-3-05, passed 1-10-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.26 DANGEROUS TREES.
   Any tree on private property which overhangs any sidewalk, street or other
public property in such a way as to impede or interfere with traffic, and any
tree or limb which has become likely to fall on or across the public right-of-
way or public property, shall be trimmed or removed by the owner of the
property on which the tree grows so that the obstruction or danger is removed.
If a determination is made by the village that a tree poses an immediate threat
to life or limb, the Mayor and/or Building Commissioner may order the removal
of the portion of the tree posing the immediate threat.
(2000 Code, § 97.26) (Ord. O-3-05, passed 1-10-2005) Penalty, see §
96.99
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Tree removal. Removal of any tree in violation of §§
96.20 through
96.26 shall be punishable by a fine determined by the location of the
violation. Each tree removed in violation shall bear a fine not to exceed
$1,000 in the public right-of-way, $750 in the front yard, $500 in the side
yard, and $300 in the rear yard. The diameter of any trees that are removed
prior to the issuance of a permit shall be determined by the diameter of the
stump where cut at six inches from the surrounding ground level. Where a tree
stump has been ground out, the applicable fine shall be increased by 25%.
   (B)   Replacement. In issuing a permit authorizing the removal of a tree
pursuant to §
96.21 or in establishing the replacement required for a tree as required by §
96.23, the size of each replacement tree shall be no less than two inches DBH
at the time of planting and of a species from the approved village arbor list.
The location and the species of the replacement tree shall be approved by the
appropriate village office. The Mayor may waive or reduce the requirement for
planting a replacement tree, or trees, if such action is consistent with the
purposes of §§
96.20 through
96.26, in which case the costs associated with the appropriate replacement tree
or trees will be placed in the Tree Perpetuation Fund.
   (C)   Tree trimming and pruning. Trimming or pruning of any tree by for-
profit tree services or utility companies in violation of §§
96.20 through
96.26 shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $250 per violation with
each tree trimmed or pruned being a separate violation.
   (D)   Fines. Fines received from these violations will be placed in a Tree
Perpetuation Fund and shall not be spent by the village for any other purpose
except to offset the cost of services provided by the Village Arborist.
(2000 Code, § 97.26) (Ord. O-3-05, passed 1-10-2005)
CHAPTER 97: INCOME TAX
Editor’s note:
   The provisions set forth in Ord. O-17-03, passed November 24, 2003, as
amended from time to time, was not included in the previous edition of the
Mariemont code of ordinances. Ord. O-17-03 was uncodified and was administered,
promulgated, and maintained as rules, regulations, and definitions by the
Village of Mariemont Tax Administrator, subject to the approval of the Tax
Board of Review. A copy of Ord. O-17-03 remains on file in the office of the
Village of Mariemont Tax Administrator.
Section
   
97.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax
   
97.02   Definitions
   
97.03   Imposition of tax
   
97.04   Collection at source
   
97.05   Annual return; filing
   
97.06   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities
   
97.07   Estimated taxes
   
97.08   Rounding of amounts
   
97.09   Requests for refunds
   
97.10   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund
   
97.11   Amended returns
   
97.12   Limitations
   
97.13   Audits
   
97.14   Service of assessment
   
97.15   Administration of claims
   
97.16   Tax information confidential
   
97.17   Fraud
   
97.18   Interest and penalties
   
97.19   Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information
   
97.20   Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator
   
97.21   Board of Review
   
97.22   Authority to create rules and regulations
   
97.23   Savings clause
   
97.24   Collection of tax after termination
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (A)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and
facilities and capital improvements, Mariemont hereby levies an annual
municipal income tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions, and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of 1.25%. The tax is levied at a
uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in
Mariemont. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions, and
other compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided in §
97.03 of this chapter and other sections as they may apply.
   (C)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter
are authorized by Article XVIII, § 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax is
levied in accordance with, and is intended to be consistent with, the
provisions and limitations of R.C. § 718. This chapter is effective for tax
years beginning on and after January 1, 2016. Municipal taxable years beginning
on or before December 31, 2015, are subject to the income tax ordinance and
amendments thereto, and rules and regulations and amendments thereto, as they
existed before January 1, 2016.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter
that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context
in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in
R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the
use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.
   (B)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender neutral.
   (C)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. For a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under division (C)(24)(d) below, means a C corporation’s federal taxable income
before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the
Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (C)(1)(a) above, but excluding that portion of intangible income
directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in § 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         (d)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(d)2. below, deduct
income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and
gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset
described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; and
            2.   Division (C)(1)(d)1. above does not apply to the extent the
income or gain is income or gain described in §§ 1245 or 1250 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
         (h)   1.   a.   Except as limited by divisions (C)(1)(h)2., (C)(1)
(h)3., and (C)(1)(h)4. below, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the
person in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017.
               b.   The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted
from net profit that is reduced by exempt income to the extent necessary to
reduce municipal taxable income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of
the net operating loss carried forward to not more than five consecutive
taxable years following the taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in
no case for more years than necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by this division (C)
(1)(h) to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or
2022, a person may not deduct more than 50% of the amount of the deduction
otherwise allowed by division (C)(1)(h)1. above.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct the full amount allowed by division (C)(1)(h)1. above.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
this division (C)(1)(h) of this section.
            5.   Nothing in division (C)(1)(h)3.a. above precludes a person
from carrying forward, use with respect to any return filed for a taxable year
beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was not fully
utilized by operation of division (C)(1)(h)3.a. above. To the extent that an
amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in one or more taxable
years by operation of division (C)(1)(h)3.a. above is carried forward for use
with respect to a return filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020,
2021, or 2022, the limitation described in division (C)(1)(h)3.a. above shall
apply to the amount carried forward.
         (i)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
97.05(O)(5)(c)2.;
         (j)   1.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
97.05(O)(5)(c)2.
            2.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made an election described in division (C)(48)(b) below, is not
a publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in division
(C)(24)(d) below, and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted
federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C
corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or
accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member,
or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such
payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as payment of
interest under § 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States Treasury
Regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed retirement
plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued
to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for
life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction.
         (k)   Nothing in this division (C)(1) shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   ASSESSMENT.
         (a)   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation that
commences the person’s time limitation for making an appeal to the Board of
Review pursuant to §
97.21, and has “ASSESSMENT” written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         (b)   ASSESSMENT does not include a notice denying a request for
refund issued under §
97.09(C)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, the Tax Administrator’s request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or the Tax Administrator’s other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (C)(2)(a) above.
      (3)   AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income
tax.
      (4) BOARD OF REVIEW. The board constituted to hear appeals of municipal
income tax matters, which is the entity created under §
97.21.
      (5)   CALENDAR QUARTER. The three- month period ending on the last day of
March, June, September, or December.
      (6)   CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 3772.01.
      (7)   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL SERVICE,
AND SIMILAR TERMS. Includes any delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. §
5703.056.
      (8)   DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      (9)   DOMICILE. The true, fixed, and permanent home of a taxpayer and to
which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may have
more than one residence but not more than one DOMICILE.
      (10)   EMPLOYEE. An individual who is an employee for federal income tax
purposes.
      (11)   EMPLOYER. A person that is an employer for federal income tax
purposes.
      (12)   EXEMPT INCOME.
         (a)   All of the following:
            1.   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces
of the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state;
            2.   Intangible income;
            3.   Social Security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious, or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness,
accident, or liability insurance policies. As used in this division (C)(12)
(a)3., UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code;
            4.   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities;
            5.   Compensation paid under R.C. §§ 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation;
            6.   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by
charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions,
lodges, and similar organizations;
            7.   Alimony and child support received;
            8.   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages;
            9.   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject
to the tax levied under R.C. §§ 5727.24 or 5727.30. This division (C)(12)(a)9.
does not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745;
            10.   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business;
            11.   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under § 107 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            12.   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined
in division (C)(35) below;
            13.   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries
of a United States air force base under the jurisdiction of the United States
air force that is used for the housing of members of the United States air
force and is a center for air force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile;
            14.   An S corporation shareholder’s share of net profits of the S
corporation, other than any part of the share of net profits that represents
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from
self-employment as defined in § 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
            15.   All of the income of individuals or a class of individuals
under 18 years of age;
            16.   a.   Except as provided in divisions (C)(12)(a)16.b., (C)(12)
(a)16.c., and (C)(12)(a)16.d. below, qualifying wages described in §
97.04(B)(2) or (B)(5) to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the village under either of those divisions;
               b.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(a)16.a. above
does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the employee
resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages;
               c.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(a)16.a. above
does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold under §
97.04(B)(4)(b); and
               d.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(a)16.a. above
does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions apply:
                  i.   For qualifying wages described in §
97.04(B)(2), the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal place of
work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
97.04(B)(5), the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer’s fixed location is
located;
                  ii.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (C)(12)(a)16.a. above on the basis of the employee not performing
services in that municipal corporation.
            17.   a.   Except as provided in division (C)(12)(a)17.b. or (C)
(12)(a)17.c. below, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a
nonresident individual for personal services performed in the village on not
more than 20 days in a taxable year;
               b.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(a)17.a. above
does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
                  i.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation; and
                  ii.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of this division (C)
(12)(a)17.b.ii., PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE, PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER, AND PUBLIC
FIGURE have the same meanings as in §
97.04(B).
               c.   Compensation to which this division (C)(12)(a)17. applies
shall be treated as earned or received at the individual’s base of operation.
If the individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be
treated as earned or received where the individual is domiciled; and
               d.   For purposes of this division (C)(12)(a)17., BASE OF
OPERATION means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
            18.   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed
for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence; and
            19.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the
constitution or laws of the United States.
         (b)   Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through
entity under division (C) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the
pass-through entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or proportionate
share of that item of the entity’s income.
      (13)   FORM 2106. Internal revenue service form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (14)   GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed
by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or for filing
a refund claim.
      (15)   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total revenue derived from sales, work done,
or service rendered.
      (16)   INCOME. Means the following:
         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in division (C)(24)(d) below.
            2.   For the purposes of division (C)(16)(a)1. above:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident’s distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (C)(16)(a)4. below; and
               b.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity’s net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (C)(16)(a)2. above does not apply with respect to any
net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership interest in an S
corporation unless shareholders’ shares of net profits from S corporations are
subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in division (C)(12)
(a)14. or this division (C)(16).
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer’s
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         (b)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident;
         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer; and
         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings
from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
      (17)   INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income
yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the
ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate investment trusts,
investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred
compensation. INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include prizes, awards, or other
income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other
similar games of chance.
      (18)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5747.01.
      (19)   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed
under R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      (20)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. Includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. §§ 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
      (21)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.
         (a)   Means the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned, or sitused to the village under §
97.03, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for the village.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of Mariemont, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then
reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) below, and further reduced by any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for the
municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of Mariemont, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned, or sitused to the municipal corporation under §
97.03, then reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) below, and further
reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the
individual for the village.
         (b)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is
an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (C)(21)
(a)2.a. or (C)(21)(b) of this section, the amount of the individual’s employee
business expenses reported on the individual’s form 2106 that the individual
deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the
limitation imposed by § 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all
such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes, but only to the extent
the expenses do not relate to exempt income. For a municipal corporation in
which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses
only to the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer’s performance of
personal services in that nonresident municipal corporation and are not related
to exempt income.
      (22)   MUNICIPALITY. The same as the Village of Mariemont (“Mariemont”).
If the terms are capitalized in the chapter they are referring to Mariemont. If
not capitalized they refer to a municipal corporation other than Mariemont.
      (23)   NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation
of a trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or passive activity loss
limitations.
      (24)   NET PROFIT.
         (a)   NET PROFIT FOR A PERSON OTHER THAN AN INDIVIDUAL means adjusted
federal taxable income.
         (b)   NET PROFIT FOR A PERSON WHO IS AN INDIVIDUAL means the
individual’s net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or
schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of this division (C)(24)(b), the net operating loss carried forward shall be
calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (C)(1)(h)
above.
         (c)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(C)(24)(a) above, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be taxable as
against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in the net
profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         (d)   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits
by Mariemont, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for Mariemont. The
election shall be made on the annual return for Mariemont. Mariemont will treat
the publicly traded partnership as a C corporation if the election is so made.
      (25)   NONRESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident.
      (26)   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The online computer network system, created
under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply
forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and
payment system.
      (27)   OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual’s employer or
the employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the
federal gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators
and video lottery terminal sales agents.
      (28)   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association
taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability
company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal
income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which
the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for
federal income tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not include a trust,
estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (29)   PENSION. Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is
reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. PENSION
does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified
deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-
2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      (30)   PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
      (31)   POSTAL SERVICE. The United States postal service.
      (32)   POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK, AND SIMILAR TERMS. Include the
date recorded and marked in the manner described in R.C. § 5703.056(B)(3).
      (33)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD.
         (a)   Any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning
before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution
or ordinance of the municipal corporation that was adopted by the municipal
corporation before January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to
offset income or net profit generated in such municipal corporation in future
taxable years.
         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (34)   PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP. Any partnership, an interest in which
is regularly traded on an established securities market. A PUBLICLY TRADED
PARTNERSHIP may have any number of partners.
      (35)   QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in § 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer; and
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         (b)   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986;
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option and the municipal corporation has not, by
resolution or ordinance, exempted the amount from withholding and tax adopted
before January 1, 2016. This division (C)(35)(b)2. of this section applies only
to those amounts constituting ordinary income;
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in § 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. This
division (C)(35)(b)3. of this section applies only to employee contributions
and employee deferrals;
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages;
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with § 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code;
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under § 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either this division (C)(35)(b) or §
97.04, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th
General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (36)   RELATED ENTITY. Means any of the following:
         (a)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder’s
family enumerated in § 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially,
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the
taxpayer’s outstanding stock;
         (b)   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s
outstanding stock;
         (c)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (C)(36)(d) below, provided the
taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, at least
50% of the value of the corporation’s outstanding stock; or
         (d)   The attribution rules described in § 318 of the Internal Revenue
Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in
divisions (C)(36)(a) to (c) above have been met.
      (37)   RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component
member as defined in § 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a person to or
from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with § 1563(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining whether a
person is a related member under this division (37), 20% shall be substituted
for 5% wherever 5% appears in § 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (38)   RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the municipal
corporation as determined under §
97.03(C).
      (39)   S CORPORATION. A person that has made an election under subchapter
S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year.
      (40)   SCHEDULE C. Internal revenue service schedule C (form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   SCHEDULE E. Internal revenue service schedule E (form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   SCHEDULE F. Internal revenue service schedule F (form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (43)   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability
company that has one direct member.
      (44)   SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than
$500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division (C)
(44), TOTAL REVENUE means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not
limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and
other investment income; compensation; commissions; premiums; money; property;
grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient
service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees;
tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of
payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and
any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purpose or under
generally accepted accounting principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the
federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      (45)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The individual charged with direct
responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by Mariemont in
accordance with this chapter. The title for this individual is ADMINISTRATOR.
      (46)   TAX RETURN PREPARER. Any individual described in § 7701(a)(36) of
the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. § 301.7701-15.
      (47)   TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed
for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (48)   TAXPAYER.
         (a)   A person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal
corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not include a
grantor trust or, except as provided in division (C)(48)(b)1. below, a
disregarded entity.
         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company;
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004;
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under R.C. § 718.01(L) as that section existed on December 31, 2004;
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member; and
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (C)(48)(b)1.e. above, a municipal
corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability company
if, for the limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003, its income
tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any other
municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      (49)   TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to
taxpayers in §§
97.09,
97.12,
97.13,
97.19(B),
97.20,
97.21, and R.C. §§ 5717.011 and 5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers
to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise
comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules and
regulations adopted by Mariemont for the imposition and administration of a
municipal income tax.
      (50)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
      (51)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT. A lottery sales agent licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the
state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The income tax levied by Mariemont at a rate of 1.25% is levied on the
municipal taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or
receiving income in Mariemont.
   (A)   Individuals.
      (1)   For residents of Mariemont, the income tax levied herein shall be
on all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation
from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the
resident’s distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned
directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident. This
is further detailed in the definition of income (§
97.02(C)(16)).
      (2)   For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities
conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
      (3)   For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to municipal
taxable income as defined in §
97.02(C)(21). Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
97.02(C)(12).
   (B)   Refundable credit for nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         (a)   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN. A compensation plan
described in § 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (b)   QUALIFYING LOSS. The amount of compensation attributable to a
taxpayer’s nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of money
and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and
property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer
sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer
receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (c)   QUALIFYING TAX RATE.
            1.   The applicable tax rate for the taxable year for the which the
taxpayer paid income tax to Mariemont with respect to any portion of the total
amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            2.   If different tax rates applied for different taxable years,
then the QUALIFYING TAX RATE is a weighted average of those different tax
rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to Mariemont each
year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (d)   REFUNDABLE CREDIT. The amount of Mariemont income tax that was
paid on the non-distributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
      (2)   If, in addition to Mariemont, a taxpayer has paid tax to other
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to Mariemont
for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this division (B) is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
         (a)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         (b)   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
   (C)   Domicile.
      (1)   (a)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in Mariemont for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in Mariemont on
the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax
Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in
Mariemont for all or part of the taxable year.
         (b)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (C)(1)(a) above if the individual establishes by a preponderance of
the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in Mariemont for all or part
of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in Mariemont for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
         (b)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         (c)   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
         (d)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
         (e)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         (f)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual’s residency;
         (g)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
         (h)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in § 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to
the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal
corporation where the educational institution is located; and
         (i)   The number of contact periods the individual has with Mariemont.
For the purposes of this division (C)(2)(i), an individual has one CONTACT
PERIOD with Mariemont if the individual is away overnight from the individual’s
abode located outside of Mariemont and while away overnight from that abode
spends at least some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days
in Mariemont.
      (3)   All additional applicable factors are provided in the Rules and
Regulations.
   (D)   Businesses. This division (D) applies to any taxpayer engaged in a
business or profession in Mariemont, unless the taxpayer is an individual who
resides in Mariemont or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company,
or telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C.
Chapter 5745.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2) below, net profit
from a business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries
of Mariemont shall be considered as having a taxable situs in Mariemont for
purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average
ratio of the following:
         (a)   1.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in Mariemont during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated; and
            2.   As used in division (D)(1)(a)1. above, tangible personal or
real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the
value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental
thereon by eight.
         (b)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in Mariemont to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under §
97.04(B); and
         (c)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in Mariemont
to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period
from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   (a)   If the apportionment factors described in division (D)(1)
above do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business activity in
Mariemont, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of Mariemont may
require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the
income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or
more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation; and
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         (b)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
97.12(A).
         (c)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (D)(2)(a) above, but
only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by §
97.12(A).
         (d)   Nothing in this division (D)(2) nullifies or otherwise affects
any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a the Tax Administrator
or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and taxpayer before
January 1, 2016.
      (3)   As used in division (D)(1)(b) above, WAGES, SALARIES, AND OTHER
COMPENSATION includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation paid to an
employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         (a)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient; or
            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described
in division (D)(3)(a)2. above, or a related member of such a vendor, customer,
client, or patient.
         (b)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         (c)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (D)(3)(a) or (D)(3)(b) above solely in
order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax liability. If the
Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may dispute the
determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax
Administrator’s determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of division (D)(1)(c) above, receipts from sales
and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal
corporation as follows:
         (a)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division (D)(4)(a), a sale of property originates in Mariemont
if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the following
criteria:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within Mariemont from
a stock of goods located within Mariemont;
            2.   The property is delivered within Mariemont from a location
outside Mariemont, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within Mariemont and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion; and
            3.   The property is shipped from a place within Mariemont to
purchasers outside Mariemont, provided that the taxpayer is not, through its
own employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at
the place where delivery is made.
         (b)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to
Mariemont to the extent that such services are performed in Mariemont.
         (c)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in Mariemont shall be sitused to Mariemont.
         (d)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in Mariemont shall be sitused to
Mariemont.
         (e)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to Mariemont based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in Mariemont.
      (5)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental
of real estate owned directly by the individual, or by a disregarded entity
owned by the individual, shall be subject to Mariemont’s tax only if the
property generating the net profit is located in Mariemont or if the individual
taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of Mariemont. Mariemont
shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose
of calculating net profit sitused under this division (D)(5) to the municipal
corporation in which the property is located.
      (6)   (a)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker
relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to Mariemont, if
applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in Mariemont
to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year.
         (b)   An individual who is a resident of Mariemont shall report the
individual’s net profit from all real estate activity on the individual’s
annual tax return for Mariemont. The individual may claim a credit for taxes
the individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such a credit is allowed under Mariemont’s income tax chapter.
      (7)   When calculating the ratios described in division (D)(1) above for
the purposes of that division or division (D)(2) above, the owner of a
disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the property, payroll,
and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.04 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   Withholding provisions.
      (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or
doing business in Mariemont shall withhold an income tax from the qualifying
wages earned and/or received by each employee in Mariemont. Except for
qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under §
97.03 or division (A)(2)(d) or (A)(2)(f) below, the tax shall be withheld at
the rate, specified in §
97.01(B), of 1.25%. An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall
deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the
employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays
the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the
employee.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b) below, an employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax Administrator of
Mariemont the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld or the income
taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other
payer according to the following schedule:
            1.   a.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be
remitted monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and
withheld or required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer on behalf of Mariemont in the preceding calendar year exceeded
$2,399, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld on behalf of Mariemont in any month of the preceding
calendar quarter exceeded $200.
               b.   Payment under division (A)(2)(a)1. above shall be made so
that the payment is received by the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days
after the last day of each month for which the tax was withheld.
            2.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not
required to make payments under division (A)(2)(a)1. above of taxes required to
be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the end of each
calendar quarter.
         (b)   If the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is
required to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal
taxes withheld on payments to employees under § 6302 of the Internal Revenue
Code, 26 C.F.R. § 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation, the
payment shall be made (if so determined by the Tax Administrator) by electronic
funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of all taxes deducted and withheld on
behalf of Mariemont. The payment of tax by electronic funds transfer under this
division (A)(2)(b) does not affect an employer’s, agent’s, or other payer’s
obligation to file any return as required under this section.
         (c)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division (A)(2)(c) shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and Mariemont as the
return required of an nonresident employee whose sole income subject to the tax
under this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee’s employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer.
         (d)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not
required to withhold Mariemont income tax with respect to an individual’s
disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the
disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the
corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such
corporation’s successor entity.
         (e)   1.   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer’s, agent’s, or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
            2.   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer to remit to Mariemont the tax withheld relieves the employee from
liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent,
or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
         (f)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to
Mariemont income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the
deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the
deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
         (g)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for Mariemont until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
         (h)    On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
            1.   The names, addresses, and Social Security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for Mariemont during the preceding calendar year;
            2.   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee,
the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
            3.   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax
was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the
preceding calendar year;
            4.   Any other information required for federal income tax
reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent form
with respect to such employee; and
            5.   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
         (i)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with
the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
         (j)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold Mariemont income
tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and
constituting qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and
gratuities are under the employer’s control. For the purposes of this division
(A)(2)(j), a tip or gratuity is under the employer’s control if the tip or
gratuity is paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to
the employee, or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit
card, or other electronic means.
         (k)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this chapter, to be tax required to be withheld and remitted
for the purposes of this section.
   (B)   Occasional entrant - withholding.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         (a)   EMPLOYER. Includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         (b)   FIXED LOCATION. A permanent place of doing business in this
state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
         (c)   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK.
            1.   The fixed location to which an employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the worksite location in this
state to which the employee is required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for
employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location or
worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the location in this state at
which the employee spends the greatest number of days in a calendar year
performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s employer.
            2.   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the “greatest number of days in a calendar year” performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s
qualifying wages subject to division (B)(2)(a)1. below among those two or more
municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division (B)(1)
(c)2. shall be the employee’s PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK with respect to those
qualifying wages for the purposes of this section.
            3.   For the purposes of this division (B)(1)(c), the location at
which an employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance
with division (B)(2)(b) below, except that “location” shall be substituted for
“municipal corporation” wherever “municipal corporation” appears in that
division (B)(2)(b) below.
         (d)   PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE. An athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         (e)   PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAIN- ER. A person who performs services in
the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
         (f)   PUBLIC FIGURE. A person of prominence who performs services at
discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events, for
wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
         (g)   WORKSITE LOCATION. A construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the home of
an employee.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to divisions (B)(3), (B)(5), (B)(6), and (B)(7)
below, an employer is not required to withhold Mariemont income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in Mariemont if the employee performed such services in Mariemont on 20 or
fewer days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee’s principal place of work is located in
Mariemont;
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in Mariemont. For the purposes of this division (B)(2)(a)2.,
PRESUMED WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in Mariemont at which the employer provides or provided services that
can reasonably be, or would have been, expected by the employer to last more
than 20 days in a calendar year. Services can “reasonably be expected by the
employer to last more than 20 days” if either of the following applies at the
time the services commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of the services to complete the services; and
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of Mariemont and has requested that
the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages as provided in
this section;
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (B)(2)(a) above, an employee shall
be considered to have spent a day performing services in Mariemont only if the
employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf of the employer
in Mariemont than in any other municipal corporation on that day. For the
purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a particular
location, the time spent performing one or more of the following activities
shall be considered to have been spent at the employee’s principal place of
work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee’s employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (B)
(2)(b)3. above, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the employee does
not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate owned, used,
or controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer; and
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in another
Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception from
withholding requirements described in division (B)(2)(a) above shall apply only
if, with respect to the employee’s qualifying wages described in that division,
the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages to that
municipal corporation.
      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(4)(b) below, if, during a
calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing personal
services in Mariemont exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer shall withhold
and remit tax to Mariemont for any subsequent days in that calendar year on
which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal services
performed in Mariemont.
         (b)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for Mariemont
under division (B)(4)(a) above may elect to withhold tax for Mariemont for the
first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee for
personal services performed in Mariemont.
      (5)   (a)   If an employer’s fixed location is Mariemont and the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in §
97.02, the employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the
employee’s qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to
Mariemont, regardless of the number of days which the employee worked outside
the corporate boundaries of Mariemont.
         (b)   To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer
for a taxable year, a the employer will be required to provide the Tax
Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for the preceding
taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(4) above shall not apply to the extent
that the Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement regarding
the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements of this
section.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.05 ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (A)   An annual Mariemont income tax return shall be completed and filed by
every individual taxpayer 18 years of age or older and any taxpayer that is not
an individual for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the
tax, whether or not a tax is due thereon.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer under §
97.04 when the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole income subject to the tax
is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, and no additional tax is due Mariemont.
      (2)   Retirees having no municipal taxable income for Mariemont income
tax purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption from these
filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The written
exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which
retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree
receives municipal taxable income taxable to Mariemont, at which time the
retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (C)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by Mariemont, the return or notice required of that individual shall
be completed and filed by the individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian,
conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or
property of that individual.
   (D)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
   (E)   Mariemont shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
   (F)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this division (F) shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall
include the taxpayer’s Social Security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an individual
to include, with each annual return, and amended return, copies of the
following documents: all of the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form W-2,
“Wage and Tax Statements,” including all information reported on the taxpayer’s
federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal
corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1040; and, with
respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation necessary to support
the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files
the annual return required by this section electronically is not required to
provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless
the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed.
      (3)   (a)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form
1065, form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect
to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary
to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         (b)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual
net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some
other manner shall either mail the documents required under this division (F)
(3) to the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission
is available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business
Gateway.
      (4)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by Mariemont to determine and verify the taxpayer’s
municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under this division
(F) apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on a
form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under R.C. §
5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms
prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to Mariemont. No remittance is required if the net
amount due is ten dollars or less.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not
an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the
taxpayer’s taxable year. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to Mariemont. No remittance is required
if the net amount due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of Mariemont’s income tax
return. The extended due date of Mariemont’s income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates. An extension of time to file under this division (G)
(2) is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax
Administrator grants an extension of that date.
         (a)   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of Mariemont’s income tax return.
         (b)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may submit a
written request that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month
extension of the date for filing the taxpayer’s Mariemont income tax return. If
the request is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
Mariemont income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the
taxpayer’s requested extension.
      (3)   If the Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of Mariemont’s income tax
return. The extended due date of Mariemont’s income tax return shall be the
same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by Mariemont, the Tax Administrator may require
taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this
division (G), including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual
returns.
      (5)   To the extent that any provision in this division (G) of this
section conflicts with any provision in divisions (N), (O), (P), or (Q) below,
the provisions in divisions (N), (O), (P), or (Q) prevail.
   (H)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, Mariemont shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount
due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to Mariemont for a taxable
year pursuant to division (H)(1) above shall file with Mariemont an annual net
profit return under division (F)(3) above.
   (I)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds transfer, the
payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to an account
designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments, except
that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to
circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered
to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. This division (I) shall not
apply to payments required to be made under §
97.04(A)(2)(a)1. or provisions for semi-monthly withholding.
   (J)   Taxes withheld for Mariemont by an employer, the agent of an employer,
or other payer as described in §
97.04 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax
imposed on the taxpayer by Mariemont, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to Mariemont and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld.
   (K)   Each return required by Mariemont to be filed in accordance with this
division (K) shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
   (L)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any
income tax return, report, or document required by Mariemont, provided that the
generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations adopted by
Mariemont or the Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax
return preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions
of this chapter and of Mariemont’s ordinance, resolution, or rules and
regulations governing the filing of returns, reports, or documents.
   (M)   Filing via Ohio Business Gateway.
      (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to
the taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file Mariemont’s
income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
   (N)   Extension for service in or for the armed forces.
      (1)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of Mariemont
for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time
for payment of taxes required by Mariemont during the period of the member’s or
civilian’s duty service, and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be
filed on or before the one hundred eightieth day after the member’s or
civilian’s duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax
Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred and eight-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. The Tax Administrator may
prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
However, taxes pursuant to a contract entered into under this division (O)(1)
are not delinquent, and the Tax Administrator shall not require any payments of
penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period.
         (b)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be
required to file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to
pay any tax otherwise due to Mariemont before the one hundred and eight-first
day after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates.
         (c)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under (N)(2)(a)
above are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require any payments
of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension
period.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (N)(3) denies to any person
described in this division the application of divisions (N)(1) and (N)(2)
above.
         (b)   1.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension
under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in
which to file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of
time in which to make any payment of taxes required by Mariemont in accordance
with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under this division (N)
(3)(b)1. shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that the
taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this division (N)
(3)(b)1., QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the national guard or a member
of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to
active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of
the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces.
            2.   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division
(N)(3)(b)1. above are not delinquent during the extension period. Such taxes
become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension period
if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator shall not
require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for
the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any period of
extension granted under division (C)(2)(a) above in calculating the penalty or
interest due on any unpaid tax.
      (4)   For each taxable year to which division (N)(1), (N)(2), or (N)(3)
above applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (N)(2)(b) and (N)(2)
(c) above, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing
status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year.
   (O)   Consolidated municipal income tax return.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         (a)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group as defined
in § 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes
at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the
business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the
affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that
would otherwise be included in the group.
         (b)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated return
filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         (c)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLI- DATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (O)(1)(a) above.
         (d)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4927.01.
         (e) LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5727.01.
      (2)   (a)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to Mariemont’s
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (O)(2)(b) below or a
taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator
shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
         (b)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income
tax returns under this section must be made in the first year following the
last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election
period in effect under division (O)(2)(a) above. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
         (c)   An election made under division (O)(2)(a) or (O)(2)(b) above is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated Mariemont income tax return for that taxable year if the
Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to Mariemont. A taxpayer that is required to file a
consolidated Mariemont income tax return for a taxable year shall file a
consolidated Mariemont income tax return for all subsequent taxable years,
unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from the Tax
Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change
in circumstances.
      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated Mariemont income tax return
in the same manner as is required under the United States Department of
Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the
consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common
parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
      (5)   (a) Except as otherwise provided in divisions (O)(5)(b), (O)(5)(c),
and (O)(5)(d) below, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax
return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
97.02, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income” for “federal
taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that division and
by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C corporation’s”
wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
         (b)   No corporation filing a consolidated Mariemont income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
97.02(C)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
         (c)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at
least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated Mariemont income tax return shall do one of
the following with respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (O)(1) through (O)(8),
exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in
the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to Mariemont. If
the entity’s net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to
taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity’s net profits that
would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the
affiliated group.
            2.   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (O)(1) through (O)(8),
include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in
the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to Mariemont. If
the entity’s net profit or loss is so included, the entity shall not be subject
to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity’s net profits
that are included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated
group.
         (d)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less
than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in (O)(1) through (O)(8), exclude
the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to Mariemont; and
            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to Mariemont income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated Mariemont income tax return
shall make the computations required under (O)(1) through (O)(8) by
substituting “consolidated federal taxable income attributable to” for “net
profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by
substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever
“taxpayer” appears in that section.
      (7) Each corporation filing a consolidated Mariemont income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges,
or other amounts imposed by Mariemont in accordance with this chapter on the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated
group.
      (8)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with Mariemont before January 1, 2016, to file a consolidated
or combined tax return with Mariemont may continue to file consolidated or
combined tax returns in accordance with such election or agreement for taxable
years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.06 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (A)   Every individual taxpayer domiciled in Mariemont who is required to
and does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to another
municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages, commissions,
net profits or other compensation taxable under this chapter, may claim a
nonrefundable credit against the tax imposed by this chapter upon satisfactory
evidence that tax has been paid to another municipality. Subject to division
(C) below, the credit shall not exceed the amount obtained by multiplying the
income, qualifying wages, commissions, net profits, or other compensation
subject to tax in the other municipality by the lower of the tax rate in such
other municipality or the tax rate of 1.0%.
   (B)   Mariemont shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident
of Mariemont who works in a joint economic development zone created under R.C.
§ 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under R.C. §§
715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against
its tax on income to its residents who are employed in another municipal
corporation.
   (C)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then for purposes of division (A) above, “the income, qualifying
wages, commissions, net profits, or other compensation” subject to tax in the
other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by dividing the tax
withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for that
municipality.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.07 ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably estimates
to be the taxpayer’s tax liability for Mariemont’s income tax for the current
taxable year.
      (2)   TAX LIABILITY. The total taxes due to Mariemont for the taxable
year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and after
applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from another
taxable year.
   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         (a)   Taxes withheld for Mariemont from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to Mariemont in equal amounts on each payment date unless
the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld,
in which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the
amounts were actually withheld; and
         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent
taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic
funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division (B)
(1)(b), DATE OF THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on
the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
97.05(G) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to Mariemont, including
the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before
the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
and
         (d)   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with §
97.05.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
97.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) below.
The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment; and
         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (D) above shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by
this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the
following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due;
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with Mariemont under §
97.05 for that year; and
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in Mariemont but was not
domiciled there on January 1 of the calendar year that includes the first day
of the taxable year.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.08 ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round
amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on
the document.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.09 REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (A)   As used in this section, WITHHOLDING TAX has the same meaning as in §
97.18.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax
levied by Mariemont:
      (1)   Overpayments of $10 or more; and
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested is $10 or more.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor’s claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount for payment. Except
as provided in division (C)(3) below, the Tax Administrator shall issue an
assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially
denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was denied,
the reasons for the denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If the Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund
request included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax
return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and
instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
97.21.
   (D)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (C) above shall be considered to have been filed in a
timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request;
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day; or
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (E)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
97.18(A)(4).
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.10 SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR REFUND.
   (A)   Income tax that has been deposited with Mariemont, but should have
been deposited with another municipality, is allowable by Mariemont as a refund
but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (B)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with Mariemont is subject to recovery by Mariemont. If
Mariemont’s tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a
refund of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, Mariemont
shall allow a nonrefundable credit against the tax or withholding Mariemont
claims is due with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or
withholding paid to the first municipality with respect to such income or
wages.
   (C)   If Mariemont’s tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the nonrefundable credit shall be calculated using
Mariemont’s tax rate. However, if Mariemont’s tax rate is greater than the tax
rate in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the nonrefundable
credit is to be paid to Mariemont, along with any penalty and interest that
accrued during the period of nonpayment.
   (D)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.11 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (A)   (1)   If a taxpayer’s tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
Mariemont changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or
state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with
Mariemont. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the Tax
Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (B)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall reopen those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return only:
         (a)   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; or
         (b)   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under §
97.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (C)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division (C) within the period prescribed by division (D) below for
filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period prescribed in
that division (D) if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of that division
(D). If the amount of the refund is less than $10, no refund need be paid by
Mariemont. A request filed under this division (C) shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations only to those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s
federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in §
97.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened. All facts, figures, computations, and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations, and attachments.
   (D)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s Mariemont’s tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended Mariemont return showing income subject to
Mariemont income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state
tax liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional Mariemont income tax shown
due thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is less than $10.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.12 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) above may be
extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer, agent of
the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the extension. Any
extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time limit
described in division (C) below.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Review the request described in §
97.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Review did not
have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part of
that assessment; and
         (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Board of Review becomes final or, if any party
appeals from the determination of the Board of Review, the sixtieth day after
the date on which the final determination of the Board of Review is either
ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further
appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is
available or taken.
   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be
reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission
of the offense.
   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
97.09.
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by Mariemont does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Review, of the Ohio Board of
Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax
Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the
amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided
by §
97.09, with interest on that amount as provided by §
97.09(E).
   (E)   No civil action to recover Mariemont income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; or
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.13 AUDITS.
   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer’s rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (C)   (1)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer
is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a
form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      (2)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer’s attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner.
      (3)   This division (C) does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.14 SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   LAST KNOWN ADDRESS. The address the Tax Administrator has at the
time a document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the Tax
Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a change
of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery
service under R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   UNDELIVERABLE ADDRESS. An address to which the postal service or an
authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056 is not able to deliver an
assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for non-delivery is
because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the assessment.
   (B)   Subject to division (C) below, a copy of each assessment shall be
served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under R.C. § 5703.056. With
the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax Administrator
may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this
section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, the Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a
new last known address, including the use of a change of address service
offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. §
5703.056. If the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known
address, the assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served.
If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable
address, the assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the
assessment’s postmark.
      (b)   Once the Tax Administrator or other Mariemont official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local Board of Review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division
(C)(1)(a) above is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and that the
assessment is served.
      (2)   (a)   If mailing of an assessment by the Tax Administrator by
certified mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address,
the Tax Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The
assessment shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and
include the following statement:
   “This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under applicable
law ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax Administrator
as shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an appeal may be filed
apply from and after that date.”
         (b)   Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable
address, the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery
of the assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
         (c)   If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (C)
(1)(a) above. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service
under this division in accordance with division (D) below.
   (D)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (C) above bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of the
evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified mail
was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person’s affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (D)(1) above, and if that assessment is subject to collection and
is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60 days after the
initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other Mariemont official, or the
designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division (D)(2) prevents
the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a compromise with
the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal with the local
Board of Review.
   (E)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator’s designee from delivering an assessment by personal service.
   (F)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (C)(1)(b) above, including those on which a claim has been delivered
for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under this
section.
   (G)   Additional regulations as detailed in the Rules and Regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.15 ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable to
Mariemont that arises pursuant to Mariemont’s income tax imposed in accordance
with this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of Mariemont:
      (1)   Compromise a claim; or
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (D)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (E)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.16 TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person’s official duties or the official business of Mariemont as
authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator or a designee thereof may
furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and
other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the Tax
Commissioner, and Tax Administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit Mariemont from publishing or disclosing
statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to
particular taxpayers.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.17 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by Mariemont ordinance or state law
to be filed with a the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or
advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule,
statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or
knowingly procure, counsel, or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of
the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or
document is based with intent to defraud Mariemont or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.18 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW. This chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes,
directives, instructions, and rules adopted by Mariemont provided they impose
or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing
requirements of Mariemont.
      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE. The rate of the average market yield on
outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods
to maturity of three years or less, as determined under § 1274 of the Internal
Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX. Any income
tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by Mariemont pursuant to
applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS SECTION. The
federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus 5%.
The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the year
in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with division
(A)(2) above.
      (5)   RETURN. Includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with the Tax Administrator or Mariemont
by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant
to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX. Estimated income tax due but not paid
by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX. Income tax due but not paid by the date the
income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX. Withholding tax due but not paid by the
date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX. Includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee’s qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying
wages.
   (B)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; and
         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required
to be paid or remitted to Mariemont on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
Mariemont to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (C)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer, or other payer
for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with Mariemont any return required to be filed, the following penalties
and interest shall apply:
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (A)
above, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and
unpaid withholding tax;
      (2)   (a)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, Mariemont may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid;
and
         (b)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, Mariemont may impose
a penalty equal to 50% of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns,
Mariemont may impose a penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each
return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any
fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled regardless of the
liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed $150 for each failure.
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires Mariemont to refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that Mariemont has
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (E)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of Mariemont to abate or
partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the Tax
Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator’s sole discretion, that such
abatement is appropriate.
   (F)   By October 31 of each year Mariemont shall publish the rate described
in division (A) of this section applicable to the next succeeding calendar
year.
   (G)   Mariemont may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, or any other payer Mariemont’s post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney’s fees.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.19 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   Authority. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the
Tax Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless
the performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision
of the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   (a)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an query nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths; and
         (b)   The powers referred to in this division (A)(1) shall be
exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of
the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under Mariemont’s
income tax ordinance.
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator’s findings, and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer’s assigns, or legal representative as
provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
97.03;
      (7)   (a)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own
motion, review, re-determine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, or orders the Tax Administrator has made; and
      (b)   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Review or other
appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator shall not review, re-determine, or
correct any tax finding, determination, computation, or order which the Tax
Administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the
appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final.
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law; and
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
97.04.
   (B)   Verification of accuracy of returns and determination of liability.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax
returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that
the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter
for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by
the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that the Tax Administrator believes is subject
to, the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by Mariemont or for the withholding of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division (B)(3) does not authorize the practice of law by
a person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
   (C)   Identification information.
      (1)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person’s Social Security
number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect
to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or
upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
97.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
97.99.
         (b)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under this division (C) above within 30
days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying information,
nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty
pursuant to §
97.18.
         (c)   The penalties provided for under divisions (C)(2)(a) and (C)(2)
(b) above may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee with
respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition to
any applicable criminal penalties described in §
97.09 for a violation of §
97.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.20 REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the Rules and Regulations.
   (C)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (E)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (F)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.21 BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Review shall consist of three members. Two members
shall be appointed by the legislative authority of Mariemont, but such
appointees may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with
Mariemont at any time during their term or in the five years (which applies
only to these two appointments) immediately preceding the date of appointment.
One member shall be appointed by the Mayor of Mariemont. This member may be an
employee of Mariemont, but may not be the Director of Finance or equivalent
officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar official or an employee
directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Board of Review Mariemont shall be two
years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve if the
member is reappointed by the legislative authority. The Board member appointed
by the Mayor of Mariemont shall serve at the discretion of the administrative
official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member,
the legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against
the member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person
or by counsel in the member’s own defense upon not less than ten days’ notice.
The decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Review who, for any reason, ceases to meet
the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Review shall impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Review
due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Review in
the member’s place. The appointment of such an individual shall be subject to
the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of
the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (B)   Whenever the Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed.
   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Review by filing a request with the Board of Review. The
request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (D)   The Board of Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60 days
after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C) above, unless the
taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a hearing. If the
taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the Board
of Review and may be represented by an attorney at law, certified public
accountant, or other representative. The Board of Review may allow a hearing to
be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing
must be completed within 120 days after the first day of the hearing unless the
parties agree otherwise.
   (E)   The Board of Review may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator’s assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Review
shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board
of Review’s final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax
Administrator may appeal the Board of Review’s final determination as provided
in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (F)   The Board of Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt rules
governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions. Such
records are not public records available for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.
Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Review created pursuant to
this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. § 121.22.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.22 AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of
Mariemont, or the Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the
administrator by resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an
income tax imposed by Mariemont in accordance with this chapter. Such rules
shall not conflict with or be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter.
Taxpayers are hereby required to comply not only with the requirements of this
chapter, but also to comply with the Rules and Regulations.
   (B)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.23 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm, or corporation, or
to any property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose
the tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section, or part of this
chapter or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the
several groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality, or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section, or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections, or other parts of this chapter.
   (B)   It is hereby declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid
sentence, or part hereof, not been included therein.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.24 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully
terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §§
97.12 and
97.99 hereof.
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
97.05 and
97.04 of this chapter as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates §§
97.17, 97.16(A), or 97.04 by failing to remit Mariemont income taxes deducted
and withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term of up to six months, or both. If the individual that commits the
violation is an employee, or official, of Mariemont, the individual is subject
to discharge from employment or dismissal from office.
   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of §
97.16(A) shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of prosecution, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. If the individual
that commits the violation is an employee, or official, of Mariemont, the
individual is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal from office.
   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
97.16(A) constitutes a separate offense.
   (D)   If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   File any incomplete or false return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers and federal and state
income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (5)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to
the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Administrator;
      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (8)   Give to an employer false information as to his or her true name,
correct Social Security number, and residence address, or fail to promptly
notify an employer of any change in residence address and date thereof; or
      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties, or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (E) Any person who violates any of the provisions in division (D) above
shall be subject to the penalties provided for in division (A) above.
(Ord. O-26-15, passed 11-23-2015)
CHAPTER 98: MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX
Section
   
98.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax
   
98.02   Definitions
   
98.03   Imposition of tax
   
98.04   Collection at source
   
98.05   Annual return; filing
   
98.06   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities
   
98.07   Estimated taxes
   
98.08   Rounding of amounts
   
98.09   Requests for refunds
   
98.10   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund
   
98.11   Amended returns
   
98.12   Limitations
   
98.13   Audits
   
98.14   Service of assessment
   
98.15   Administration of claims
   
98.16   Tax information confidential
   
98.17   Fraud
   
98.18   Interest and penalties
   
98.19   Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information
   
98.20   Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator
   
98.21   Board of Review
   
98.22   Authority to create rules and regulation
   
98.23   [Reserved]
   
98.24   Savings clause
   
98.25   Collection of tax after termination of chapter
   
98.26   Election to be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95
 
   
98.99   Violations; penalties
§ 98.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (A)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and
facilities and capital improvements, Mariemont hereby levies an annual
municipal income tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   (1)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of 1.25%. The tax is levied
at a uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in
Mariemont. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided in §
98.03 and other sections as they may apply.
      (2)   [Intentionally left blank.]
   (C)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter
are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax is
levied in accordance with, and is intended to be consistent with, the
provisions and limitations of R.C. Chapter 718. This chapter is effective for
tax years beginning on and after January 1, 2016. Municipal taxable years
beginning on or before December 31, 2015, are subject to the income tax
ordinance and amendments thereto, and rules and regulations and amendments
thereto, as they existed before January 1, 2016.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter
that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context
in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in
R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the
use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.
   (B)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (C)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME, for a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under division (C)(24)(e) of this section. means a C corporation's federal
taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined
under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (C)(1)(a) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in § 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in § 1221 or § 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         (d)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(d)2. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in § 1221 or § 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Division (C)(1)(d)1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in § 1245 or § 1250 of
the Internal Revenue Code.
         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
         (h)   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income;
         (i)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
98.05(V)(3)(b);
         (j)   1.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
98.05(V)(3)(b).
            2.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made an election described in division (C)(48)(b) of this
section, is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election
described in division (C)(24)(e) of this section, and is not an individual the
taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if
the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar
amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible
expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and
treated as payment of interest under § 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or
United States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
            3.   Nothing in division (C)(1) of this section shall be construed
as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be
construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for
purposes of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   (a)   ASSESSMENT. A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a
person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation that
commences the person's time limitation for making an appeal to the Board of
Review pursuant to §
98.21, and has "ASSESSMENT' written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         (b)   ASSESSMENT does not include a notice denying a request for
refund issued under §
98.09(C)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, the Tax Administrator's request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or the Tax Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (C)(2)(a) of this
section.
      (3)   AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income
tax.
      (4)   BOARD OF REVIEW. The Board constituted to hear appeals of municipal
income tax matters, which is the entity created under §
98.21.
      (5)   CALENDAR QUARTER. The three-month period ending on the last day of
March, June, September, or December.
      (6)   CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 3772.01.
      (7)   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL SERVICE,
and SIMILAR TERMS. Include any delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. §
5703.056.
      (8)   DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      (9)   DOMICILE. The true, fixed, and permanent home of a taxpayer and to
which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may have
more than one residence but not more than one domicile.
      (10)   EMPLOYEE. An individual who is an employee for federal income tax
purposes.
      (11)   EMPLOYER. A person that is an employer for federal income tax
purposes.
      (12)   EXEMPT INCOME. All of the following:
         (a)   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state.
         (b)   Intangible income.
         (c)   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident,
or liability insurance policies. As used in division (C)(12)(c) of this
section, UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in § 3402(0)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (d)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities.
         (e)   Compensation paid under R.C. § 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation.
         (f)   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by
charitable, religious, educational or literary organizations or labor unions,
lodges, and similar organizations.
         (g)   Alimony and child support received.
         (h)   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages.
         (i)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject
to the tax levied under R.C. § 5727.24 or 5727.30. Division (C)(12)(i) of this
section does not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745.
         (j)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business.
         (k)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under § 107 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (l)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (C)(35) of this section.
         (m)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of
a United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.
         (n)   An S corporation shareholder's share of net profits of the S
corporation, other than any part of the share of net profits that represents
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from
self-employment as defined in § 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (o)   All of the income of individuals or a class of individuals under
18 years of age.
         (p)   1.   Except as provided in divisions (C)(12)(p)2., 3., and 4. of
this section, qualifying wages described in §
98.04(C)(2) or (C)(5) to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for Mariemont under either of those divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. of this
section does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the
employee resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. of this
section does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold
under §
98.04(C)(4)(b).
            4.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. of this
section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions
apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
98.04(C)(2), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal place of
work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
98.04(C)(5), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the qualifying
wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed location is
located;
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (C)(12)(p)4.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
         (q)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(12)(q)2. or 3. of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in Mariemont on not more than 20
days in a taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(q)1. of this
section does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual's base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation.
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of division (C)(12)
(q)2.b. of this section, "professional athlete," "professional entertainer,"
and "public figure" have the same meanings as in §
98.04(C).
            3.   Compensation to which division (C)(12)(q) of this section
applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of
operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of division (C)(12)(q) of this section, BASE OF
OPERATION means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         (r)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed
for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence.
         (s)   In the case of a tax administered, collected, and enforced by
Mariemont pursuant to an agreement with the directors of a joint economic
development district under R.C. § 715.72, the net profits of a business, and
the income of the employees of that business, exempted from tax under division
(Q) of R.C. § 715.72.
         (t)   Income from disaster work:
            1.   Income derived from disaster work conducted in Ohio by an out-
of-state disaster business during a disaster response period pursuant to a
qualifying solicitation received by the business;
            2.   Income of a qualifying employee described in division (A)(14)
(a) of R.C. § 5703.94, to the extent such income is derived from disaster work
conducted in Ohio by the employee during a disaster response period pursuant to
a qualifying solicitation received by the employee's employer, and/or for work
on critical infrastructure owned or used by the employee's employer described
in (A)(14)(b) of R.C. § 5703.98.
         (u)   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution
or laws of the United States. Any item of income that is exempt income of a
pass-through entity under division (C) of this section is exempt income of each
owner of the pass-through entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or
proportionate share of that item of the entity's income.
      (13)   FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (14)   GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed
by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or for filing
a refund claim.
      (15)   GROSS RECEIPTS. The total revenue derived from sales, work done,
or service rendered.
      (16)   INCOME.
         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in division (C)(24)(e) of this
section.
            2.   For the purposes of division (C)(16)(a)1. of this section:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (C)(16)(a)4. of this section;
               b.   The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (C)(16)(a)2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders' shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
division (C)(12)(n) of this section.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         (b)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer.
         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings
from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
         (e)   [Intentionally left blank.]
      (17)   INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income
yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the
ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate investment trusts,
investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred
compensation. INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include prizes, awards, or other
income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other
similar games of chance.
      (18)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5747.01.
      (19)   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed
under R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      (20)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. Includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. § 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
      (21)   (a)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income apportioned or
sitused to Mariemont under § 98.03, as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net
operating loss carryforward available to the person for Mariemont.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of Mariemont, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then
reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) of this section, and further reduced
by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for
the municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of Mariemont, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under §
98.03, then reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) of this section, and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to
the individual for Mariemont.
         (b)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is
an individual, the taxpayer may subtract as provided in division (C)(21)(a)2.a.
or (C)(21)(b) of this section, the amount of the individual's employee business
expenses reported on the individual's Form 2106 that the individual deducted
for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the limitation
imposed by § 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the municipal corporation in
which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may deduct all such expenses
allowed for federal income tax purposes, but only to the extent the expenses do
not relate to exempt income. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer
is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the
expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal services in that
nonresident municipal corporation and are not related to exempt income.
      (22)   MUNICIPALITY. The same as the Village of Mariemont ("Mariemont").
If the terms are capitalized in the chapter, they are referring to Mariemont.
If not capitalized they refer to a municipal corporation other than Mariemont.
      (23)   NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation
of a trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or passive activity loss
limitations.
      (24)   (a)   NET PROFIT. For a person who is an individual means the
individual's net profit required to be reported on Schedule C, Schedule E, or
Schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of division (C)(24)(a) of this section, the net operating loss carried forward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (C)
(24)(c) of this section.
         (b)   NET PROFIT. For a person other than an individual, means
adjusted federal taxable income reduced by any net operating loss incurred by
the person in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017, subject to
the limitations of division (C)(24)(c) of this section.
         (c)   1.   The amount of such operating loss shall be deducted from
net profit to the extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to zero,
with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss carried forward to
not more than five consecutive taxable years following the taxable year in
which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more years than necessary for
the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (C)(24)
(c) of this section to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or
2022, a person may not deduct more than 50% of the amount of the deduction
otherwise allowed by division (C)(24)(c) of this section.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct the full amount allowed by (C)(24)(c) of this section without regard
to the limitation of division (C)(24)(c)3.a. of this section.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available may be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
(C)(24)(c) of this section.
            5.   Nothing in division (C)(24)(c)3.a. of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of division (C)(24)(c)3.a. of this section. To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years by operation of division (C)(24)(c)3.a. of this
section is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable
year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in
division (C)(24)(c)3.a. of this section shall apply to the amount carried
forward.
         (d)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(C)(24)(b) of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be
taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in
the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         (e)   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits
by Mariemont, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for Mariemont, and
shall not be treated as the net profit or income of any owner of the
partnership. The election shall be made on the annual return for Mariemont.
Mariemont will treat the publicly traded partnership as a C corporation if the
election is so made.
      (25)   NONRESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident.
      (26)   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The on line computer network system,
created under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file
business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic
filing and payment system.
      (27)   (a)   OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual's employer
or the employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the
federal gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators
and video lottery terminal sales agents.
         (b)   OUT-OF-STATE DISASTER BUSINESS, QUALIFYING SOLICITATION,
QUALIFYING EMPLOYEE, DISASTER WORK, CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE, and DISASTER
RESPONSE PERIOD. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 5703.94.
      (28)   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association
taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability
company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal
income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which
the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for
federal income tax purposes. PASSTHROUGH ENTITY does not include a trust,
estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (29)   PENSION. Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is
reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. PENSION
does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified
deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS form W-
2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form. Effective for tax years beginning
on or after January 1, 2020, PENSION means a retirement benefit plan,
regardless of whether the plan satisfies the qualifications described under §
401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, including amounts that are taxable under
the "Federal Insurance Contributions Act", Chapter 21 of the Internal Revenue
Code, excluding employee contributions and elective deferrals, and regardless
of whether such amounts are paid in the same taxable year in which the amounts
are included in the employee's wages, as defined by § 3121(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (30)   PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
      (31)   POSTAL SERVICE. The United States Postal Service.
      (32)   POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK, and SIMILAR TERMS. Include the
date recorded and marked in the manner described in division (B)(3) of R.C. §
5703.056.
      (33)   (a)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD. Any net operating
loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to the extent
such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the municipal
corporation that was adopted by the municipal corporation before January 1,
2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit
generated in such municipal corporation in future taxable years.
         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (34)   PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP. Any partnership, an interest in which
is regularly traded on an established securities market. A PUBLICLY TRADED
PARTNERSHIP may have any number of partners.
      (35)   QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in § 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
            3.   [Intentionally left blank.]
            4.   [Intentionally left blank.]
            5.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         (b)   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option and the municipal corporation has not, by
resolution or ordinance, exempted the amount from withholding and tax adopted
before January 1, 2016. Division (C)(35)(b)2. of this section applies only to
those amounts constituting ordinary income.
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in §§ 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. Division
(C)(35)(b)3. of this section applies only to employee contributions and
employee deferrals.
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with § 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year, the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under § 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either division (C)(35)(b) of this section or §
98.04, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the 130th
General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (36)   RELATED ENTITY.
         (a)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's
family enumerated in § 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder's family own directly, indirectly, beneficially,
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the
taxpayer's outstanding stock;
         (b)   A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer's
outstanding stock;
         (c)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (C)(36)(d) of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least 50% of the value of the corporation's outstanding
stock;
         (d)   The attribution rules described in § 318 of the Internal Revenue
Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in
divisions (C)(36)(a) to (c) of this section have been met.
      (37)   RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component
member as defined in § 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a person to or
from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with § 1563(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining whether a
person is a related member under this division, "twenty percent (20%)" shall be
substituted for "five percent (5%)" wherever "five percent (5%)" appears in §
1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (38)   (a)   RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the municipal
corporation as determined under § 98.03(E).
         (b)   RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLAN. Effective for tax years beginning on or
after January 1, 2020, means an arrangement whereby an entity provides benefits
to individuals either on or after their termination of service because of
retirement or disability. RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLAN does not include wage
continuation payments, severance payments, or payments made for accrued
personal or vacation time.
      (39)   S CORPORATION. A person that has made an election under subchapter
S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year.
      (40)   SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service Schedule C (Form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service Schedule E (Form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service Schedule F (Form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (43)   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability
company that has one direct member.
      (44)   SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than
$500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division,
"total revenue" means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited
to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and other
investment income; compensation; commissions; premiums; money; property;
grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient
service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees;
tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of
payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and
any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purpose or under
generally accepted accounting principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the
federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      (45)   (a)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. The individual charged with direct
responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by Mariemont in
accordance with this chapter. The title for this individual is "Administrator".
         (b)   TAX COMMISSIONER. The tax commissioner appointed under R.C. §
121.03.
      (46)   TAX RETURN PREPARER. Any individual described in § 7701(a)(36) of
the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R 301.7701-15.
      (47)   TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed
for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (48)   (a)   TAXPAYER. A person subject to a tax levied on income by a
municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not
include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division (C)(48)(b)l. of this
section, a disregarded entity.
         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company's single member is also a
limited liability company.
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under division (L) of R.C. § 718.01 as that section existed on
December 31, 2004.
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member.
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (C)(48)(b)1.e. of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      (49)   TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to
taxpayers in §§ 98.09, 98.12, 98.13, 98.19(B), 98.20, 98.21, and R.C. §§
5717.011 and 5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report,
withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise comply with R.C.
Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules and regulations adopted by
Mariemont for the imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.
      (50)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
      (51)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT. A lottery sales agent licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the
state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The income tax levied by Mariemont at a rate of 1.25% is levied on the
municipal taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or
receiving income in Mariemont.
   Individuals.
   (A)   For residents of Mariemont, the income tax levied herein shall be on
all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation
from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the
resident's distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned
directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident. This
is further detailed in the definition of income (§
98.02(C)(16)).
   (B)   For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions,
and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the
nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities
conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
   (C)   For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to municipal
taxable income as defined in §
98.02(C)(21). Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
98.02(C)(12).
Refundable credit for nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
   (D)   (1)   As used in this division:
         (a)   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN means a compensation
plan described in § 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (b)   QUALIFYING LOSS means the amount of compensation attributable to
a taxpayer's  nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of
money and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and
property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer
sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer
receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (c)   1.   QUALIFYING TAX RATE means the applicable tax rate for the
taxable year for which the taxpayer paid income tax to Mariemont with respect
to any portion of the total amount of compensation the payment of which is
deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            2.   If different tax rates applied for different taxable years,
then the qualifying tax rate is a weighted average of those different tax
rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to Mariemont each
year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (d)   REFUNDABLE CREDIT means the amount of Mariemont income tax that
was paid on the nondistributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
      (2)   If, in addition to Mariemont, a taxpayer has paid tax to other
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to Mariemont
for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this division is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to:
         (a)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         (b)   The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
   Domicile.
   (E)   (1)   (a)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in Mariemont for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in Mariemont on
the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax
Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in
Mariemont for all or part of the taxable year.
         (b)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (E)(1)(a) of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in
Mariemont for all or part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in Mariemont for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The individual's domicile in other taxable years;
         (b)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         (c)   The address on the individual's driver's license;
         (d)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's
residence or domicile;
         (e)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         (f)   Declarations, written or oral made by the individual regarding
the individual's residency;
         (g)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
         (h)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual's dependents as defined in § 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to
the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal
corporation where the educational institution is located;
         (i)   The number of contact periods the individual has with Mariemont.
For the purposes of this division, an individual has one contact period with
Mariemont if the individual is away overnight from the individual's abode
located outside of Mariemont and while away overnight from that abode spends at
least some portion, however minimal of each of two consecutive days in
Mariemont.
      (3)   All additional applicable factors are provided in the Rules and
Regulations.
   Businesses.
   (F)   This division applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in Mariemont, unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in
Mariemont or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or
telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C.
Chapter 5745.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 718.021 and 718.821,
division (F)(2) of this section, or otherwise in this chapter, net profit from
a business or profession conducted both within and without the boundaries of
Mariemont shall be considered as having a taxable situs in Mariemont for
purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the average
ratio of the following:
         (a)   1.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in Mariemont during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated;
            2.   As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real
property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value
of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon
by eight;
         (b)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in Mariemont to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under §
98.04(C);
         (c)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in Mariemont
to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period
from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   (a)   If the apportionment factors described in division (F)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business
activity in Mariemont, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of
Mariemont may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any
portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
involving one or more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         (b)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
98.12(A).
         (c)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (F)(2)(a) of this
section, but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by §
98.12(A).
         (d)   Nothing in division (F)(2) of this section nullifies or
otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by the Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
      (3)   As used in division (F)(1)(b) of this section, "wages, salaries,
and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation
paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         (a)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described
in division (F)(3)(a)2. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
         (b)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         (c)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (F)(3)(a) or (b) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer
may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Tax Administrator's determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of division (F)(1)(c) of this section, and except
as provided in R.C. §§ 718.021 and 718.821 or otherwise in this chapter,
receipts from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to
a municipal corporation as follows:
         (a)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in Mariemont if,
regardless of where title passes, the property for tax years prior to the
taxable year beginning January 1, 2018, meets any of the following criteria of
division (F)(4)(a)1., 2., or 3. of this section, and for tax years beginning on
or after January 1, 2018, meets either division (F)(4)(a)1. or (F)(4)(a)2. of
this section:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within Mariemont from
a stock of goods located within Mariemont.
            2.   The property is delivered within Mariemont from a location
outside Mariemont, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within Mariemont and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
            3.   For tax years prior to the taxable year beginning January 1,
2018, the property is shipped from a place within Mariemont to purchasers
outside Mariemont, provided that the taxpayer is not, through its own
employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the
place where delivery is made.
         (b)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to
Mariemont to the extent that such services are performed in Mariemont.
         (c)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in Mariemont shall be sitused to Mariemont.
         (d)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in Mariemont shall be sitused to
Mariemont.
         (e)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
properly shall be sitused to Mariemont based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in Mariemont.
      (5)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental
of real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded entity
owned by the individual, shall be subject to Mariemont's tax only if the
property generating the net profit is located in Mariemont or if the individual
taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of Mariemont. Mariemont
shall allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose
of calculating net profit sitused under this division to the municipal
corporation in which the property is located.
      (6)   (a)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker
relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to Mariemont, if
applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in Mariemont
to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year.
         (b)   An individual who is a resident of Mariemont shall report the
individual's net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's
annual tax return for Mariemont. The individual may claim a credit for taxes
the individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such a credit is allowed under Mariemont's income tax ordinance.
      (7)   When calculating the ratios described in division (F)(1) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (F)(2) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
      (8)   [Left intentionally blank.]
      (9)   [Intentionally left blank.]
   Remote employees and owners.
   (G)   (1)   As used in this section:
         (a)   QUALIFYING REMOTE EMPLOYEE OR OWNER means an individual who is
an employee of a taxpayer or who is a partner or  member holding an Am. Sub. H.
B. No. 33 135th G.A. 565 ownership interest in a taxpayer that is treated as a
partnership for federal income tax purposes, provided that the individual meets
both of the following criteria:
            1.   The taxpayer has assigned the individual to a qualifying
reporting location.
            2.   The individual is permitted or required to perform services
for the taxpayer at a qualifying remote work location.
         (b)   QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION means a permanent or temporary
location at which an employee or owner chooses or is required to perform
services for the taxpayer, other than a reporting location of the taxpayer or
any other location owned or controlled by a customer or client of the taxpayer.
QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION may include the residence of an employee or
owner and may be located outside of Mariemont. An employee or owner may have
more than one qualifying remote work location during a taxable year.
         (c)   REPORTING LOCATION means either of the following:
            1.   A permanent or temporary place of doing business, such as an
office, warehouse, storefront, construction site, or similar location, that is
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the taxpayer;
            2.   Any location in this state owned or controlled by a customer
or client of the taxpayer, provided that the taxpayer is required to withhold
taxes under R.C. § 718.03 on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the
performance of personal services at that location.
         (d)   QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION means one of the following:
            1.   The reporting location in this state at which an employee or
owner performs services for the taxpayer on a regular or periodic basis during
the taxable year;
            2.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee
or owner under division (G)(1)(d)1. of this section, the reporting location in
this state at which the employee's or owner's supervisor regularly or
periodically reports during the taxable year;
            3.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee
or owner under division (G)(1)(d)1. or (G)(1)(d)2. of this section, the
location that the taxpayer otherwise assigns as the employee's or owner's
qualifying reporting location, provided the assignment is made in good faith
and is recorded and maintained in the taxpayer's business records. A taxpayer
may change the qualifying reporting location designated for an employee or
owner under this division at any time.
      (2)   (a)   A taxpayer may elect to apply the provisions of this section
to the Am. Sub. H. B. No. 33 135th G.A. 566 apportionment of its net profit
from a business or profession. For taxpayers that make this election, the
provisions of R.C. §§ 718.02 and 718.82 apply to such apportionment except as
otherwise provided in this section.
         (b)   A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this section in
writing on or with the taxpayer's net profit return or, if applicable, a timely
filed amended net profit return or a timely filed appeal of an assessment. The
election applies to the taxable year for which that return or appeal is filed
and for all subsequent taxable years, until the taxpayer revokes the election.
         (c)   The taxpayer shall make the initial election with the tax
administrator of Mariemont if, after applying the apportionment provisions
authorized in this section, the taxpayer is required to file a net profit tax
return for that taxable year under this chapter. A taxpayer shall not be
required to notify the Tax Administrator of Mariemont unless the taxpayer is
otherwise required to file a net profit return with Mariemont due to business
operations that are unrelated to the employee's or owner's activity at the
qualifying remote work location.
         (d)   After the taxpayer makes the initial election, the election
applies to every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducts business.
The taxpayer shall not be required to file a net profit return with Mariemont
solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work
location is located in Mariemont.
         (e)   Nothing in this section prohibits a taxpayer from making a new
election under this section after properly revoking a prior election.
      (3)   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in R.C. §§
718.02(A) and 718.82(A), all of the following apply to a taxpayer that has made
the election described in division (G)(2) of this section:
         (a)   For the purpose of divisions (A)(1) of R.C. §§ 718.02 and
718.82, the average original cost of any tangible personal property used by a
qualifying remote employee or owner at that individual’s qualifying remote work
location shall be sitused to that individual’s qualifying reporting location.
         (b)   For the purpose of R.C. §§ 718.02(A)(2) and 718.82(A)(2), any
wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
         (c)   For the purpose of R.C. §§ 718.02(A)(3) and 718.82(A)(3), and
notwithstanding division (D) in each of those sections, any gross receipts of
the business or profession from services performed during the taxable period
Am. Sub. H. 8. No. 33 135th G.A. 567 by a qualifying remote employee or owner
for services performed at that individual’s qualifying remote work location
shall be sitused to that individual’s qualifying reporting location.
      (4)   Nothing in this section prevents a taxpayer from requesting, or a
Tax Administrator from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or
a portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method as
described in R.C. §§ 718.02(B) and 718.82(B). However, the Tax Administrator
shall not require an alternative apportionment method in such a manner that it
would require a taxpayer to file a net profit return with Mariemont solely
because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work
location is located Mariemont.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, nothing in this
section is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on qualifying wages
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.04 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   Withholding provisions.
   (A)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or doing
business in Mariemont shall withhold an income tax from the qualifying wages
earned and/or received by each employee in Mariemont. Except for qualifying
wages for which withholding is not required under §
98.03 or division (B)(4) or (B)(6) of this section, the tax shall be withheld
at the rate, specified in §
98.01(8), of 1.25%. An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall
deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the
employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays
the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the
employee.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, an
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax
Administrator of Mariemont the greater of the income taxes deducted and
withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the
employer, agent, or other payer according to the following schedule:
         (a)   1.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be
remitted monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and
withheld or required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer on behalf of Mariemont in the preceding calendar year exceeded
$2,399, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld on behalf of Mariemont in any month of the preceding
calendar quarter exceeded $200.
            2.   Payment under division (B)(1)(a) of this section shall be made
to the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days after the last day of each
month for which the tax was withheld.
         (b)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not required
to make payments under division (B)(1)(a) of this section of taxes required to
be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the last day of the month following the last day of each
calendar quarter.
         (c)   [Intentionally left blank.]
      (2)   If the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is required
to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes
withheld on payments to employees under § 6302 of the Internal Revenue Code, 26
C.F.R. 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation, the payment shall
be made (if so determined by the Tax Administrator) by electronic funds
transfer to the Tax Administrator of all taxes deducted and withheld on behalf
of Mariemont. The payment of tax by electronic funds transfer under this
division does not affect an employer's, agent's, or other payer's obligation to
file any return as required under this section.
      (3)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and Mariemont as the return
required of a non-resident employee whose sole income subject to the tax under
this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent
of an employer, or other payer.
      (4)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not required
to withhold Mariemont income tax with respect to an individual's disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation's
successor entity.
      (5)   (a)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other
payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
         (b)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
to remit to Mariemont the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for
that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent, or other payer
in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
      (6)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to
Mariemont income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the
deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the
deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
      (7)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for Mariemont until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
      (8)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
         (a)   The names, addresses, and social security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for Mariemont during the preceding calendar year;
         (b)   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee, the
total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         (c)   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax was
withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         (d)   Any other information required for federal income tax reporting
purposes on Internal Revenue Service Form W-2 or its equivalent form with
respect to such employee;
         (e)   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
      (9)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
      (10)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold Mariemont income
tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and
constituting qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and
gratuities are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this division,
a tip or gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is
paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee,
or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or
other electronic means.
      (11)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this chapter, to be tax required to be withheld and remitted
for the purposes of this section.
   Occasional entrant- withholding.
   (C)   (1)   As used in this division:
         (a)   EMPLOYER includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         (b)   FIXED LOCATION means a permanent place of doing business in this
state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
         (c)   1.   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the fixed location to which
an employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and
ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties
on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK
means the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to
report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee
is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis
to a fixed location or worksite location, PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the
location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days
in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's
employer.
            2.   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the greatest number of days in a calendar year performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's
qualifying wages subject to division (C)(2)(a)1. of this section among those
two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair
and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee's principal place of work with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
            3.   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with
division (C)(2)(b) of this section, except that "location" shall be substituted
for "municipal corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that
division.
         (d)   PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE means an athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         (e)   PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER means a person who performs services in
the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
         (f)   PUBLIC FIGURE means a person of prominence who performs services
at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar events,
for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
         (g)   WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the home of
an employee.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to divisions (C)(3), (C)(5), and (C)(6) of this
section, an employer is not required to withhold Mariemont income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in Mariemont if the employee performed such services in Mariemont on 20 or
fewer days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee's principal place of work is located in
Mariemont.
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in Mariemont. For the purposes of this division, presumed
worksite location means a construction site or other temporary worksite in
Mariemont at which the employer provides or provided services that can
reasonably be, or would have been, expected by the employer to last more than
20 days in a calendar year. Services can reasonably be expected by the employer
to last more than 20 days if either of the following applies at the time the
services commence:
               a.   The nature of the services is such that it will require
more than 20 days of the services to complete the services;
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of Mariemont and has requested that
the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages as provided in
this section.
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (C)(2)(a) of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in
Mariemont only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on
behalf of the employer in Mariemont than in any other municipal corporation on
that day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent
in a particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the
following activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee's
principal place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (C)
(2)(b)3. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee's employer;
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee's final delivery or pickup for the day to either the employee's
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in another
Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception from
withholding requirements described in division (C)(2)(a) of this section shall
apply only if, with respect to the employee's qualifying wages described in
that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages
to that municipal corporation.
      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(4)(b) of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in Mariemont exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to Mariemont for any subsequent days in that calendar
year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal
services performed in Mariemont
         (b)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for Mariemont
under division (C)(4)(a) of this section may elect to withhold tax for
Mariemont for the first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to
the employee for personal services performed in Mariemont.
      (5)   (a)   If an employer's fixed location is Mariemont and the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in § 98.02, the employer shall
withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee's qualifying wages for a
taxable year and remit that tax only to Mariemont, regardless of the number of
days which the employee worked outside the corporate boundaries of Mariemont.
         (b)   To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer
for a taxable year, the employer will be required to provide the Tax
Administrator with the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding
taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (C)(2)(a) and (C)(4) of this section shall not apply to
the extent that the Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of this section.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.05 ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (A)   An annual Mariemont income tax return shall be completed and filed by
every individual taxpayer 18 years of age or older and any taxpayer that is not
an individual for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the
tax, whether or not a tax is due thereon.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer under §
98.04 when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole income subject to the tax
is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, and no additional tax is due Mariemont.
      (2)   Retirees having no municipal taxable income for Mariemont income
tax purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption from these
filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The written
exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which
retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree
receives municipal taxable income taxable to Mariemont, at which time the
retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (C)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by Mariemont, the return or notice required of that individual shall
be completed and filed by the individual's duly authorized agent, guardian,
conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or
property of that individual.
   (D)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
   (E)   Mariemont shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
   (F)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this division shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall
include the taxpayer's social security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an individual
to include, with each annual return and amended return, copies of the following
documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service Form W-2, "Wage and
Tax Statements," including all information reported on the taxpayer's federal
W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal
corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service Form 1040 or, in the case
of a return or request required by a qualified municipal corporation, Ohio Form
IT-1040; and, with respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation
necessary to support the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual
taxpayer who files the annual return required by this section electronically is
not required to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax
Administrator unless the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the
return has been filed.
      (3)   (a)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service Form 1041, Form
1065, Form 1120, Form 1120-REIT, Form 1120F, or Form 1120S, and, with respect
to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary
to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         (b)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual
net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some
other manner shall either mail the documents required under this division to
the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is
available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business
Gateway.
      (4)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by Mariemont to determine and verify the taxpayer's
municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (F) of
this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form
or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under R.C. §
5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms
prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to Mariemont. No remittance is required if the net
amount due is $10 or less. Mariemont shall not require a qualifying employee
whose income consists exclusively of exempt income described in §
98.02(C)(12)(t)2. to file a return under this section.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not
an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator
on or before the 15th day of the fourth month following the end of the
taxpayer's taxable year. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to Mariemont. No remittance is required
if the net amount due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of Mariemont's income tax
return. The extended due date of Mariemont's income tax return for a taxpayer
that is an individual shall be the 15th day of the tenth month after the last
day of the taxable year to which the return relates. The extended due date of
Mariemont's income tax return for a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be
the 15th day of the 11th month after the last day of the taxable year to which
the return relates. An extension of time to file under this division is not an
extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an
extension of that date.
         (a)   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of Mariemont's income tax return.
         (b)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may submit a
written request that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month
extension of the date for filing the taxpayer's Mariemont income tax return. If
the request is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
Mariemont income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the
taxpayer's requested extension.
      (3)   If the Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of Mariemont's income tax
return. The extended due date of Mariemont's income tax return shall be the
same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by Mariemont, the Tax Administrator may require
taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this
division, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns.
      (5)   If a taxpayer receives an extension for the filing of an income tax
return under division (G)(2), (3), or (4) of this section, the Tax
Administrator shall not make any inquiry or send any notice to the taxpayer
with regard to the return on or before the date the taxpayer files the return
or on or before the extended due date to file the return, whichever occurs
first. If a Tax Administrator violates division (G)(5) of this section,
Mariemont shall reimburse the taxpayer for any reasonable costs incurred to
respond to such inquiry or notice, up to $150. Division (G)(5) of this section
does not apply to an extension received under division (G)(2) of this section
if the Tax Administrator has actual knowledge that the taxpayer failed to file
for a federal extension as required to receive the extension under division (G)
(2) of this section or failed to file for an extension under division (G)(2)(b)
of this section.
      (6)   To the extent that any provision in this division (G) conflicts
with any provision in divisions (N), (O), (P), or (Q) of this section, the
provisions in divisions (N), (0), (P), or (Q) prevail.
   (H)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, Mariemont shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount
due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to Mariemont for a taxable
year pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section shall file with Mariemont an
annual net profit return under division (F)(3) of this section, unless the
provisions of division (H)(3) apply.
      (3)   (a)   A person may notify the Tax Administrator that the person
does not expect to be a taxpayer subject to Mariemont's income tax ordinance
for a taxable year if both the following apply:
            1.   The person was required to file a tax return with Mariemont
for the immediately preceding taxable year because the person performed
services at a worksite location (as defined in §
98.04(C)(1)(g) within Mariemont.
            2.   The person no longer provides services in Mariemont and does
not expect to be subject to Mariemont's income tax for the taxable year.
         (b)   The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that
briefly explains the person's circumstances, including the location of the
previous worksite location and the last date on which the person performed
services or made any sales within Mariemont. The affidavit shall also include
the following statement: "The affiant has no plans to perform any services
within Mariemont, make any sales in Mariemont, or otherwise become subject to
the tax levied by Mariemont during the taxable year. If the affiant does become
subject to the tax levied by Mariemont for the taxable year, the affiant agrees
to be considered a taxpayer and to properly comply as a taxpayer with
Mariemont's income tax ordinance and rules and regulations." The person shall
sign the affidavit under penalty of perjury.
         (c)   If a person submits an affidavit described in division (H)(3)(b)
of this section the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file a
tax return for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses
information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described
in the affidavit change.
         (d)   Nothing in division (H)(3) of this section prohibits the Tax
Administrator from performing an audit of the person.
   (I)   If a payment under this chapter is made by electronic funds transfer,
the payment shall be considered to be made on the date of the timestamp
assigned by the first electronic system receiving that payment.
   (J)   Taxes withheld for Mariemont by an employer, the agent of an employer,
or other payer as described in §
98.04 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax
imposed on the taxpayer by Mariemont, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to Mariemont and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld.
   (K)   Each return required by Mariemont to be filed in accordance with this
division shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another
person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate
with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
   (L)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any
income tax return, report, or document required by Mariemont, provided that the
generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations adopted by
Mariemont or the Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax
return preparer filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions
of this chapter and of Mariemont's ordinance, resolution, or rules and
regulations governing the firing of returns, reports, or documents.
   Filing via Ohio Business Gateway.
   (M)   (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect
to the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file Mariemont's
income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns. Extension for service in or for the armed forces.
   (N)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of Mariemont
for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time
for payment of taxes required by Mariemont during the period of the member's or
civilian's duty service, and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be
filed on or before the 180th day after the member's or civilian's duty
terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator
considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
   (O)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the 181st day after the applicant's active duty or
service terminates. The Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract terms as
the Tax Administrator considers appropriate. However, taxes pursuant to a
contract entered into under this division are not delinquent, and the Tax
Administrator shall not require any payments of penalties, or interest in
connection with those taxes for the extension period.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to Mariemont before the 181st day after the applicant's active
duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (O)
(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (P)   (1)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in this
division the application of divisions (N) and (O) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of time in
which to make any payment of taxes required by Mariemont in accordance with
this chapter. The length of any extension granted under division (P)(2)(a) of
this section shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that
the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this
division, QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the national guard or a member
of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to
active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of
the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces.
         (b)   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division (P)
(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such
taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension
period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those
taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any
period of extension granted under division (C)(2)(a) of this section in
calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (Q)   For each taxable year to which division (N), (O), or (P) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (O)(2) and (O)(3) of
this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing
status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year.
   Consolidated municipal income tax return.
   (R)   As used in this section:
      (1)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS means an affiliated group as
defined in § 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group
includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN means a consolidated return
filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (3)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME means the consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (R)(1) of this section.
      (4)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4927.01.
      (5)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5727.01.
   (S)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to Mariemont's
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (S)(2) of this section
or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax
Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under division (S)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (S)(1) or (S)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (4)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under R.C. § 718.80, a
valid election made by a taxpayer under division (S)(1) or (S)(2) of this
section is binding upon the Tax Commissioner for the remainder of the five-year
period.
      (5)   When an election is made under R.C. § 718.80 is terminated, a valid
election made under R.C. § 718.86 is binding upon the Tax Administrator for the
remainder of the five-year period.
   (T)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated Mariemont income tax return for that taxable year if the
Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to Mariemont. A taxpayer that is required to file a
consolidated Mariemont income tax return for a taxable year shall file a
consolidated Mariemont income tax return for all subsequent taxable years,
unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from the Tax
Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change
in circumstances.
   (U)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated Mariemont income tax return in
the same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (V)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (V)(2), (V)(3), and
(V)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income
tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
98.02, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal
taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division and
by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C corporation's"
wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated Mariemont income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
98.02(C)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated Mariemont income tax return shall do one of
the following with respect to that passthrough entity's net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
         (a)   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (R) through (Y) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to Mariemont. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity
shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         (b)   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (R) through (Y) of
this section, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to Mariemont. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the entity
shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
         (a)   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in divisions (R) through (Y) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to Mariemont;
         (b)   The pass-through entity shall be subject to Mariemont income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (W)   Corporations filing a consolidated Mariemont income tax return shall
make the computations required under divisions (R) through (Y) of this section
by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to" for "net
profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and by
substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever
"taxpayer" appears in that section.
   (X)   Each corporation filing a consolidated Mariemont income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges,
or other amounts imposed by Mariemont in accordance with this chapter on the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated
group.
   (Y)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with Mariemont before January 1, 2016, to file a consolidated
or combined tax return with Mariemont may continue to file consolidated or
combined tax returns in accordance with such election or agreement for taxable
years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.06 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (A)   Every individual taxpayer domiciled in Mariemont who is required to
and does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to another
municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages, commissions,
net profits or other compensation taxable under this chapter, may claim a
nonrefundable credit against the tax imposed by this chapter upon satisfactory
evidence that tax has been paid to another municipality. Subject to division
(C) of this section, the credit shall not exceed the amount obtained by
multiplying the income, qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other
compensation subject to tax in the other municipality by the LOWER of the tax
rate in such other municipality OR the tax rate of 1.0%.
   (B)   Mariemont shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident
of Mariemont who works in a joint economic development zone created under R.C.
§ 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under R.C. § 715.70,
715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on
income to its residents who are employed in another municipal corporation.
   (C)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then for purposes of division (A) of this section, the income,
qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation subject to tax
in the other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by dividing
the tax withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for that
municipality.
   (D)   [Intentionally left blank.]
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.07 ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for Mariemont's income tax for the
current taxable year.
      (2)   TAX LIABILITY means the total taxes due to Mariemont for the
taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and
after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from
another taxable year.
   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         (a)   Taxes withheld for Mariemont from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to Mariemont in equal amounts on each payment date unless
the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld,
in which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the
amounts were actually withheld.
         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent
taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic
funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division,
DATE OF THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the
cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under § 98.05(G)
or on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the taxpayer becomes
subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to Mariemont, including
the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before
the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         (a)   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (b)   On or before the 15th day of the sixth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (c)   On or before the 15th day of the ninth month after the beginning
of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (d)   On or before the 15th day of the 12th month of the taxable year,
90% of the tax liability for the taxable year. For taxable years beginning on
or after January 1, 2018, for an individual on or before the 15th day of the
first month of the following taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the
taxable year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the 15th day of the fourth month of the year following
that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual
return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid with the
return in accordance with §
98.05.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
98.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with Mariemont under §
98.05 for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in Mariemont but was not
domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes
the first day of the taxable year.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.08 ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round
amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on
the document.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.09 REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (A)   As used in this section, withholding tax has the same meaning as in §
98.18.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax
levied by Mariemont:
      (1)   Overpayments of $10 or more;
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested is $10 or more.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requester to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requester's claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount for payment. Except
as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, the Tax Administrator shall
issue an assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or
partially denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that was
denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for appealing the
assessment.
      (3)   If the Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund
request included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax
return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and
instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
98.21.
   (D)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (C) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (E)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
98.18(A)(4).
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.10 SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR REFUND.
   (A)   Income tax that has been deposited with Mariemont, but should have
been deposited with another municipality, is allowable by Mariemont as a refund
but is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (B)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with Mariemont is subject to recovery by Mariemont. If
Mariemont's tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a
refund of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, Mariemont
shall allow a nonrefundable credit against the tax or withholding Mariemont
claims is due with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or
withholding paid to the first municipality with respect to such income or
wages.
   (C)   If Mariemont's tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the nonefundable credit shall be calculated using
Mariemont's tax rate. However, if Mariemont's tax rate is greater than the tax
rate in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the nonrefundable
credit is to be paid to Mariemont, along with any penalty and interest that
accrued during the period of nonpayment.
   (D)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.11 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (A)   (1)   If a taxpayer's tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
Mariemont changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or
state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with
Mariemont. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the Tax
Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (B)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall reopen those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer's federal or state income tax return only:
         (a)   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; or
         (b)   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under § 98.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (C)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by division (D) of this
section for filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period
prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that division. If the amount of the refund is less than $10, no refund need be
paid by Mariemont. A request filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations only to those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's
federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in §
98.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened. All facts, figures, computations, and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations, and attachments.
   (D)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer's Mariemont's tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended Mariemont return showing income subject to
Mariemont income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state
tax liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional Mariemont income tax shown
due thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is less than $10.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.12 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of this section
may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer,
agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the
extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time
limit described in division (C) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Review the request described in §
98.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Review did not
have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part of
that assessment.
         (b)   Ending the later of the 60th day after the date on which the
final determination of the Board of Review becomes final or, if any party
appeals from the determination of the Board of Review, the 60th day after the
date on which the final determination of the Board of Review is either
ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further
appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is
available or taken.
   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be
reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission
of the offense.
   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
98.09.
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by Mariemont does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Review, of the Ohio Board of
Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax
Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the
amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided
by §
98.09, with interest on that amount as provided by § 98.09(E).
   (E)   No civil action to recover Mariemont income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.13 AUDITS.
   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer's rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (C)   (1)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer
is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a
form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      (2)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer's attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner.
      (3)   This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person
who is not an attorney.
   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case.
   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.14 SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   LAST KNOWN ADDRESS means the address the Tax Administrator has at
the time a document is originally sent by certified mail or any address the Tax
Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a change
of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery
service under R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   UNDELIVERABLE ADDRESS means an address to which the postal service
or an authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056 is not able to deliver
an assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for non-delivery
is because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the assessment.
   (B)   Subject to division (C) of this section, a copy of each assessment
shall be served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under R.C. § 5703.056. With
the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax Administrator
may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this
section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, the Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a
new last known address, including the use of a change of address service
offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. §
5703.056. If the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known
address, the assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served.
If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable
address, the assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the
assessment's postmark.
         (b)   Once the Tax Administrator or other Mariemont official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local Board of Review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division
(C)(1)(a) of this section is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete,
and that the assessment is served.
      (2)   (a)   If mailing of an assessment by the Tax Administrator by
certified mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address,
the Tax Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The
assessment shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and
include the following statement:
"This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under applicable law
ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax Administrator as
shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an appeal may be filed
apply from and after that date."
         (b)   Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable
address, the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery
of the assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
         (c)   If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (C)
(1)(a) of this section. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and
service under this division in accordance with division (D) of this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (C) of this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of
the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified
mail was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the
Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee's business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (D)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other Mariemont
official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division
prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the local Board of Review.
   (E)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator's designee from delivering an assessment by personal service.
   (F)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (C)(1)(b) of this section, including those on which a claim has been
delivered for collection, shall be stayed upon the pend ency of an appeal under
this section.
   (G)   Additional regulations as detailed in the Rules and Regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.15 ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable to
Mariemont that arises pursuant to Mariemont's income tax imposed in accordance
with this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of Mariemont:
      (1)   Compromise a claim;
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (D)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (E)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.16 TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person's official duties or the official business of Mariemont as
authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator or a designee thereof may
furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and
other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the Tax
Commissioner, and tax administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit Mariemont from publishing or disclosing
statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to
particular taxpayers.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.17 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by Mariemont ordinance or state law
to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or
advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule,
statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or
knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of
the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or
document is based with intent to defraud Mariemont or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.18 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances,
codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by Mariemont provided they
impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or
filing requirements of Mariemont.
      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE means the rate of the average market yield
on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining
periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under § 1274 of the
Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX means any
income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by Mariemont
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS SECTION means
the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus
5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the
year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with
division (A)(2) of this section.
      (5)   RETURN includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule,
and other document required to be filed with the Tax Administrator or Mariemont
by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant
to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX means estimated income tax due but not
paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX means income tax due but not paid by the date the
income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX means withholding tax due but not paid by
the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying
wages.
   (B)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;
         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required
to be paid or remitted to Mariemont on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
Mariemont to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (C)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer, or other payer
for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with Mariemont any return required to be filed, the following penalties
and interest shall apply:
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (A) of
this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax,
and unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   (a)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, Mariemont may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid.
         (b)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, Mariemont may impose
a penalty not exceeding 50% of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns,
Mariemont may impose a penalty of not exceeding $25 for each failure to timely
file each return, regardless of the liability shown thereon, except that
Mariemont shall abate or refund the penalty assessed on a taxpayer's first
failure to timely file a return after the taxpayer files that return.
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires Mariemont to refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that Mariemont has
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (E)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of Mariemont to abate or
partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the Tax
Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator's sole discretion, that such
abatement is appropriate.
   (F)   By the 31st day of October of each year Mariemont shall publish the
rate described in division (A) of this section applicable to the next
succeeding calendar year.
   (G)   Mariemont may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, or any other payer Mariemont's post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney's fees.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.19 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
   Authority.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the Tax
Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless the
performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision of
the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   (a)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of a query nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths.
         (b)   The powers referred to in this division of this section shall be
exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of
the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under Mariemont's
income tax ordinance;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator's findings, and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as
provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
98.03;
      (7)   (a)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator's own
motion, review, re-determine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, or orders the Tax Administrator has made.
         (b)   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Review or other
appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator shall not review, re-determine, or
correct any tax finding, determination, computation, or order which the Tax
Administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the
appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law;
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
98.04.
   Verification of accuracy of returns and determination of liability.
   (B)   (1)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee
thereof may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income
tax returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or
that the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this
chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no
return was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written
request by the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee
thereof, every employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is
required to furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator authorized agent,
or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that the Tax Administrator believes is subject
to, the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator's
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by Mariemont or for the withholding of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
   Identification information.
   (C)   (1)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person's social security
number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect
to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or
upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
98.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
98.99.
         (b)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under this division (C) within 30 days
after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying information,
nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty
pursuant to §
98.18.
         (c)   The penalties provided for under divisions (C)(2)(a) and (b) of
this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
98.09 for a violation of §
98.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.20 REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the Rules and Regulations.
   (C)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (D)   The Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (E)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (F)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.21 BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Review shall consist of three members. Two members
shall be appointed by the legislative authority of Mariemont, but such
appointees may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with
Mariemont at any time during their term or in the five years (which applies
only to these two appointments) immediately preceding the date of appointment.
One member shall be appointed by the Mayor of Mariemont. This member may be an
employee of Mariemont but may not be the director of finance or equivalent
officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar official or an employee
directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Board of Review shall be two years.
There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve if the member
is reappointed by the legislative authority. The board member appointed by the
Mayor of Mariemont shall serve at the discretion of the administrative
official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member,
the legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against
the member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person
or by counsel in the member's own defense upon not less than ten days' notice.
The decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Review who, for any reason, ceases to meet
the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Review shall impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Review
due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Review in
the member's place. The appointment of such an individual shall be subject to
the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the appointment of
the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (B)   Whenever the Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed.
   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Review by filing a request with the Board of Review. The
request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (D)   The Board of Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60 days
after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C) of this section,
unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a hearing. If
the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear before the
Board of Review and may be represented by an attorney at law, certified public
accountant, or other representative. The Board of Review may allow a hearing to
be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing
must be completed within 120 days after the first day of the hearing unless the
parties agree otherwise.
   (E)   The Board of Review may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Review
shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board
of Review's final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax
Administrator may appeal the Board of Review's final determination as provided
in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (F)   The Board of Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt rules
governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions. Such
records are not public records available for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.
Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Review created pursuant to
this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. § 121.22.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.22 AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of Mariemont, or
the Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the Tax Administrator by
resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an income tax imposed by
Mariemont in accordance with this chapter. Such rules shall not conflict with
or be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter. Taxpayers are hereby
required to comply not only with the requirements of this chapter, but also to
comply with the Rules and Regulations. All rules adopted under this section
shall be published and posted on the internet.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.23 [RESERVED]
§ 98.24 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the
tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter
or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several
groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, or part hereof,
not been included therein.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.25 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully
terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §§
98.12 and
98.99.
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
98.04 and
98.05 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.26 ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO R.C. §§ 718.80 TO 718.95.
   (A)   Mariemont hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference R.C. §§
718.80 to 718.95 for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018.
   (B)   A taxpayer, as defined in division (C) of this section, may elect to
be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 in lieu of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   Taxpayer has the same meaning as in R.C. § 718.01, except that
taxpayer does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. Taxpayer may include receivers, assignees, or
trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a
taxpayer.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
§ 98.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Whoever violates §§
98.04,
98.16(A) or
98.17 by failing to remit Mariemont income taxes deducted and withheld from an
employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to
six months, or both. If the individual that commits the violation is an
employee, or official, of Mariemont, the individual is subject to discharge
from employment or dismissal from office.
   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of §
98.16(A) shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of prosecution, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. If the individual
that commits the violation is an employee, or official, of Mariemont, the
individual is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal from office.
   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
98.16(A) constitutes a separate offense.
   (D)   If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   File any incomplete or false return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers and federal and state
income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (5)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to
the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Administrator;
      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (8)   Give to an employer false information as to his true name, correct
social security number, and residence address, or fail to promptly notify an
employer of any change in residence address and date thereof;
      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (E)   Any person who violates any of the provisions in division (D) of this
section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in division (A) of this
chapter.
(Ord. O-8-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-8-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-17-23,
passed 12-18-2023)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   LICENSE REGULATIONS
      
111.   CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, AND GAMES OF CHANCE
      
112.   PUBLIC VEHICLES
      
113.   CANVASSING AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION
CHAPTER 110: LICENSE REGULATIONS
Section
   
110.01   License required
   
110.02   Application and oath
   
110.03   Records
   
110.04   License nontransferable
   
110.05   Statement of sales; fees
   
110.06   Rate and duration
   
110.07   Evidence of liability
   
110.08   2% fine
   
110.09   License exhibition
   
110.10   Revocation of license
   
110.11   License fees established by Council
   
110.12   Motor vehicle license tax
   
110.13   Supplemental motor vehicle license tax
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in any trade, business, or profession hereinafter
mentioned until the person has obtained a license to do so.
(1967 Code, § 111.01) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
110.99
Cross-reference:
   Sewer tappers to be licensed, see §
50.06
§ 110.02 APPLICATION AND OATH.
   Every person engaged in any trade, business, occupation, or profession for
which a license is imposed by this chapter shall, at the time of procuring a
license, make application to the Mayor and shall state under oath or
affirmation facts applicable to the license. The Mayor, on receipt of the
payment for the license, shall issue the license to the applicant with a
certificate of payment, stating the particular kind of license issued and the
amount paid therefor.
(1967 Code, § 111.02) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 RECORDS.
   The Mayor shall sign and keep a record of licenses in his or her license
cash book.
(1967 Code, § 111.03) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942)
§ 110.04 LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   No license granted or issued under any provisions of this chapter
shall in any manner be assignable or transferable or shall authorize any person
other than therein mentioned or named to do business or shall authorize any
other business than is therein named or mentioned to be done or transacted at
any place other than is therein mentioned or named without permission by the
Mayor endorsed thereon.
   (B)   The Mayor shall, at the time of granting permission, immediately
record the change or transfer on the proper register. The license for any
business conducted at any particular or fixed locality shall authorize the
transaction of business by an individual, firm, or corporation. Every license
shall specify, by name, the person, firm, or corporation to whom issued and
shall designate the particular place at which the business shall be transacted.
(1967 Code, § 111.04) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.05 STATEMENT OF SALES; FEES.
   In all cases where the amount of license paid by any person, firm, or
corporation is based on, or regulated by, the amount of sales affected or
business transacted, that person, firm, or corporation shall make a sworn
statement to the Mayor of the total amount of sales made or business done by
them respectively during the six months preceding the application for a
license. The statement shall determine the amount for which the license shall
be issued.
(1967 Code, § 111.05) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 RATE AND DURATION.
   (A)   All licenses, except as otherwise provided, shall date from July 1 or
January 1 preceding the date of their issue, and be issued for one year from
either of the aforesaid dates, except for theaters, concert halls, places of
amusement, public ballrooms, entertainment, performances, or exhibitions for
which licenses may be issued for one year or any shorter time.
   (B)    Licenses applied for at times other than specified will be on a
prorated basis for the licensing period.
(1967 Code, § 111.06) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942)
§ 110.07 EVIDENCE OF LIABILITY.
   In the trial of any action brought under provisions of this chapter, the
fact that any party to that action represents himself or herself as engaged in
any business or occupation, for the transaction of which a license is required,
or as the keeper, proprietor, or manager of the thing for which the license is
required, or that the party exhibits a sign indicating that business or
calling, or such proprietorship or management, shall be evidence of the party’s
liability to pay the license fee.
(1967 Code, § 111.07) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.08 2% FINE.
   All licenses due January 1 or July 1 shall be considered overdue and
delinquent if not paid within 15 days thereafter. For every month, or fraction
thereof, the license remains delinquent after the 15-day grace period, a 2%
penalty shall be added to the whole amount of the license fee. The percentage
fine shall be collected in the same manner as the license fee, but the addition
of a percentage fine to a license fee shall not exempt the person from whom the
license fee is due.
(1967 Code, § 111.08) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.09 LICENSE EXHIBITION.
   Every person licensed under provisions of this chapter shall exhibit his or
her license at all times, while in force, in some conspicuous part of his or
her place of business, and shall produce the same when applying for a renewal,
or when requested to produce it by any municipal officer or member of the
Police Department. Every peddler, while engaged in peddling, shall carry his or
her license and shall exhibit it if requested to do so by any municipal
officer.
(1967 Code, § 111.09) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.10 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Mayor shall revoke the license of any licensee who:
   (A)   Violates any provisions of this chapter, or any law relating to
licensing of his or her business or occupation;
   (B)   Knowingly permits or suffers his or her agent or employee to violate
this chapter’s provisions or other licensing laws relating to his or her
business or occupation; or
   (C)   Is involved in moral turpitude.
(1967 Code, § 111.10) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.11 LICENSE FEES ESTABLISHED BY COUNCIL.
   Council shall from time to time establish license fees for this chapter.
(1967 Code, § 111.11)
§ 110.12 MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon the operation of
motor vehicles on the public roads or highways of the Village of Mariemont,
Ohio, pursuant to R.C. § 4504.173 for the purposes of planning, constructing,
improving, maintaining, and repairing public roads, highways, and streets, and
to provide additional revenue for the purposes authorized by R.C. § 4504.173(A)
(2); and to supplement revenue already available for such purposes.
   (B)   Such tax shall be at the rate of $5.00 per motor vehicle per year, on
each and every motor vehicle the district of registration of which, as defined
in R.C. § 4503.10, is in the Village of Mariemont, Ohio.
   (C)   As used in this section, the term MOTOR VEHICLE shall include all
vehicles within the definition of motor vehicle in the Ohio Revised Code.
   (D)   The annual tax imposed by this section shall apply to and be in effect
for registrations beginning January 1, 2021, or at the earliest time legally
authorized, and shall continue in effect and apply during each registration
thereafter.
   (E)   The annual tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles of the State of Ohio, or to a Deputy Registrar, at the time
of application for registration of a motor vehicle is made pursuant to the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (F)   All revenues derived from the annual tax herein levied shall be used
by the Village of Mariemont, Ohio for the purposes specified in this section,
or any other purpose authorized by state law.
(Ord. O-13-20, passed 5-11-2020)
§ 110.13 SUPPLEMENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual supplemental license tax upon the
operation of motor vehicles on the public roads or highways of the Village of
Mariemont, Ohio, pursuant to R.C. § 4504.172 for the purposes of paying the
costs and expenses of enforcing and administering the tax provided for in this
section; to supplement revenue already available to the Village of Mariemont
under R.C. §§ 4504.04, 4504.06, 4504.17, or 4507.171, and to provide additional
revenue for the purposes set forth in those sections.
   (B)   Such tax shall be at the rate of $5.00 per motor vehicle per year, on
each and every motor vehicle the district of registration of which, as defined
in R.C. § 4503.10, is in the Village of Mariemont, Ohio, and shall be in
addition to the taxes at the rate specified in R.C. §§ 4503.04 and 4503.16 as
well as §
110.12.
   (C)   As used in this section, the term MOTOR VEHICLE shall include all
vehicles within the definition of motor vehicle in the Ohio Revised Code.
   (D)   The annual tax imposed by this section shall apply to and be in effect
for registrations beginning January 1, 2021, or at the earliest time legally
authorized, and shall continue in effect and apply during, each registration
thereafter.
   (E)   The annual tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles of the State of Ohio, or to a Deputy Registrar, at the time
of application for registration of a motor vehicle is made pursuant to the Ohio
Revised Code.
   (F)   All revenues derived from the annual tax herein levied shall be used
by the Village of Mariemont, Ohio for the purposes specified in this section,
or any other purpose authorized by state law.
(Ord. O-14-20, passed 5-11-2020)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which no penalty
is otherwise provided, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day that a
violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   The conviction and punishment of anyone transacting business without a
license shall not excuse or exempt the person from paying license fees which
are due at the time of conviction.
(1967 Code, § 111.99) (Ord. O-22-42, passed 6-8-1942)
CHAPTER 111: CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, AND GAMES OF CHANCE
Section
   
111.01   Prohibitions; exceptions
   
111.02   Council’s permission required
 
   
111.99   Penalty
§ 111.01 PROHIBITIONS; EXCEPTIONS.
   No person, firm, corporation, club, or organization shall stage or promote a
circus, menagerie, carnival, bazaar, or medicine show within the corporate
limits of the village; however, this section shall not apply to any society,
association, or corporation organized and operated exclusively for religious,
educational, philanthropic, benevolent, fraternal, charitable, or reformatory
purposes, in which no part of the net earnings inure to the benefit of any
individual or private shareholder.
(1967 Code, § 110.01) (Ord. O-27-42, passed 8-24-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 111.02 COUNCIL’S PERMISSION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any society, association, or corporation referred to in the exception
contained in §
112.01 may make written application to Council to stage or promote a circus,
menagerie, carnival, bazaar, or medicine show. The application shall state, in
detail, the purpose of promoting such enterprise, the use to be made of the net
earnings therefrom, and the types of entertainment to be staged. Council may
grant, or in its discretion may refuse to grant, such permission.
   (B)   No person, society, organization, or corporation shall stage or
promote any enterprise unless a permit therefor be issued by the Council.
(1967 Code, § 110.02) (Ord. O-27-42, passed 8-24-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 111.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be punished as
provided in §
10.99. Each day’s violation shall be considered a separate offense.
   (B)   Any devices, instruments, or other materials used in committing an
offense shall be seized by police and used as evidence. On conviction of an
offender, those materials shall be destroyed by court order or hearing.
(1967 Code, § 110.99) (Ord. O-27-42, passed 8-24-1942)
CHAPTER 112: PUBLIC VEHICLES
Section
Public Vehicles
   
112.01   Definitions
   
112.02   Vehicle license fee
   
112.03   Application for vehicle license
   
112.04   Issuance of taxicab and auto-for-hire license
   
112.05   Issuance of funeral car and driverless auto-for-hire licenses
   
112.06   Taxicab and auto-for-hire licenses revoked for non-use
   
112.07   Liability insurance for public vehicle
   
112.08   Liability insurance for driverless auto- for-hire
   
112.09   Extent of liability
   
112.10   Bond in lieu of insurance
   
112.11   Notice of termination of bond or insurance
   
112.12   Metal tag
   
112.13   Lost tag
   
112.14   Identification of taxicabs
   
112.15   Rates of fare for taxicabs
   
112.16   Rates of fare for autos-for-hire
   
112.17   Rates to be filed
   
112.18   Rate card
   
112.19   Fare receipt
   
112.20   Taximeter required
   
112.21   Baggage and children
   
112.22   Articles left in vehicles
   
112.23   Records
   
112.24   Employment of unlicensed drivers
   
112.25   Employment charge
   
112.26   Transfer of licenses, vehicle to vehicle
   
112.27   Transfer of licenses, owner to owner
   
112.28   Passenger-carrying for hire by other vehicles
   
112.29   Public vehicle requirements
   
112.30   Taxicab stands and parking
   
112.31   Number of passengers carried
   
112.32   Mayor’s power
   
112.33   Revocation for misrepresentation
   
112.34   Operation without license
   
112.35   Incorrect taximeter
   
112.36   Notification by Mayor; public hearing
   
112.37   Impounding vehicles
   
112.38   Appeals
Buses
   
112.45   Permit
 
   
112.99   Penalty
PUBLIC VEHICLES
§ 112.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTO-FOR-HIRE. Any public vehicle other than a taxicab, driverless auto-for-
hire, and funeral car. An AUTO-FOR-HIRE shall be driven by the owner or his or
her employee and shall not secure or accept any passengers for hire on the
public streets or on public or quasi-public places, or accept any passengers
for hire on hail or request made in the public street, or in public or quasi-
public places.
   DRIVERLESS AUTO-FOR-HIRE. Any public vehicle which is rented or hired out to
a person other than the owner and operated by the person renting or hiring the
same for his or her own use and not for the purpose of transporting persons for
compensation.
   FUNERAL CAR. Any public vehicle which is not used for public services other
than funeral or burial purposes.
   OWNER. The person who has good title to a public vehicle by lawful bill of
sale or certificate of title and who, in the conduct of his or her business,
operates or rents that public vehicle.
   PUBLIC VEHICLES. Vehicles furnishing individual service for compensation in
the transportation of persons on public streets. These vehicles are classified
as taxicabs, autos-for-hire, driverless autos-for-hire, and funeral cars.
Vehicles furnishing mass service such as street railway cars, motor buses, and
omnibuses, which move over fixed routes, on a fixed schedule, or between fixed
termini are not included in the term public vehicles, but must comply with
appropriate provisions of law and this code of ordinances.
   RENTEE. The person to whom a driverless auto- for-hire is rented by the
owner.
   TAXICAB. Any public vehicle whose owner or driver secures or accepts a
passenger or passengers for hire, on the public streets, or in public or quasi-
public places, or accepts a passenger or passengers for hire on hail or request
made in public streets, or in public or quasi-public places.
   TAXIMETER. Any mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire
for a taxicab is mechanically calculated, and on which the charge is plainly
indicated.
(1967 Code, § 112.01) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942)
§ 112.02 VEHICLE LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation or any owner, agent, employee, or
driver shall operate or permit a public vehicle to be operated unless the
proper license has been issued to the owner thereof and is in force.
   (B)   Every license shall expire on December 31 of the year for which it is
issued. In the case of licenses issued for operation on or after July 1 of any
year, the fee shall be one-half the yearly fee.
   (C)   License fees for each public vehicle shall be payable to the Mayor in
the following amounts per year.
 
Auto-for-hire            $18
Driverless auto-for-hire $8
Funeral car              $12
Taxicab company          $50
 
   (D)   The license fee required by this section shall be in addition to any
fee required by state law.
(1967 Code, § 112.02) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942; Ord. O-5-69, passed 4-14-
1969) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.03 APPLICATION FOR VEHICLE LICENSE.
   Applications for public vehicle licenses shall be made to the Mayor on
blanks provided by the Mayor, and shall set forth the name and address of the
applicant, the trade name under which he or she does business, the class of
each vehicle for which a license is desired, seating capacity, design, color
scheme, lettering, marks to be used on the vehicle, and any other information
required by the Mayor. If the application is granted, the applicant shall
furnish the Mayor, prior to the issuance of the license tag, with information
covering the particular vehicle to be licensed and the information shall
include the make, state license number, length of time the vehicle has been in
use, motor power thereof, and the name and address of the person, firm, or
corporation from which the vehicle was purchased, and any other information
required by the Mayor pertinent to the issuance of a license.
(1967 Code, § 112.03) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.04 ISSUANCE OF TAXICAB AND AUTO-FOR-HIRE LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor shall investigate and hold a hearing as to each
application for license for a taxicab or auto-for-hire. If the Mayor finds, in
investigation and hearing, that public convenience and necessity justify
operation of the vehicle for which a license is desired, the Mayor shall notify
the applicant of his or her finding.
      (2)   Within 60 days, the applicant shall furnish the Mayor with
additional required information and if the Mayor finds that the applicant is
the owner of the vehicle for which a license is desired, and that the vehicle
is safe and fit conveyance, and that it complies with all the requirements of
this subchapter, the Mayor shall issue a license to the applicant on payment of
the license fee and the furnishing of bond or insurance required.
      (3)   If the applicant does not comply with the requirements of this
section within 60 days, the Mayor’s finding shall be null and void.
   (B)   If the Mayor finds from an investigation and hearing that public
convenience and necessity do not justify operation of the vehicle for which a
license is desired, the Mayor shall notify the applicant of this finding.
(1967 Code, § 112.04) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942)
§ 112.05 ISSUANCE OF FUNERAL CAR AND DRIVERLESS AUTO-FOR-HIRE LICENSES.
   The Mayor shall investigate each license application for a funeral car or
driverless auto-for- hire, and if the Mayor finds the applicant is the owner of
the vehicle for which the license is desired, and that such vehicle is a safe
and fit conveyance, the Mayor shall issue a license to the applicant on payment
of the license fee and the furnishings of bond or insurance required.
(1967 Code, § 112.05) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942)
§ 112.06 TAXICAB AND AUTO-FOR-HIRE LICENSES REVOKED FOR NON-USE.
   No person, firm, or corporation holding one or more licenses for taxicabs or
autos-for-hire shall, for a period of 60 days consecutive days, fail to make a
reasonable and consistent effort to operate any licensed taxicab or auto-for-
hire. The Mayor shall revoke the license for that vehicle on noncompliance with
this section’s provisions.
(1967 Code, § 112.06) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.07 LIABILITY INSURANCE FOR PUBLIC VEHICLE.
   (A)   No license to operate any public vehicle, other than a driverless
auto-for-hire, shall be issued or renewed by the Mayor, and it shall be
unlawful to operate any public vehicle or permit the same to be operated unless
the applicant deposits with the Mayor a policy of liability insurance issued by
a responsible insurance company, approved as to sufficiency by the Mayor and as
to legality by the Village Solicitor. This insurance shall provide indemnity
for, or protection to, the insured against loss in the amounts provided for in
§
112.09 and agree to pay, within the limits of the amounts, to any judgment
creditor who has filed his or her suit or notice of a claim for loss with the
Mayor during the license year in which the injury occurred, or six months
thereafter, any final judgment rendered against the insured by reason of the
liability of the insured to pay damages to others for bodily injuries,
including death at any time resulting therefrom, and for damages to or
destruction of property sustained during the term of the policy by any person
other than employees of the insured, and resulting from negligent operation,
maintenance, or use of those licensed public vehicles.
   (B)   The policy of insurance aforesaid, or the bond given in lieu thereof,
shall provide that in case the public vehicle is operated, maintained, or used
with the consent or acquiescence of the owner, by one other than the owner, his
or her agent or employee, and an injury results to person or damage to property
as set forth above, due to the negligent operation, maintenance, or use of that
public vehicle, that the insurer or the obligers in the bond, as the case may
be, shall pay to any judgment creditor of the person maintaining, using, or
operating the public vehicle, any final judgment rendered against that person.
The judgment creditor shall have filed his or her suit, or notice of claim as
provided in this section.
   (C)   The policy of insurance, and the bond hereinbefore required, shall be
valid and effective for the same period for which the license is issued.
(1967 Code, § 112.07) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.08 LIABILITY INSURANCE FOR DRIVERLESS AUTO-FOR-HIRE.
   (A)   Any license to operate a driverless auto-for- hire shall be issued or
renewed by the Mayor. No person shall operate any public vehicle, or permit the
same to be operated, unless and until the applicant deposits with the Mayor a
policy or policies of liability insurance issued by a responsible insurance
company, approved as to sufficiency by the Mayor and as to legality by the
Village Solicitor, providing indemnity for or protection to the rentee against
loss in the amounts provided for in §
112.09, and agreeing to pay within the limits of the amounts fixed in this
section to any judgment creditor any final judgment rendered against the rentee
by reason of liability of the rentee to pay damages to others except to
occupants of the driverless auto-for-hire for bodily injures, including death
at any time resulting therefrom, and for damages to or destruction of property
sustained during the term of the policy resulting from negligent operation,
maintenance, or use of the driverless auto- for-hire. Any person claiming the
protection of this section shall, within 30 days after the date of the accident
out of which the injury or damage arises, file with the Mayor his or her claim
for injury or damages together with a statement setting forth, to the best of
his or her knowledge, the day, hour, and place of the accident, the license
number of the vehicle at fault, the name and address of the driver, if known,
and the names and addresses of witnesses of the accident to the extent the same
are known to him or her. When the injured person is by the accident rendered
incapable of preparing the claim and statement required herein, the claim and
statement may be filed within 30 days after the person is able to prepare the
same or, in the case of death resulting from the injury, within 30 days after
the date of death.
   (B)   The policy of insurance required by this section may provide that if a
rentee is independently insured against liability, the indemnity herein
provided shall not apply except to the extent that the independent insurance
shall be inadequate to furnish the protection required by §
112.09.
   (C)   In lieu of the policy or policies of insurance provided for in this
section, the owner may furnish a bond executed by himself or herself as owner,
without sureties, approved as to legality by the Village Solicitor, holding and
binding the owner to the same liability and subject to the same conditions
assumed by an insurer in the case of policies of insurance provided for herein.
   (D)   It shall be further permissible for the owner to furnish insurance as
to damages for personal injuries, including death, and an indemnity bond as to
property damages or vice versa.
   (E)   In lieu of either of the alternatives set forth, the owner may furnish
insurance to the extent of not less than one-third of the amounts required by §
112.09 and, in addition, furnish a bond executed by himself or herself as owner
for the remainder of the required liability; however, in that event, the
insurance policy shall provide that if any liability accrues, the liability
shall first be satisfied out of that insurance, and if the insurance is
insufficient in amount to cover the total liability, the excess shall be
satisfied out of bond executed by the owner.
   (F)   If the owner of a driverless auto-for-hire is obligated under his or
her bond, executed in accordance with the provisions of division (A) above, to
pay a judgment recovered against a rentee of such public vehicle and the
judgment shall remain unsatisfied for a period of 30 days after it becomes
final, the Mayor, on being advised of the fact, shall forthwith revoke the
driverless auto-for-hire license or licenses held by that owner.
   (G)   Every rentee of a driverless auto-for-hire shall designate and
constitute the owner as his or her agent to accept service or summons for and
on his or her behalf in any action based on negligent operation, maintenance,
or use of the vehicle. The owner shall agree to accept summons for and on
behalf of the rentee under those circumstances. The provisions of this section
shall be embodied in the rental contract and in the policy or insurance or bond
filed by the owner with the Mayor.
(1967 Code, § 112.08) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.09 EXTENT OF LIABILITY.
   The extent of liability of the insurer or sureties shall be, as to any one
licensed taxicab company, per unit, the sum of $1,000,000 on account of
injuries or death of, any one person in any one accident, and subject to that
limit in respect to injury to, or death of one person, $1,000,000 on account of
any one accident resulting in injury or death of more than one person, and
$100,000 on account of damage to property in any one accident.
(1967 Code, § 112.09) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942; Ord. O-23-64, passed 12-
14-1964) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.10 BOND IN LIEU OF INSURANCE.
   In lieu of the policy of insurance herein provided for, the applicant may
furnish a bond executed by a surety company, authorized to do business in the
state, or by two personal sureties, approved as to sufficiency by the Mayor and
as to legality by the Village Solicitor, holding and binding the principal and
sureties to the same liability, and subject to the same conditions as in the
case of insurance policies provided for hereunder. It shall be permissible for
the applicant to furnish insurance as to damages for personal injuries,
including death, and an indemnity bond as to property damages, or vice versa.
(1967 Code, § 112.10) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942)
§ 112.11 NOTICE OF TERMINATION OF BOND OR INSURANCE.
   Every policy or certificate of insurance or bond shall contain a clause
obligating the insurer or surety to give the Mayor at least ten days’ written
notice before the cancellation, expiration, lapse, or other termination of that
insurance, or the expiration, withdrawal of the surety therefrom or other
termination of bond. The license granted shall be suspended on termination of
the insurance or bond, or on termination of the liability of the insurer or
surety thereon, in accordance with such notice, until a new policy or
certificate of liability insurance, or a new indemnity bond, approved as
hereinbefore provided, is substituted therefor. Failure to give notice required
shall operate to continue the liability of the insurer or surety for the
benefit of persons injured or damaged, and the policy shall continue in full
force and effect.
(1967 Code, § 112.11) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942)
§ 112.12 METAL TAG.
   At the time the license is issued by the Mayor to the owner of any public
vehicle, the Mayor shall also issue the owner a metal tag showing the class of
public vehicle, license number, and the year for which issued. The tag for each
public vehicle shall be numbered separately and the tag for each taxicab shall
be numbered to correspond to the body number assigned by the Mayor. No tag
shall be displayed on any public vehicle except the one for which it was
issued. The tag shall be affixed to the front of the vehicle, plainly
discernible at all times. Whenever the owner of a public vehicle ceases to
operate the same, or whenever the license of a public vehicle is suspended or
revoked, the owner shall return the tag to the Mayor and in case of
reinstatement after suspension, the Mayor shall reissue the tag to the
licensee.
(1967 Code, § 112.12) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.13 LOST TAG.
   (A)   In case of the loss of a license tag, the owner may file with the
Mayor a sworn statement to facts concerning that loss.
   (B)   If the Mayor is satisfied the facts justify issuance of a replacement
tag for any public vehicle, there shall be a $1 replacement fee for that new
tag, and for each subsequent replacement tag, a fee shall be charged.
(1967 Code, § 112.13) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942)
§ 112.14 IDENTIFICATION OF TAXICABS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, PAINT or PAINTED shall mean the
application of coloring matter in oil solution, not in water solution.
   (B)   (1)   Every person, firm, corporation, or association owning and
operating a taxicab under license from the village may adopt any trade name,
design, color scheme, or method of painting or lettering for such taxicabs as
approved by the Mayor.
      (2)   The trade name, design, color scheme, or method of painting or
lettering shall include the following matter:
         (a)   A serial body number assigned by the Mayor to each taxicab and
painted on each side and on the rear of the taxicab; and
         (b)   The name of the owner or the trade name under which he, she, or
it does business, painted on each side of the taxicab.
   (C)   Whenever the name of the owner, or the trade name under which he, she,
or it does business, does not include any one of the words taxicab, taxi, or
cab, the word taxicab shall be painted on each side of the taxicab immediately
beneath the name or trade name.
   (D)   Whenever any person, firm, association, or corporation owning or
operating taxicabs does not adopt and use an approved trade name, design, color
scheme, or method of painting and lettering as hereinbefore mentioned, it shall
be mandatory for the person, firm, association, or corporation to paint the
following matter on its taxicabs:
      (1)   (a)   A framed panel, containing on separate lines the name of the
owner, the word taxicab and the serial body number assigned to the taxicab by
the Mayor. The panel shall be painted on each side of the taxicab, and shall
cover no less area than ten inches by 12 inches.
         (b)   The form of the panel shall be substantially as follows:
JOHN T. SMITH
TAXICAB
320
      (2)   The serial body number assigned the taxicab by the Mayor, painted
on the rear exterior of the taxicab.
   (E)   (1)   All mandatory lettering and wording, whether in a particular
trade name, design, color scheme, method of painting or lettering, or
otherwise, shall be at least two inches in height, and shall be of such color
as in the opinion of the Mayor will contrast distinctly with the color of the
taxicab body.
      (2)   The serial body numbers on the sides and rear shall be no less than
three inches in height.
   (F)   No person shall cause or permit any taxicab to appear with a trade
name, design, color scheme, or method of painting and lettering that is
unapproved by the Mayor or not in accordance with terms of this subchapter.
(1967 Code, § 112.14) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.15 RATES OF FARE FOR TAXICABS.
   (A)   All fares or charges for the use of taxicabs shall be determined by
the taximeter rate, hourly rate, or the special trip rate and by no other
method.
      (1)   The taximeter fares shall be computed by a taximeter and shall not
exceed the following schedule.
 
For one to five passengers
For the first 1/7 mile             $0.85
For each additional 2/7 mile       $0.20
For every two minutes waiting time $0.20
 
      (2)   Hourly rate: the hourly rate for all trips engaged at an hourly
rate shall be $6 per hour.
      (3)   Special trip rate: the special trip rate shall be a temporary rate,
used only with the approval of the Mayor, for trips to and from points of
general public gatherings. The rate shall not exceed $0.30 per mile per
passenger. An owner desiring to use the special trip rate shall make
application for its use to the Mayor. The Mayor may approve use of the trip
rate for a period of time as public convenience and necessity justifies.
Whenever a special trip rate is used, it shall be posted on the exterior of the
taxicab.
   (B)   When a taxicab is not in service, the taximeter shall show no fare.
When a taxicab is in service and the taximeter rate is used, the flag or
indicator on the taximeter shall be lowered, and the taximeter shall be in the
calculating position. On completion of taxicab service, the flag or indicator
on the taximeter shall be raised, and the taximeter shall be returned to the
non-calculating position, with its dial cleared.
      (1)   Taxicabs may not use and offer the hourly rate or the special trip
rate, unless also offering the taximeter rate.
      (2)   The person engaging a taxicab shall have the option, at the time,
of electing payment by the taximeter rate, hourly rate, or special trip rate,
if authorized.
      (3)   If a person engaging a taxicab specifies no rate, the taximeter
rate shall be used. If the person shall designate a place of public gathering
to which a special trip rate has been authorized as the destination, and if a
special trip rate, authorized and applicable, is posted on the exterior of the
taxicab, the special trip rate shall apply.
(1967 Code, § 112.15) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942; Ord. O-19-75, passed 10-
13-1975; Ord. O-21-77, passed 12-27-1977) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.16 RATES OF FARE FOR AUTOS-FOR HIRE.
   (A)   (1)   All fares and charges for the use of an auto-for-hire shall be
determined by the hourly rates specified below.
      (2)   The hourly rate shall not exceed the following schedule:
         (a)   For a car seating five persons or less, $3 per hour,
irrespective of number of persons carried;
      (b)   For a car seating six persons or more, $4 per hour, irrespective of
number of persons carried; and
      (c)   The rate for a car seating six persons or more shall apply only in
case the passenger expressly specified and ordered the car.
   (B)   The time for which charge may be made shall not include the time taken
to reach the passenger, or, after dismissed, to reach the station of the
licensee. No passenger shall be carried for less than one-half-hour’s charge.
(1967 Code, § 112.16) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.17 RATES TO BE FILED.
   (A)   Every owner of one or more taxicabs or autos-for-hire shall file in
the office of the Mayor the complete schedule of rates offered and used.
   (B)   Rates scheduled may be changed by the owner. No change in schedule
shall become effective until one day after filed with the Mayor and until all
requirements have been met. Not more than one amended schedule shall be filed
by any owner in any period of 30 days, unless with the Mayor’s consent.
   (C)   All rates of fare schedules on file with the Mayor shall be open to
public inspection.
   (D)   No driver or other person in control of a taxicab or auto-for-hire
shall make any charge except in accordance with the schedule of rates filed as
herein provided.
(1967 Code, § 112.17) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.18 RATE CARD.
   (A)   Every taxicab shall carry in it, at all times, a rate card issued for
the vehicle by the Mayor. The rate card shall contain, in legible type, the
Mayor’s office address, name of the vehicle owner, class of vehicle, serial
body number on the vehicle, the date of issuance, and the complete schedule or
rates of fare used as filed with the Mayor. The rate card shall be mounted
under transparent covering in the rear compartment or interior of the vehicle
in such position that it may be read easily by an occupant of the vehicle.
   (B)   The driver of any auto-for-hire shall at all times carry a rate card
issued for the vehicle by the Mayor. The card shall be exhibited to the hirer
of the vehicle at any time demanded. The rate card shall contain in legible
type, the Mayor’s office address, name of the vehicle owner, class of vehicle,
date of issuance, rate of fare filed with the Mayor, and the provision that no
passenger shall be carried for less than one-half-hour’s charge.
   (C)   Whenever a new schedule of rates becomes effective or whenever an
auto-for-hire or taxicab license is transferred from owner to owner or from
vehicle to vehicle, or whenever any of the information on the rate card becomes
incorrect, the Mayor shall issue to the owner a new or corrected rate card.
   (D)   Rate cards shall not be altered or tampered with by any person.
Whenever a rate card becomes damaged, soiled, or illegible, the owner shall
request and the Mayor shall issue a new card for the vehicle. No fee shall be
charged for the issuance of a new, corrected, or duplicate rate card when the
old card is turned in to the Mayor.
   (E)   In case the rate card is lost, the owner shall file with the Mayor a
sworn statement of the facts concerning the loss. If the Mayor is satisfied the
facts justify issuance of a replacement rate card, the Mayor shall issue the
replacement rate card on the payment of $0.50 which shall be turned over to the
Village Fiscal Officer.
(1967 Code, § 112.18) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.19 FARE RECEIPT.
   The driver of a taxicab or auto-for-hire shall, if requested, deliver a
receipt to the person paying for the hire of same at the time of payment. On
this receipt shall be legibly printed or written the name of the owner, method
of identifying the vehicle or its driver, all items for which a charge is made,
total amount paid, and the date of payment.
(1967 Code, § 112.19) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.20 TAXIMETER REQUIRED.
   (A)   No taxicab shall be operated or licensed hereafter unless equipped
with a taximeter geared to the drive shaft in the transmission or in the rear
of the transmission.
   (B)   Every taximeter shall be so mounted in the taxicab so that the amount
of fare being charged shall, at all times, be plainly visible from the inside
of the vehicle to all occupants of the vehicle. Every taximeter shall be
attached to the taxicab so that it is possible for a person standing outside
the vehicle to tell whether or not the taximeter is in use. Between the hours
of sunset and sunrise, the dial of the taximeter shall be illuminated whenever
in use.
   (C)   No person, firm, or corporation, owning or operating any taxicab shall
offer or let the same for hire unless the taximeter affixed thereto is set to
register and calculate the fare in accordance with rates filed with the Mayor.
(1967 Code, § 112.20) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.21 BAGGAGE AND CHILDREN.
   No charge shall be made for any bag, suitcase, or ordinary light traveling
baggage in an amount not exceeding 50 pounds in weight carried by any person
paying fare, nor for children under four years of age when accompanied by a
person paying fare. Not more than two children shall be carried for free. If
there are more than two children carried, accompanied by a person paying fare,
the rate of fare chargeable for additional passengers shall apply. For children
under four years of age, not accompanied by an adult paying fare, and for all
children over four years of age, all provisions as to fare for individual and
additional passengers shall apply.
(1967 Code, § 112.21) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.22 ARTICLES LEFT IN VEHICLES.
   Drivers of public vehicles shall promptly deliver to the Police Department,
or to authorized agencies of their companies, all property of value left in
their vehicles by passengers.
(1967 Code, § 112.22) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.23 RECORDS.
   (A)   The owner or person in charge of one or more taxicabs or autos-for-
hire shall keep a record of any public vehicles, showing the body number, city
license number, state license number, and data necessary to identify the driver
of the vehicle at any time.
   (B)   The owner or person in charge shall also keep a record of the time of
departure from and arrival at his or her garage or headquarters of that taxicab
or auto-for-hire. All taxicab and auto-for- hire drivers shall make records
which shall be preserved by the owner or person in charge, showing the time of
beginning and time of ending of each trip, the first and last stop, and the
amount of fare collected. The record shall be subject to inspection at all
times by the Police Department and by the Mayor, and shall not be destroyed for
a period of six months.
(1967 Code, § 112.23) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.24 EMPLOYMENT OF UNLICENSED DRIVERS.
   No owner of any taxicab or auto-for-hire shall permit it to be driven for
hire by anyone who is not a licensed driver.
(1967 Code, § 112.24) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.25 EMPLOYMENT CHANGE.
   Every corporation, partnership, or individual operating one or more public
vehicles shall notify the Mayor monthly of every public vehicle driver entering
or leaving its or his or her employ during the month.
(1967 Code, § 112.25) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.26 TRANSFER OF LICENSES, VEHICLE TO VEHICLE.
   In the event the owner of a licensed public vehicle ceases to own the same,
or in the event the vehicle becomes unsuitable for operation, or the owner
desires to substitute another vehicle, an affidavit to that effect may be filed
with the Mayor and the Mayor shall transfer the license to any other vehicle
belonging to the owner; provided, that vehicle is of the same class and
approved by the Mayor.
(1967 Code, § 112.26) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.27 TRANSFER OF LICENSES, OWNER TO OWNER.
   No public vehicle license shall be transferred from one owner to another by
the Mayor except after a finding of public convenience and necessity. Findings
shall be arrived at in the manner as in the case of an original application.
The applicant for the transfer of a license shall file with his or her
application the consent, in writing, of the former owner of the license and
shall comply with all terms and conditions of the ordinances governing public
vehicles.
(1967 Code, § 112.27) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.28 PASSENGER-CARRYING FOR HIRE BY OTHER VEHICLES.
   Acceptance of passengers for compensation by any vehicle other than a public
vehicle, duly licensed under and operating in accordance with this subchapter,
or by other than motor buses, omnibuses, or streetcars, operating under proper
authority, shall not be permitted.
(1967 Code, § 112.28) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.29 PUBLIC VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   Every public vehicle shall be kept in a safe and sanitary operating
condition and shall at all times have the following equipment:
   (A)   A light within the passenger compartment, capable of being lighted or
extinguished by the passenger;
   (B)   A spare tire, capable of being used on any of the wheels of the
vehicle;
   (C)   Brakes sufficient to control the vehicle at all times, and no brakes
shall be deemed to comply with the requirements of this section unless they are
capable of stopping the vehicle with no load except the driver within 35 feet
from a speed of 20 mph on a hard, dry, level road, free from loose material. In
addition, every public vehicle shall have an emergency brake capable of holding
that vehicle on any grade that it can ascend;
   (D)   Skid chains, to be applied to the rear wheels when their use is
desirable to promote safety;
   (E)   In addition to the foregoing equipment, taxicabs shall have the
following:
      (1)   A substantial partition extending entirely across the taxicab and
separating the driver from the compartment for passengers, but with an
arrangement enabling passengers to communicate with the driver. This partition
shall be unobstructed by any curtain, and the upper portion thereof shall be of
glass; or
      (2)   A light capable of illuminating the dial of the taximeter.
   (F)   Whenever a public vehicle is found in an unsafe and unsanitary
operating condition or not complying fully with all requirements specified
herein, the Mayor shall suspend or revoke the license of the public vehicle
concerned until the provisions are complied with.
(1967 Code, § 112.30) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.30 TAXICAB STANDS AND PARKING.
   The Mayor shall be authorized and directed to establish taxicab stands which
will serve the public interest. The stands shall be reserved exclusively for
parking taxicabs awaiting passengers for hire. No taxicabs shall park
continuously in a taxicab stand for a period exceeding one hour. The Mayor
shall designate taxicab stands by stanchions or signs indicating that they are
taxicab stands. The Mayor shall have continuing authority to establish,
enlarge, diminish, or discontinue any taxicab stand. No person shall park any
vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand.
(1967 Code, § 112.32) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.31 NUMBER OF PASSENGERS CARRIED.
   No public vehicle shall carry more passengers than the number designated as
its seating capacity in the application on which the license was issued. No
taxicab shall carry a passenger in the driver’s compartment.
(1967 Code, § 112.33) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.32 MAYOR’S POWER.
   The Mayor is authorized and empowered to establish and adopt rules and
regulations governing the issuance of public vehicle licenses and the
inspection of public vehicles and their appurtenances as are reasonable and
necessary, and not inconsistent with the terms of this subchapter.
(1967 Code, § 112.34) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.33 REVOCATION FOR MISREPRESENTATION.
   Whenever it appears on investigation and hearing by the Mayor that a license
issued has been obtained by misrepresentation, the Mayor shall revoke the
license.
(1967 Code, § 112.35) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.34 OPERATION WITHOUT LICENSE.
   No person, firm, or corporation shall operate or allow an unlicensed vehicle
to be operated for hire.
(1967 Code, § 112.36) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.35 INCORRECT TAXIMETER.
   No owner, agent, employee, driver, or operator shall knowingly drive or
operate a taxicab to which is attached a taximeter which registers improperly,
incorrectly, or not in accordance with the rate on file with the Mayor and
posted in the taxicab.
(1967 Code, § 112.37) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.36 NOTIFICATION BY MAYOR; PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   The owner of a public vehicle shall be responsible for the lawful
operation of the same when driven by anyone with his or her knowledge. Whenever
the driver of a public vehicle is convicted of a violation of this subchapter,
or any amendments thereto, the Mayor shall notify the owner of the conviction
in writing. When two convictions have occurred within 90 days because of
unlawful operation of any public vehicle, the Mayor, on receiving evidence of
further unlawful operation of the vehicle within an additional period of 90
days, shall hold a public hearing concerning revocation of the license of the
vehicle. The owner shall have due notice of the public hearing. If after the
hearing the Mayor finds that a practice exists as to unlawful operation of the
public vehicle, the Mayor shall revoke the license.
   (B)   If the Mayor finds after a public hearing that any licenses of a
public vehicle or vehicles have within six months prior to the hearing, and
after the passage of this subchapter, knowingly operated or caused or permitted
to be operated for compensation any other public vehicle without a license, the
Mayor may revoke any or all public vehicle licenses which the licensee holds.
(1967 Code, § 112.38) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.37 IMPOUNDING VEHICLES.
   Any public vehicle operated in violation of any provisions of this
subchapter or any amendments thereto may be impounded by the police, and a
service charge of $5 shall be paid to the village before the vehicle is
released from the pound. Payment of the service charge shall not release the
owner or driver of the vehicle from the penalty imposed for violation of this
subchapter or any amendments thereto.
(1967 Code, § 112.39) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942) Penalty, see §
112.99
§ 112.38 APPEALS.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor refuses to authorize a public vehicle license, or
whenever the Mayor has suspended or revoked a public vehicle license, the
applicant, within ten days after receiving notice of such denial, suspension,
or revocation may appeal to the Council. Council may either consider the appeal
on evidence produced before the Mayor or permit the introduction of new
evidence, inspections, and tests. The decision of Council shall be final.
   (B)   When the Mayor refuses a license on the grounds of public necessity
and convenience, the applicant, within ten days after receiving notice of
refusal, may appeal to Council. Council may consider the appeal on evidence
produced before the Mayor, or permit the introduction of new evidence,
inspections, and tests. The decision of Council shall be final.
(1967 Code, § 112.40) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942)
BUSES
§ 112.45 PERMIT.
   (A)   Public and private buses operating on a village street, except for
operation on streets used by Queen City Metro, or its successor entity, shall
obtain a permit from the village to operate the bus within the village. School
buses carrying pupils are exempt.
   (B)   The permit fee shall be $50 per event. If the event exceeds one hour,
there shall be a fee of $50 for each additional hour.
(2000 Code, § 113.45) (Ord. O-2-81, passed 1-12-1981)
§ 112.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty is
otherwise provided, shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of §
112.36, in addition to the general penalty in division (A) above, shall not be
granted a license for the vehicle concerned for a three-month period for a
first conviction and a one-year period for each subsequent conviction.
   (C)   Whoever violates any provisions of §
112.37 shall, in addition to the general penalty in division (A) above, have
his or her license revoked by the Mayor following a second conviction within
three months after a first conviction.
(1967 Code, § 112.99) (Ord. O-23-42, passed 6-8-1942)
CHAPTER 113: CANVASSING AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SOLICITATION
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   General rules
   
113.03   Commercial solicitation permit requirements
   
113.04   Applications for commercial solicitation permits
   
113.05   Investigation
   
113.06   Appeal of denial
   
113.07   Issuance of commercial solicitation permit
   
113.08   Revocation of commercial solicitation permits
   
113.09   No solicitation notice
   
113.10   Violations
   
113.11   Restriction against leaving property or materials unattended
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CANVASSERS. Any person traveling door-to- door within the community, to
canvas or advocate for a cause, organization, or person, or any person
conducting a survey, advocating a religious organization or ministry, or
presenting handbills for a person, cause, or organization so long as such
canvassing does not involve the solicitation or request for donations.
   COMMERCIAL SOLICITORS. Any individual, group of individuals, business
entity, organization (both for-profit or not-for-profit), or any agent of such
business entity or organization which travels door-to-door within the
community, which either solicits or offers for sale either for present or
future delivery any goods, merchandise, or services, whether monies are
collected at the time of such solicitation or to be paid in the future.
   COMMUNITY. As referenced herein, the term community shall mean the Village
of Mariemont, Ohio.
   DOOR-TO-DOOR. Travel by foot, motor vehicle, or any other type of conveyance
from house- to-house, building-to-building, or door-to-door within the
community. Such solicitation does not include telephone, Internet, or any other
electronic communication. Door-to-door travel is intended to mean the personal
contact between two or more individuals at a home, office, or building within
the community.
   NONCOMMERCIAL SOLICITORS. Any individual, group of individuals, business
entity, organization (both for-profit or not-for-profit), or any agent of such
business entity or organization which travels door-to-door within the
community, which either solicits or requests donations for any organization,
person, or cause, whether monies are collected at the time of such solicitation
or to be paid in the future.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015)
§ 113.02 GENERAL RULES.
   (A)   In addition to the requirements set forth below for permits by
commercial solicitors, all solicitors, commercial or noncommercial, or
canvassers traveling door-to-door within any residential area of the village to
solicit donations, canvas, or offer goods or services for sale, shall carry
appropriate photo identification and shall exhibit the same upon the request of
any resident contacted within the village.
   (B)   In addition to the permit required for commercial solicitors as set
forth below, any solicitor, commercial or noncommercial, or canvasser under 18
years of age traveling door-to-door within any residential area of the village
to solicit donations, canvas, or offer goods or services for sale, must be
accompanied by a parent, guardian, or supervising adult. Such parent, guardian,
or supervising adult shall have photo identification for himself or herself
with him or her at all times, and shall exhibit the same upon request of any
resident contacted within the community.
   (C)   No person or organization shall solicit, whether commercial or
noncommercial, or canvass within any residential area of the community between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   Commercial solicitors intending to sell or offer for sale goods or services
through door-to-door solicitation in any residential area of the village shall
be required to register in advance with the village through the Police
Department. Each organization, business entity, groups of individuals, or
individuals will be issued a permit upon appropriate application to the village
so long as such organization, business entity, group of individuals or
individuals meet the requirements of this chapter for appropriate registration
and authorization to conduct the solicitation within the community.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.04 APPLICATIONS FOR COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMITS.
   Applicants for permits under this chapter shall file with the Chief of
Police or his or her designated clerk, in writing, in duplicate, on an
application containing the following information:
   (A)   Name of applicant and all agents of the applicant who will offer or
sell goods or services within the village;
   (B)   Permanent home address and/or business address of the applicant who
will offer for sale or solicit sales of goods or services within the village;
   (C)   A brief description of the nature of the business or organization
offering such goods or services to be sold and a brief description of the goods
or services to be sold;
   (D)   The length of time during which the right to do business or the right
to solicit sales within the community is desired; provided, however, that this
right may not exceed a period of six months. This shall not restrict a
commercial solicitor from selling or soliciting for sale for a period of 12
months throughout the community, but the commercial solicitor must renew such
permit after its six month expiration with such renewal being similar to the
procedure for the issuance of a new permit;
   (E)   Photographic identification of the applicant and photographic
identification of all agents of the applicant who will be selling or soliciting
for sales within the village; and
   (F)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any agent of the
applicant who will be selling or soliciting for sales within the village, has
been convicted of any crime or misdemeanor, the nature of the offense, and the
punishment or penalty assessed for such violation. The application shall
acknowledge that the Chief of Police shall access and review the applicant’s
and any agent of the applicant’s criminal record. An administrative fee in the
amount of $50 shall be paid to offset the expense of this review.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015)
§ 113.05 INVESTIGATION.
   (A)   Upon receipt of the completed application for a commercial
solicitation permit by the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall cause an
investigation of the applicant’s or applicant’s agents business and moral
character to be made as the Chief may deem necessary for the protection of the
public good. This review shall be completed by the Chief of Police within three
business days. If the investigation is not completed within that period of time
the applicant may deem the application to be denied and the applicant may
appeal the deemed denial similar to an appeal as set forth in §
113.06.
   (B)   If the Chief of Police’s review of the application determines that any
applicant or agent of the applicant has been convicted of a crime of moral
turpitude, any crime of violence which may present a danger to the public, any
sex offense crime or drug offense, the application or the right of any agent of
the applicant to solicit in the community maybe denied. If such application is
denied, the Chief of Police shall endorse such denial upon the application and
state the reasons for the same and then return the application to the applicant
with a copy to the Village Mayor. The application shall be returned either in
person or by ordinary mail directed to the applicant’s address as listed on the
original application.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015)
§ 113.06 APPEAL OF DENIAL.
   (A)   If an application has been denied as stated herein, the applicant may
file such appeal within ten calendar days after written notice of such denial
has been either delivered to the applicant or mailed to the applicant by
ordinary mail to the applicant’s last known address. Such appeal shall be
brought to the Village Mayor by filing a copy with the office of the Village
Mayor and a copy with the Chief of Police.
   (B)   The Village Mayor or his or her designee shall then hold a public
hearing upon such appeal at which the Chief of Police or his or her designee
shall present the appropriate evidence to the Village Mayor upon which the
application was denied. The applicant may be present at the public hearing and
may present evidence to refute the findings of the Chief of Police. Upon
hearing all evidence, the Village Mayor may either affirm, modify or, for good
cause shown, overrule the decision of the Chief of Police. The decision of the
Village Mayor shall be rendered within ten days of the conclusion of the public
hearing. Such decision shall be made in writing and presented personally to the
applicant or mailed by ordinary mail to the applicant at the last known address
provided in the application. The decision by the Village Mayor may be appealed
as an administrative decision according to state law.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015)
§ 113.07 ISSUANCE OF COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMIT.
   (A)   If as a result of the investigation the Chief of Police approves the
permit, the Chief shall endorse such approval upon the commercial solicitation
permit application. Each application shall then be assigned an appropriate
permit number and a copy of the approved application shall be returned to the
applicant. The applicant must at all times carry a copy of such approved permit
and appropriate photo identification upon his or her person when soliciting for
sales within the village. A copy of the approved application shall be provided
to all agents of the applicant who have been identified to solicit sales within
the community, all of whom shall carry a copy of the permit and appropriate
identification upon his or her person when soliciting sales within the village.
   (B)   In addition to any criminal offense for a violation of this section,
the approved permit granted to such applicant or the applicant’s agent may
immediately be suspended for failure to comply with this section. Any such
suspension may be appealed by the permittee under the same procedure for
application appeals as set forth in §
113.06.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015)
§ 113.08 REVOCATION OF COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION PERMITS.
   (A)   Commercial solicitation permits issued under the provisions of this
chapter may be revoked by the Chief of Police after notice and hearing for any
of the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the
application for a permit;
      (2)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the business of the commercial solicitor;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter;
      (4)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving any crime of
violence which may present a danger to the public or any sex offense crime,
crime of moral turpitude, or drug offense; or
      (5)   Conducting the business of the commercial solicitor in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of peace or a menace to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.
   (B)   An issued permit will be immediately suspended upon the issuance of a
notice of hearing by the Chief of Police, under this section, and will remain
suspended pending a decision to reinstate the permit by the Village Mayor.
   (C)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of permits shall be given in
writing setting forth specifically the grounds for such revocation and the time
and place of the hearing. The notice shall be delivered personally to the
permit holder or mailed to the permittee at his or her last known address at
least five business days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such hearing
shall be held within ten business days of the notice of revocation unless
extended by agreement with the permit holder.
   (D)   Such hearing shall be conducted by the Village Mayor, or his or her
designee, as a public hearing. The Village Mayor, upon reviewing the evidence
presented, may uphold the decision of the Chief of Police to revoke the
commercial solicitation permit, may modify the decision or may overrule the
decision of the Chief of Police. The Village Mayor’s decision shall be rendered
within ten calendar days of the hearing and shall be rendered in writing with a
copy mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at his or her last known
address. Pending a review by the Village Mayor, the commercial solicitation
permit shall be temporarily suspended. If the Village Mayor fails to render a
decision within ten calendar days after the hearing, then a decision of the
Chief of Police shall be deemed to be overruled and the permit reinstated.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015)
§ 113.09 NO SOLICITATION NOTICE.
   Any resident or business within the community may file a notice of no
solicitation with the Police Department and post a no solicitation sign
conspicuously on the property to bar entry to the property from any commercial
or noncommercial solicitors or canvassers. The notice shall be on a form
provided by the Police Department and the sign shall be a weatherproof sign, a
minimum of three inches by four inches in size, stating no solicitors or words
of similar meaning. The maximum size for any such sign shall be one square
foot. The letters on such sign shall be at least one-third inch in height. No
commercial or noncommercial solicitors or canvassers shall enter upon such
residential or business property where such sign has been posted and where such
notice has been filed with the Police Department.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.10 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, or entity regulated by
this chapter to:
   (A)   Enter upon any residential or business property within the community
if such property has been appropriately posted to prohibit on-site
solicitation;
   (B)   To solicit or canvass within any residential area of the community
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily;
   (C)   To solicit sales within the community without appropriately obtaining
a permit in advance;
   (D)   To solicit sales within the community without having a copy of such
permit on such person;
   (E)   To solicit, whether commercial or noncommercial, or canvass in the
community without appropriate photo identification or refuse to exhibit such
photo identification to a resident or business resident when requested;
   (F)   Solicit, whether commercial or noncommercial, or canvas in the
community without being accompanied by a parent, guardian, or supervising adult
if such solicitor or canvasser is under the age of 18 years;
   (G)   Accompany an underage solicitor or canvasser as an accompanying
parent, guardian, or supervising adult without appropriate photo
identification;
   (H)   Remain on such residential or business property without permission of
the occupant or homeowner after the commercial or noncommercial solicitor or
canvasser has been requested by the owner/occupant or person in charge of the
premises to leave such private premises;
   (I)   Make any false statement or misrepresentation in the process of
applying for a commercial solicitation permit; or
   (J)   Violate any other section of this chapter not specified herein.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.11 RESTRICTION AGAINST LEAVING PROPERTY OR MATERIALS UNATTENDED.
   (A)   Restriction. Any promotional materials, gifts, display objects, or
other written materials distributed door-to-door throughout the community as a
part of any solicitation or canvass must be appropriately delivered and
presented for acceptance to the homeowner, business owner, or occupant. If such
materials are left upon the property, the materials must be appropriately
secured or placed so as not to cause waste, debris, or other refuse in the
community as a result of exposure to the weather and other elements. Under no
circumstances may any promotional materials, gifts, display objects, or other
door-to-door solicitation or marketing materials or canvassing materials to be
left in the right-of-way. It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor or
canvasser to return to the residence or business property and to remove such
materials from the residence or business property if it remains upon the
residential property or business property in excess of 72 hours after being
delivered to the residence property or business property without being claimed.
It shall also be the responsibility of the solicitor or canvasser to cleanup
any debris, refuse, or other waste caused throughout the community by leaving
such property or promotional materials unattended at a residential or business
property.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to any goods or services pre-
ordered by a resident/occupant or business, which goods or services are being
delivered with the permission of the owner/occupant or person in charge of the
premises at an agreed upon time or in an agreed upon manner.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of any provisions of this chapter may be subject to a fine not
to exceed $150 for any first offense in a calendar year, not to exceed $250 for
any second offense within a calendar year, and not to exceed $500 for any third
offense within a calendar year. Each day a person, organization, or entity is
in violation of this chapter may be charged as a separate criminal offense.
(Ord. O-17-15, passed 7-22-2015)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
133.   SEX OFFENSES
      
134.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
      
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
137.   WEAPONS CONTROL
      
138.   DRUG OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Application of Title XIII
   
130.02   Definitions
   
130.03   Classification of offenses
   
130.04   Common law offenses abrogated
   
130.05   Rules of construction
   
130.06   Limitation of criminal prosecutions
   
130.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication
   
130.08   Culpable mental states
   
130.09   Organizational criminal liability
   
130.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct
   
130.11   Attempt
   
130.12   Complicity
   
130.13   Presumption of innocence; proof of offense; affirmative defense
   
130.14   Battered woman syndrome
   
130.15   Delinquency adjudications deemed convictions
   
130.16   Criminal law jurisdiction
   
130.17   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department
   
130.18   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor
   
130.19   Multiple sentences
   
130.20   Apprehension, detention, or arrest of persons on bond
   
130.21   Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
   
130.22   Methods of arrest
 
   
130.99   Penalty for Title XIII
Statutory reference:
   Mayor’s Court generally, see R.C. Ch. 1905
   Municipal Court generally, see R.C. Ch. 1901
   Trials, Magistrate Courts, see R.C. Ch. 2938
§ 130.01 APPLICATION OF TITLE XIII.
   (A)   Title XIII of this code of ordinances embodies and prescribes
penalties for offenses against the municipality not classifiable in previous
titles and chapters. The word “misdemeanors”, as used in this title, is not
exhaustive and does not imply that offenses found elsewhere in this code of
ordinances are not also misdemeanors and punishable as such.
   (B)   Each act or omission for which a fine, imprisonment, or both is
provided under this Title or elsewhere in this code, or each act or omission
which is declared a violation of this code, is unlawful and is hereby made a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the penalty or penalties so provided shall be
imposed by the court.
(2000 Code, § 130.01)
§ 130.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess
under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose history,
character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will be a
danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by any
means upon or against a person or thing.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, Marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C. § 737.10 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms;
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. Pts. 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is “not guilty by reason of
insanity” relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the
offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division (A)(1)
of R.C. § 2903.34, of divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or
of divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   PERSON.
      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, the term includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that
does not set forth a criminal offense, the term includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in no case
shall the portion of the definition of the term “person” that is set forth in
division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal offense in any
of the following manners:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division if it is
of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.
         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human;
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to property
that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or
enjoyment. The term does not include wear and tear occasioned by normal use.
   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or bestowed by
express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office, or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. The term includes but is not limited to
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. “Financial instruments associated with
computers” include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information service”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in
this section, “cable television service,” “computer,” “computer network,”
“computer software,” “computer system,” “data,” and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal activity
and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a repeat
offender if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually-oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent sexually-oriented
offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent felony drug abuse
offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.
   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
   SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school premises,
school activity, and school bus.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that does
either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2935.36(E)) (2000 Code, § 130.02)
§ 130.03 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this Title:
   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.
   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100;
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02) (2000 Code, § 130.03)
§ 130.04 COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED.
   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this code.
   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this code state a
positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty for
violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty.
   (C)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03) (2000 Code, § 130.04)
§ 130.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C) or (D) below, sections
of this code defining offenses or penalties shall be strictly construed against
the municipality and liberally construed in favor of the accused.
   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this code providing for
criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair, impartial,
speedy, and sure administration of justice.
   (C)   Any provision of a section of this code that refers to a previous
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of this code, the
Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code shall be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of
guilty to a substantially equivalent offense under an existing or former law of
this municipality, state, another state, or the United States or under an
existing or former municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or
to an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or
ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a
substantially equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04) (2000 Code, § 130.05)
§ 130.06 LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5),
or (A)(6) of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a
prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods
after an offense is committed:
         (a)   For a felony, six years;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         (c)   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a conspiracy to
commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation of R.C. §
2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) through (J) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, or 2917.02, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former R.C. §
2907.12.
         (b)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (A)(3)(a) of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D) to (L) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(5)(b) and (E)
to (I) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         (b)   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (A)(5)
(a) of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person's legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         (c)   As used in division (A)(5)(b) of this section, "aggrieved
person" includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of
R.C. § 2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
      (6)   A prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2151.421(A)(1) or (A)(4),
which is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, or a misdemeanor of the first
degree under circumstances specified in R.C. § 2151.99, is barred unless it is
commenced within four years after the violation is committed.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public
servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter;
         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   As used in this division:
         OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A PUBLIC
SERVANT. The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C. §
101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or
(B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense involving
misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any municipal
ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed
in this division (C)(2).
         PUBLIC SERVANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (D)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is
determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if
the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 of the Revised
Code is determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable
person and if the time of the determination is within 25 years after the
offense is committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section
may be commenced within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed
or five years after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, DNA RECORD has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.573.
   (E)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (F)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation, or other process unless reasonable diligence
is exercised to execute the same.
   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (I)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the prosecution
is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or process are
set aside or reversed on appeal.
   (J)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Title XIII or Title
XXIX of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a development disability or
physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until either
of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to
have occurred.
   (K)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (L)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (A) and (D) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (A)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(R.C. § 2901.13) (2000 Code, § 130.06)
Statutory reference:
   Limitation for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.12
§ 130.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CULPABILITY. Means purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.
      INTOXICATION. Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting from
the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Means reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are involuntary acts.
      POSSESSION. Means a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21) (2000 Code, § 130.07)
§ 130.08 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22) (2000 Code, § 130.08)
§ 130.09 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent,
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer,
agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the
scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except
that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or
employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the
circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated, or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent, or employee acting in behalf of the
organization and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or
employment.
   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (D)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity. The term does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23) (2000 Code, § 130.09)
§ 130.10 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C.
§ 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if
he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24) (2000 Code, § 130.10)
§ 130.11 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of R.C. Ch. 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor. In
the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C. Ch. 3734,
other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an attempt is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under this
section.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02) (2000 Code, § 130.11)
Statutory reference:
   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01
   Solid and hazardous wastes, see R.C. Ch. 3734
§ 130.12 COMPLICITY.
   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03) (2000 Code, § 130.12)
Statutory reference:
   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01
§ 130.13 PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE; PROOF OF OFFENSE; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   (A)   Every person accused of an offense is presumed innocent until proven
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and the burden of proof for all elements of
the offense is upon the prosecution. The burden of going forward with the
evidence of an affirmative defense, and the burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence, for an affirmative defense other than self-defense, defense of
another, or defense of the accused’s residence presented as described in
division (B)(1) of this section, is upon the accused.
   (B)   (1)   A person is allowed to act in self-defense, defense of another,
or defense of that person’s residence. If, at the trial of a person who is
accused of an offense that involved the person’s use of force against another,
there is evidence presented that tends to support that the accused person used
the force in self-defense, defense of another, or defense of that person’s
residence, the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused person did not use the force in self-defense, defense of another, or
defense of that person’s residence, as the case may be.
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(3) of this section, a person is presumed to
have acted in self-defense or defense of another when using defensive force
that is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily harm to another if
the person against whom the defensive force is used is in the process of
unlawfully and without privilege to do so entering, or has unlawfully and
without privilege to do so entered, the residence or vehicle occupied by the
person using the defensive force.
      (3)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section does
not apply if either of the following is true:
         (a)   The person against whom the defensive force is used has a right
to be in, or is a lawful resident of, the residence or vehicle.
         (b)   The person who uses the defensive force uses it while in a
residence or vehicle and the person is unlawfully, and without privilege to be,
in that residence or vehicle.
      (4)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section is a
rebuttable presumption and may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence,
provided that the prosecution’s burden of proof remains proof beyond a
reasonable doubt as described in divisions (A) and (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   As part of its charge to the jury in a criminal case, the court shall
read the definitions of “reasonable doubt” and “proof beyond a reasonable
doubt”, contained in division (E) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. An affirmative defense is either of the following:
         (a)   A defense expressly designated as affirmative;
         (b)   A defense involving an excuse or justification peculiarly within
the knowledge of the accused, on which the accused can fairly be required to
adduce supporting evidence.
      DWELLING. Means a building or conveyance of any kind that has a roof over
it and that is designed to be occupied by people lodging in the  building or
conveyance at night, regardless of whether the building or conveyance is
temporary or permanent or is mobile or immobile. As used in this division, a
building or conveyance includes but is not limited to an attached porch, and a
building or conveyance with a roof over it includes but is not limited to a
tent.
      RESIDENCE. Means a dwelling in which a person resides either temporarily
or permanently or is visiting as a guest.
      VEHICLE. Means a conveyance of any kind, whether or not motorized, that
is designed to transport people or property.
   (E)   “Reasonable doubt” is present when the jurors, after they have
carefully considered and compared all the evidence, cannot say they are firmly
convinced of the truth of the charge. It is a doubt based on reasonable and
common sense. Reasonable doubt is not mere possible doubt, because everything
relating to human affairs or depending on moral evidence is open to some
possible or imaginary doubt. “Proof beyond a reasonable doubt” is proof of such
character that an ordinary person would be willing to rely and act upon it in
the most important of the person's own affairs.
(R.C. § 2901.05) (2000 Code, § 130.13)
§ 130.14 BATTERED WOMAN SYNDROME.
   (A)   The municipality hereby declares that it recognizes both of the
following, in relation to the “battered woman syndrome”: that the syndrome
currently is a matter of commonly accepted scientific knowledge, and that the
subject matter and details of the syndrome are not within the general
understanding or experience of a person who is a member of the general populace
and are not within the field of common knowledge.
   (B)   (1)   If a person is charged with an offense involving the use of
force against another and the person, as a defense to the offense charged,
raises the affirmative defense of self defense, the person may introduce expert
testimony of the “battered woman syndrome” and expert testimony that the person
suffered from that syndrome as evidence to establish the requisite belief of an
imminent danger of death or great bodily harm that is necessary, as an element
of the affirmative defense, to justify the person’s use of force in question.
      (2)   The introduction of any expert testimony under this division shall
be in accordance with the Ohio Rules of Evidence.
(R.C. § 2901.06) (2000 Code, § 130.14)
§ 130.15 DELINQUENCY ADJUDICATIONS DEEMED CONVICTIONS.
   (A)   If a person is alleged to have committed an offense and if the person
previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or juvenile traffic offender
for a violation of a law or ordinance, except as provided in division (B)
below, the adjudication as a delinquent child or as a juvenile traffic offender
is a conviction for a violation of the law for purposes of determining the
offense with which the person should be charged and, if the person is convicted
of or pleads guilty to an offense, the sentence to be imposed upon the person
relative to the conviction or guilty plea.
   (B)   A previous adjudication of a person as a delinquent child or juvenile
traffic offender for a violation of a law or ordinance is not a conviction for
a violation of the law or ordinance for purposes of determining any of the
following:
      (1)   Whether the person is a repeat violent offender, as defined in R.C.
§ 2929.01, or whether the person should be sentenced as a repeat violent
offender under R.C. § 2929.14(B)(2) and R.C. § 2941.149;
      (2)    Whether the person is a violent career criminal as defined in R.C.
§ 2923.132, whether the person has committed unlawful use of a weapon by a
violent career criminal in violation of R.C. § 2923.132 or should be sentenced
for that offense under that section, or whether the person should be sentenced
under R.C. § 2929.14(K) as a violent career criminal who had a firearm on or
about the person’s person or under the person’s control while committing a
violent felony offense and displayed or brandished the firearm, indicated that
the offender possessed a firearm, or used the firearm to facilitate the
offense.
(R.C. § 2901.08) (2000 Code, § 130.15)
§ 130.16 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (A)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (B)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) above includes
the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes death, the death
itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense in question. If
any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this municipality, the
death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (C)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (D)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (E)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (F)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (G)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (H)   For purposes of division (A)(2) above, an overt act is substantial
when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of the actor
that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (I)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER NETWORK,
INFORMATION SERVICE, TELE COMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11) (2000 Code, § 130.16)
Statutory reference:
   State criminal law jurisdiction, see R.C. § 2901.11
§ 130.17 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   (a)   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         (b)   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any
of the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (B)(1)(f) of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of, or that is identified by the department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in division (B)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   (a)   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include but not be limited to both of the following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold, and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
Law Enforcement Trust Fund or similar fund created under that section.
         (b)   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   (a)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be
disposed of under this section or R.C. § 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a
reasonable effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to
notify them of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to
them at the earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying
persons entitled to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise using at
least one of the following methods:
            1.   In the print or digital edition of a newspaper of general
circulation in the county;
            2.   On the official public notice web site established under R.C.
§ 125.182;
            3.   On the web site and social media account of the county.
         (b)   The notices shall briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.92.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.
         TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means an organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (B)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (A)(1)(b) of this
section, shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has
territorial jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         (a)   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         (b)   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         (c)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         (d)   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or R.C. § 4301.53
shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that
it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit
in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to
law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any
moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (B)(1)(d) shall be paid into the State
Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division
determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         (e)   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from
an unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the Inmates’ Industrial and Entertainment
Fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         (f)   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter
2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the
mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants
the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         (g)   Computers, computer networks, computer systems, and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (B)(2) of this section.
         (h)   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(B)(1) of this section or division (A)(1)(b) of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (B)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (B)(3) of this section.
      (5)   (a)   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         (b)   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (B)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. §
5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (C)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12.
If the property is to be sold under division (B) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
(2000 Code, § 130.17)
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Ch. 2981
§ 130.18 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C. §
1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under
this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has
discretion to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
130.99(B).
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §
130.99 or
133.99 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 through 2929.28, a court that imposes a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any
sanction or combination of sanctions under §
130.99(C) through (G). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (B)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         (a)   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         (b)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         (c)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character, and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         (d)   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability, or other factor
made the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of
the offense more serious;
         (e)   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (B)(1)(b) and
(B)(1)(c) above;
         (f)   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         (g)   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, if the
offender enters an Alford plea, the sentencing court shall not consider whether
the offender showed genuine remorse for the offense.
      (3)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (B)(1) above, the court may consider any
other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and principles of
sentencing set forth in §
130.99(B).
   (C)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
130.99(D), (E), (F), and (G). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
130.99(C) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (D)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim's representative, the victim's
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2743.51 through 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22) (2000 Code, § 130.18)
§ 130.19 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) below, R.C. § 2929.14(C), or R.C. §
2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term, or sentence of imprisonment shall
be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, this state, another
state, or the United States. Except as provided in division (B)(2) below, a
jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor shall be served
concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for felony served
in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (B)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21, or 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to
a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08
or 4511.19 or a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving the operation of a
vehicle by the offender and that is served in a state correctional institution
when the trial court specifies that it is to be served consecutively. When
consecutive jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are
imposed for one or more misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this
division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms
imposed, and the offender shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before
serving any term imposed for a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41) (2000 Code, § 130.19)
§ 130.20 APPREHENSION, DETENTION, OR ARREST OF PERSONS ON BOND.
   (A)   No person, other than a law enforcement officer, shall apprehend,
detain, or arrest a principal on bond, wherever issued, unless that person
meets all of the following criteria:
      (1)   The person is any of the following:
         (a)   Qualified, licensed, and appointed as a surety bail bond agent
under R.C. §§ 3905.83 through 3905.95;
         (b)   Licensed as a surety bail bond agent by the state where the bond
was written;
         (c)   Licensed as a private investigator under R.C. Ch. 4749;
         (d)   Licensed as a private investigator by the state where the bond
was written;
         (e)   An off-duty peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2921.51.
      (2)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or arresting the
principal, has entered into a written contract with the surety or with a
licensed surety bail bond agent appointed by the surety, which contract sets
forth the name of the principal who is to be apprehended, detained, or
arrested. For purposes of this division (A)(2), SURETY has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 3905.83.
      (3)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or arresting the
principal, has notified the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction
over the area in which such activities will be performed and has provided any
form or identification or other information requested by the law enforcement
agency.
   (B)   No person shall represent the person’s self to be a bail enforcement
agent or bounty hunter, or claim any similar title, in this municipality.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal bail bond agent
practices.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of division (A) above, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of division (B) above, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.27)
§ 130.21 SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (B)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (C)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self- defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09)
§ 130.22 METHODS OF ARREST.
   Arrests of persons charged with misdemeanors under state or village law may
be made by taking the person charged into custody or by serving the person with
a citation to appear before a court having jurisdiction of the offense charged.
(1967 Code, § 130.21) (Ord. O-10-41, passed 12-8-1941)
§ 130.99 PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII.
   (A)   Generally. Except where otherwise specifically classified within the
body of the section of a chapter of this title, a violation of such section
shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more
than $500, imprisonment of not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 715.67)
   (B)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (B)(1) above shall be reasonably calculated to
achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set forth in
division (B)(1) above, commensurate with and not demeaning to the seriousness
of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim, and consistent with
sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) above
shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender, or
religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) above shall not apply to any offense
that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court pursuant to
Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any provision of the
Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is disposed of without a
court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) through (B)(3) above do not affect any
penalties established by the municipality for a violation of its ordinances
that are not substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor
violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21)
   (C)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
130.18 or
133.99 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (C)(5) of this
section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if
the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under this
division (C) may permit the offender to serve the sentence in intermittent
confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as provided in
division (E)(2) below. The court retains jurisdiction over every offender
sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at any time, but the
court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(C) and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has established a
county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the court shall
specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be considered for
participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the county jail,
the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification regarding the
offender’s participation in the county jail industry program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to this division (C),
the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 a
reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which the term
is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. § 307.93,
341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or 2947.19 and
R.C. § 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(C)(4)(a)1. above and does not pay the bill by the times specified in R.C. §
2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a certificate of judgment against the
person as described in that section.
         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (C)(4)(a)2. above.
      (5)   (a)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (C)(5)(a)2. below, an additional definite
jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more
of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         (b)   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (C)(5)(a) above, the court may directly impose on the offender a
sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing, continual
tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time specified by
the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal the duration
of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon the offender
under division (C)(5)(a) above. A sanction imposed under this division shall
commence on the date specified by the court, provided that the sanction shall
not commence until after the offender has served the jail term imposed for the
misdemeanor violation of R.C. §§ 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and any residential sanction
imposed for the violation under division (E) below or R.C. § 2929.26. A
sanction imposed under this division shall be considered to be a community
control sanction for purposes of division (D) below or R.C. § 2929.25, and all
provisions of this code and the Ohio Revised Code that pertain to community
control sanctions shall apply to a sanction imposed under this division, except
to the extent that they would by their nature be clearly inapplicable. The
offender shall pay all costs associated with a sanction imposed under this
division, including the cost of the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(C), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under divisions (E) or (F) below for
any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (D)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in §§
130.18 and
133.99 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (E), (F), or (G) below. The
court may impose any other conditions of release under a community control
sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a jail term
upon the offender, the court may impose any community control sanction or
combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (C) above from the range of
jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all or a
portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (E), (F), or (G) below.
         (b)   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         (c)   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)
(1)(a)1. above, the court shall state the duration of the community control
sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the conditions
of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any of the
following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (D)(1)(b) below;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
divisions (E), (F), or (G) below, but the court is not required to impose any
particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (C) above.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)(1)(a)1.
above, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the
period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   (a)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (E), (F), or (G) below, the court shall place the offender under the
general control and supervision of the court or of a department of probation in
the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting to the court a
violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If the offender
resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has been
established to serve the municipal court or county court in that jurisdiction,
the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the county court to
receive the offender into the general control and supervision of that
department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing court a
violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The sentencing
court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for the duration
of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         (b)   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   (a)   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under divisions (E), (F), or (G) below, and the offender
violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private person
or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that comprises
the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing court or to
the department of probation or probation officer with general control and
supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or entity
reports the violation to the department of probation or probation officer, the
department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing court.
         (b)   Except as provided in division (D)(4)(c) of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (D)(1)(b) above;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         (c)   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b),
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related provision
under R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14, or R.C. § 2925.141, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the conditions of a
community control sanction based on a minor drug possession offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2925.11, or violated R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. §
2925.141, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the sentencing
court shall not impose any of the penalties described in division (D)(4)(b) of
this section based on the violation.
         (d)   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (D)(4)(b) above, the total time spent in jail for the misdemeanor
offense and the violation of a condition of the community control sanction
shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for which the
sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the longer period
of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer sanction or the
more restrictive sanction imposed under division (D)(4)(b) above by all or part
of the time the violator successfully spent under the sanction that was
initially imposed.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an
offender, for a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a
community control sanction imposed pursuant to divisions (E), (F), or (G) below
in an exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the
community control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control
sanction.
         (b)   Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does
not relieve the offender of a duty to make restitution under division (G)
below.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (E)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (E). Community residential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         (b)   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (E)
(1)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (E) may do either or both of the following:
         (a)   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family;
         (b)   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (E)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (G) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (E)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including
but not limited to hepatitis A, B, and C, and other contagious diseases. The
person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction may cause a
convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing
center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other place who
refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including but not limited to hepatitis A, B, and C, or another contagious
disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (E)(1)(a) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (F)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. Nonresidential
sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A term of day reporting;
         (b)   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         (c)   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor
of the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third, or
fourth degree;
         (d)   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         (e)   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         (f)   A term of basic probation supervision;
         (g)   A term of monitored time;
         (h)   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         (i)   A curfew term;
         (j)   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         (k)   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         (l)   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         (m)   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         (n)   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian, or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (F)(1)(c) above the offender may request that the court modify the
sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable contribution, as
determined by the court, to the general fund of the county, municipality, or
other local entity that provides funding to the court. The court may grant the
request if the offender demonstrates a change in circumstances from the date
the court imposes the sentence or that the modification would otherwise be in
the interests of justice. If the court grants the request, the offender shall
make a reasonable contribution to the court, and the clerk of the court shall
deposit that contribution into the general fund of the county, municipality, or
other local entity that provides funding to the court. If more than one entity
provides funding to the court, the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the
reasonable contribution equal to the percentage of funding the entity provides
to the court in that entity’s general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (F)(1)
above, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory jail
term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the offender
or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (F)(2) above.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (G)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the
court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this division (G) and, if the offender
is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in R.C. § 2930.01, shall
sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this division (G) and
R.C. § 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as required by this
division (G), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions
that may be imposed pursuant to this division (G) include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender's crime or the victim's estate,
in an amount based on the victim's economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim's representative, victim's attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor's designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim's costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim's representative, victim's attorney, if applicable, or victim's estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim's estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (G) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim's attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim's estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in R.C. § 2929.281(A).
         (b)   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (G)(1)(b)1. and
(G)(1)(b)2. below payable to the appropriate entity as required by law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         (c)   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to, the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room
and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of
repairing property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (G)(1)(c)1. above
shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able to pay
and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may collect
any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.
      (2)   (a)   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         (b)   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (F)(1) above in lieu
of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court does not
determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term of
community service under division (F)(1) above in lieu of or in addition to
imposing a financial sanction under this division (G) and in addition to
imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a minor
misdemeanor pursuant to division (F)(4) above in lieu of or in addition to
imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to imposing
court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court costs, the
court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction or court
costs.
      (3)   (a)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) above to pay the costs incurred by a
county pursuant to any sanction imposed under divisions (E) and (F) above or
this division (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine
offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) above to the county
treasurer. The county treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
divisions (E) or (F) above or this division (G) in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) above.
         (b)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) above to pay the costs incurred by a municipal
corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under divisions (E) or (F) or this
division (G) or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a
sanction imposed under division (E) above to the treasurer of the municipal
corporation. The treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the municipal
corporation’s General Fund. The municipal corporation shall use the amounts
deposited in the fund to pay the costs incurred by the municipal corporation
pursuant to any sanction imposed under divisions (E) or (F) above or this
division (G) or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a
sanction imposed under division (E) above.
         (c)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(c) above for the costs incurred by a private provider pursuant
to a sanction imposed under divisions (E) or (F) above or this division (G) to
the provider.
      (4)   (a)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under
this section, the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall, except as provided in divisions (G)(4)(b)
and (G)(4)(c) of this section, be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to be
credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. § 111.48.
         (b)   A court that imposes a fine under division (G)(4)(a) of this
section may retain up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to cover administrative costs.
         (c)   A court that imposes a fine under division (G)(4)(a) of this
section may assign up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to reimburse the prosecuting attorney for costs associated with prosecution of
the offense.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (G)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (G)(1) above is a judgment in favor
of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that imposed
the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is
the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(c)1.a. above upon an offender is a judgment in favor of the
entity administering the community control sanction, and the offender subject
to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of
reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.b. above upon an offender
confined in a jail or other residential facility is a judgment in favor of the
entity operating the jail or other residential facility, and the offender
subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction
of restitution imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(a) above is an order in
favor of the victim of the offender’s criminal act that can be collected
through a certificate of judgment as described in division (G)(5)(b)1. below,
through execution as described in division (G)(5)(b)2. below or through an
order as described in division (G)(5)(b)3. below and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         (b)   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order
under this division, the victim, private provider, state, or political
subdivision may do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action.
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (G)(5) above for the
collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (G) may designate the clerk of the court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         (a)   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 through 307.92.
         (b)   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just. If the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the board of county commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         (c)   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (G) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
   (H)   Organizational penalties.
      (1)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in this section, an
organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
130.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
         (e)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
         (f)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000;
         (g)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more
than $1,000.
      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
      (3)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
      (4)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
130.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2929.31)
(2000 Code, § 130.99)
Cross-reference:
   Sentencing for sexually-oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration,
see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Citation issuance and limitations on arrest for minor misdemeanors, see R.C.
§ 2935.26
   Crime Victim’s Reparations Fund, see R.C. § 2929.32
   Habitual sex offender and sexual predator registration, see R.C. Ch. 2950
   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
   Reports to health care licensing boards of criminal offenses, see R.C. §
2929.42
   Restitution, see R.C. § 2929.281
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Arson; determining property value or amount of physical harm
   
131.03   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
   
131.04   Criminal mischief
   
131.05   Damaging or endangering aircraft or airport operations
   
131.06   Criminal trespass; aggravated trespass
   
131.07   Tampering with coin machines
   
131.08   Theft
   
131.09   Unauthorized use of a vehicle
   
131.10   Unauthorized use of property, including telecommunication property and
computers; possession of municipal property
   
131.11   Passing bad checks
   
131.12   Misuse of credit cards
   
131.13   Making or using slugs
   
131.14   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
   
131.15   Tampering with records
   
131.16   Securing writings by deception
   
131.17   Defrauding creditors
   
131.18   Receiving stolen property
   
131.19   Value of stolen property
   
131.20   Degree of offense when certain property involved
   
131.21   Injuring vines, bushes, trees, or crops
   
131.22   Detention and arrest of shoplifters and those committing motion
picture piracy; protection of institutional property
   
131.23   Insurance fraud; workers’ compensation fraud; Medicaid fraud
   
131.24   Injury to property by hunters
   
131.25   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental
services; evidence of lack of capacity to consent
   
131.26   Forgery of identification cards
   
131.27   Criminal simulation
   
131.28   Personating an officer
   
131.29   Trademark counterfeiting
   
131.30   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
   
131.31   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
   
131.32   Prosecutions for theft of utilities
   
131.33   Motion picture piracy
   
131.34   Digging prohibited
   
131.35   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism
   
131.36   Desecration
Cross-reference:
   Animals, offenses against, see §§
90.20 through, see §
90.35
   Property recovered by police, see §§
34.10
Statutory reference:
   Cable television service devices, unauthorized sale or possession, felony,
see R.C. § 2913.041
   Deceptive acts or practices in connection with consumer transactions, see
O.A.C. Ch. 109:4-3
   Disrupting public services, felony, see R.C. § 2909.04
   E-mail advertisements, civil offenses and felony forgery offense, see R.C. §
2307.64
   E-mail spam, civil offenses and felony offenses, see R.C. § 2913.421
   Food stamps, illegal use, see R.C. § 2913.46
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
   Terrorism involving agricultural products or equipment, see R.C. § 901.511
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the United
States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the facilities
of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable
communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in
connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system.
   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the
following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license.
   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and memory
functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. The term
includes but is not limited to all input, output, processing, storage, computer
program, or communication facilities that are connected, or related, in a
computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.
   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to modify,
damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access
to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information within a computer,
computer system, or computer network without the express or implied consent of
the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or
kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or
kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   The term means any of the following:
         (a)   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system, or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         (b)   Misusing computer or network services including, but not limited
to, mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         (c)   1.   Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system, or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system, or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including, but not
limited to, operating systems, computer services, or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system, or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)
(c)1. of this definition does not include standard computer software used for
the normal operation, administration, management, and test of a computer,
computer system, or computer network including, but not limited to, domain name
services, mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer
programs commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         (d)   The intentional use of a computer, computer system, or a
computer network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by
the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent.
      (2)   The term does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program, or computer network.
   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers and
communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has
the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded instructions or
statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the computer to process
data.
   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to the use of a computer
system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer
use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer network.
   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures, and other documentation
associated with the operation of a computer system.
   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including, but not limited to,, data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device that,
alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed,
manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or otherwise
facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information service
without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications
service or information service. The phrase includes but is not limited to a
clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or tumbler microchip; a
wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving, or
otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information
service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or
software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the electronic
serial number in a wireless telephone.
   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON. Includes
the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any emergency
personnel.
   CREDIT CARD. Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device, or other
means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining money,
property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic fund
transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a cash
dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued under
R.C. § 301.29.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.
   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived by
any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by
preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act, or
omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in another,
including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other
objective or subjective fact.
   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or
another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision, or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned or
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal, or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any
spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or otherwise
purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
including, but not limited to, electronic publishing.
      (2)   The term does not include any use of a capability of a type
described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control, or
operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure, vehicle, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is actually
present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other
than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who
has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership,
possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession and use
of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for
consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession of the
property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of
consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the
property.
   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services, rental
services, public utility services including wireless service as defined in R.C.
§ 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink, transportation,
entertainment, and cable television services and, for purposes of R.C. §
2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes cable
services as defined in that section.
   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or other
quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an
improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that purpose.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination, transmission,
or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or
equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any communications system by any
method, including, but not limited to, a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic,
optical, digital or analog method.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine, or other
device that facilitates telecommunication, including, but not limited to, a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13,
2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.08, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or 2913.48, or R.C. §
2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation,
deliver, or display.
   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper,
plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written, type-
written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge,
trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license, or
identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01) (2000 Code, § 131.01)
§ 131.02 ARSON; DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE OR AMOUNT OF PHYSICAL HARM.
   (A)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (B)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1)
or (B)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1) or (B)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03)
   (E)   Determining property value or amount of physical harm.
      (1)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of division (A)(1)
or (B)(1) of this section:
         (a)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item,
antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that is
either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial
time, effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical
harm involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
         (b)   If the property is not covered under division (B)(1)(a) above,
and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored substantially
to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is the reasonable
cost of restoring the property.
         (c)   If the property is not covered under division (B)(1)(a) above,
and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
      (2)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2913.61.
      (3)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C.
§ 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B) through (D)) (2000 Code, § 131.02)
Cross-reference:
   Negligent burning, see §
91.38
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Arson offender registration, see R.C. §§ 2909.13, 2909.14 and 2909.15
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.71
§ 131.03 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (A)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         (a)   Knowingly, by any means; or
         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (B)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         ALLEY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         HIGHWAY. Means any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.
         STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         VESSEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.
         WATERS IN THIS STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway;
         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (B) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09)
(2000 Code, § 131.03)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.101
   Railroad vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.10
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 131.04 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         (a)   The property of another;
         (b)   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation
station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of
another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety
of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including, but not limited to,
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      IMPROPERLY TAMPER. Means to change the physical location or the physical
condition of the property.
      SAFETY DEVICE. Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or
any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (C)(2), (C)(3), or (C)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07) (2000 Code, § 131.04)
§ 131.05 DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT OR AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AIR GUN. Means a hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.
      AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE. Means any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is
actually being used for any of those purposes.
      FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      SPRING-OPERATED GUN. Means a hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (B)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun, or spring- operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring- operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This division does not apply
to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of endangering aircraft,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk of
physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of endangering airport
operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation creates a risk
of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious harm to any
person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for
the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who violates division
(C) above while hunting shall be suspended or revoked pursuant to R.C. §
1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A) through (E)) (2000 Code, § 131.05)
§ 131.06 CRIMINAL TRESPASS; AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes, or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court,
in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47
applies.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (F)   As used in divisions (A) through (E) of this section:
      ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF- HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         (a)   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above- ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel- making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security’s Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above-ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, “video service network” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above- ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above- ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         (b)   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         (c)   Any railroad property;
         (d)   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (G)   Aggravated trespass.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
         (b)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (G)(1)(a) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(G)(1)(b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   As used in this division (G), CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
   (H)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT means a
stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (H)(4)(a)
below that the general public is restricted from access to that restricted
portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a place of
public amusement may include, but is not limited to, a playing field, an
athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting
event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This
division does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force
beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement,
an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a
place of public amusement.
      (4)   (a)   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         (b)   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (H)(4)(a) above, the
municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (H)(2)
above, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual notice that
the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public
amusement.
      (5)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(2) above is guilty of criminal
trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other sentence, penalty,
or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (H)(5)(a) above,
a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform not less
than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
(2000 Code, § 131.06)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
§ 131.07 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32) (2000 Code, § 131.07)
§ 131.08 THEFT.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor
theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the elements set forth in R.C. §
2913.02(B) for felony theft, grand theft, or aggravated theft are met, then a
violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
         (a)   Unless division (B)(2)(b) of this section applies, suspend for
not more than six months the offenders driver's license, probationary driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
         (b)   If the offender's driver's license, probationary driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to
division (B)(2)(a) of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state
or local law, impose a class seven suspension of the offender's license,
permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided
that the suspension shall be at least six months;
         (c)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license, probationary driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (B)
(2)(a) or (B)(2)(b) of this section, instead may require the offender to
perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is
not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the
cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (C)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender's license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (B)(2) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02) (2000 Code, § 131.08)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)
§ 131.09 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat, or other motor- propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner
or person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a violation
of division (A) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of
the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim incurs a
loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (A) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) above a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03) (2000 Code, § 131.09)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving a motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see R.C. § 2913.82
§ 131.10 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY, INCLUDING TELECOMMUNICATION PROPERTY AND
COMPUTERS; POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including, but not limited
to, computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access
to, or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
   (C)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of unauthorized use of
property. Except as otherwise provided in this division, unauthorized use of
property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of unauthorized use of
computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of unauthorized use of
the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) above is guilty of unauthorized use of
the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Means any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      CABLE SERVICE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (a)
of this definition;
         (c)   Any cable television service.
      CABLE SYSTEM. Means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (b)   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         (c)   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         (d)   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         (e)   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04)
   (K)   Possession of municipal property.
      (1)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her
control or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property
belonging to the municipality.
(R.C. § 5589.12)
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (K) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 131.10)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 131.11 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including, but not limited to, any of the following:
         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or
similar negotiable or non- negotiable instrument;
         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.
      ISSUE A CHECK. Means causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (D)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (E)
below, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable instruments that
the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or transferred in
violation of division (B) above within a period of 180 consecutive days.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued ortransferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11) (2000 Code, § 131.11)
§ 131.12 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) below, a violation
of divisions (A), (B)(1), or (C) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (D)(3)
above, a violation of divisions (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) above is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of the property
and services involved in one or more violations of divisions (B)(2), (B)(3), or
(B)(4) above which violations involve one or more credit card accounts and
occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on the date of the
first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of divisions (B)(1) or (B)(2)
above, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21) (2000 Code, § 131.12)
§ 131.13 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33) (2000 Code, § 131.13)
§ 131.14 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41) (2000 Code, § 131.14)
§ 131.15 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data, or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (A)(1) above.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) below if the offense does not
involve data or computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the
following is applicable:
         (a)   If division (B)(1)(b) below does not apply, it is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
         (b)   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) below, if the offense
involves a violation of division (A) above involving data or computer software,
tampering with records is whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b) below, it is
a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42) (2000 Code, § 131.15)
§ 131.16 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or
the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or
spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43) (2000 Code, § 131.16)
§ 131.17 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount, or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45) (2000 Code, § 131.17)
§ 131.18 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51) (2000 Code, § 131.18)
§ 131.19 VALUE OF STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or
2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or 2913.43 involving
a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the
offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or relationship to
another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. When a
series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of violations of, attempts
to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations
of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is an active duty service
member or spouse of an active duty service member, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the
offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or relationship to
another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. The value of
the property or services involved in the series of offenses for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property and services involved in all offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A),
R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. §
2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more than one
victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, pursuant
to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a
single offense. If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed
against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active
duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a
scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single
offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the
property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value as
required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property
and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or more
offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under divisions (B)(1), (B)(2) or
(B)(3) above, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense
in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the offender,
within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or violations
of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same employment,
capacity, or relationship to another as described in divisions (B)(1) or (B)(3)
above, or committed one or more theft offenses that involve a common course of
conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or course of conduct as
described in division (B)(2) above. While it is not necessary to separately
allege and prove each offense in the series in order to prosecute a single
offense under divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) above, it remains necessary
in prosecuting them as a single offense to prove the aggregate value of the
property or services in order to meet the requisite statutory offense level
sought by the prosecution.
   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is the amount which
would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (C)(1) above, and which retains substantial utility for its
purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing such
property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above, and the value of services, is the fair
market value of the property or services. As used in this section, FAIR MARKET
VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a seller would
accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is willing to buy and
the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed as to all facts
material to the transaction, and that neither is under any compulsion to act.
   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry, or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is established
by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B) through (E)) (2000 Code, § 131.19)
§ 131.20 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
131.08 or §
131.18 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (A)   A credit card;
   (B)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (C)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (D)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;
   (E)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71) (2000 Code, § 131.20)
§ 131.21 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES, OR CROPS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or
crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) below, whoever
violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A))
(2000 Code, § 131.21)
§ 131.22 DETENTION AND ARREST OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION
PICTURE PIRACY; PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Means any public or private building, structure, or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored
to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available
for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a
particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.07.
      FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.07.
      MUSEUM. Means any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. Means a rehabilitative, educational program
designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at
least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in this
state.
   (B)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (C)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (D) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival institution, if the
officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent
of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (D)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or archival
institution pursuant to division (C) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief, or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (E)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (F)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions (B), (C) or
(E) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (G)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above, that the officer has probable cause to
believe has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that
the officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by
R.C. § 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable
time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041) (2000 Code, § 131.22)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest without a warrant generally, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Probable cause, see R.C. § 2933.22
§ 131.23 INSURANCE FRAUD; WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD; MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (A)   Insurance fraud.
      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written
or oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for
insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other
benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the
statement, is false or deceptive;
         (b)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of insurance fraud.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is
$1,000 or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   This division (A) shall not be construed to abrogate, waive, or
modify R.C. § 2317.02(A).
      (4)   As used in this division (A):
         DATA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts,
or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
         DECEPTIVE. Means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause
another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation,
withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other
conduct, act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression,
including, but not limited to, a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
         INSURER. Means any person that is authorized to engage in the business
of insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting
Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and
any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or
members.
         POLICY. Means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is issued
by an insurer.
         STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test
result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated
document; and data in any form.
(R.C. § 2913.47)
   (B)   Workers’ compensation fraud.
      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is
not entitled;
         (b)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under R.C. Chs. 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure workers’
compensation benefits;
         (c)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any record or
document that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed
with, or necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and
services for which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from
the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C.
Chs. 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;
         (d)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
         (e)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false
statement concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
         (f)   Alter, forge, or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
         (g)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by R.C. Ch. 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of workers’
compensation fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’
compensation fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of
premiums and assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in divisions (B)
(1)(e), (B)(1)(f), or (B)(1)(g) above, or goods, services, property, or money
stolen is $1,000 or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   (a)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this division (B), the court
shall order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the
governmental body its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case.
         (b)   These costs are in addition to any other costs or penalty
provided under federal, state or local law.
      (4)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (B) are not
exclusive remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other
criminal or civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this
division (B).
      (5)   As used in this division (B):
         CLAIM. Means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation,
an independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
         EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         EMPLOYER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         EMPLOYMENT. Means participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service, or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
         FALSE. Means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
         GOODS. Includes but is not limited to medical supplies, appliances,
rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or
used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for workers’
compensation benefits.
         RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial, or business
record relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services
provided to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any
person, or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires
pursuant to rule.
         REMUNERATION. Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates, and any other reward or consideration.
         SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service provided by any
health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and any
and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
         STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement, or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical, or
dental chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
         WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Means any compensation or benefits
payable under R.C. Chs. 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48)
   (C)   Medicaid fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
      (2)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement,
charge, solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person
provides under the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration
in addition to the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the
person’s provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing
expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
         (b)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including, but not
limited to, a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
      (3)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or
services under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a
period of at least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
         (a)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
         (b)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of Medicaid fraud.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained
in violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (5)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
      (6)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
      (7)   As used in this division (C):
         PROVIDER. Means any person who has signed a provider agreement with
the Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the
Medicaid program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such
a provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
         PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         RECIPIENT. Means any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
         RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial or business
records relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or
services provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services
provided to any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of
the Medicaid Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
         STATEMENT or REPRESENT ATION. Means any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (D)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         (a)   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         (b)   Conceal an interest in property;
         (c)   1.   Except as provided in division (D)(1)(c)2. below, fail to
disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period beginning 36
months before submission of the application or document and ending on the date
the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (D) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (D) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         (b)   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (D)(2)(a)
above, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (D) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (D).
      (3)   This division (D) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (D) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   As used in this division (D):
         MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         PROPERTY. Means any real or personal property or other asset in which
a person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
(2000 Code, § 131.23)
§ 131.24 INJURY TO PROPERTY BY HUNTERS.
   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing a wild
animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to injure
property.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 131.24)
Statutory reference:
   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) through (E)
§ 131.25 EVIDENCE OF INTENT TO COMMIT THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY OR RENTAL
SERVICES; EVIDENCE OF LACK OF CAPACITY TO CONSENT.
   (A)   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental
services.
      (1)   As used in this division (A):
         RENTER. Means a person who owns rented property.
         RENTEE. Means a person who pays consideration to a renter for the use
of rented property.
      (2)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services:
         (a)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious,
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment, or other
relevant information.
         (b)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (A)(3) below, the rentee neither returned the
rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter to return the
rented property.
      (3)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (A)(2)(b) above, a renter may issue
a notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
      (4)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a
prerequisite for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or
rental services. The evidence specified in division (A)(2) above does not
constitute the only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services.
(R.C. § 2913.72)
   (B)   Evidence of lack of capacity to consent.
      (1)   In a prosecution for any alleged violation of §
131.08 through
131.20,
131.23,
131.25 through
131.29, or
132.11, if the lack of consent of the victim is an element of the provision
that allegedly was violated, evidence that, at the time of the alleged
violation, the victim lacked the capacity to give consent is admissible to show
that the victim did not give consent.
      (2)   As used in this section, LACKS THE CAPACITY TO CONSENT means being
impaired for any reason to the extent that the person lacks sufficient
understanding or capacity to make and carry out reasonable decisions concerning
the person or the person’s resources.
(R.C. § 2913.73)
(2000 Code, § 131.25)
§ 131.26 FORGERY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (B)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity,” “identification,” “identification card,” or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (A) above or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing forged
identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in addition, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
      (2)    If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2)) (2000 Code, § 131.26)
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A) and (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 131.27 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under R.C. Chs. 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently cause
to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any wrapper, label,
stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chs.
4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap
prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chs. 4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), or
(A)(3) above.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, criminal
simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32) (2000 Code, § 131.27)
§ 131.28 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44) (2000 Code, § 131.28)
Cross-reference:
   Impersonating an officer (non-fraud offense), see §
132.12
§ 131.29 TRADEMARK COUNTERFEITING.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Attach, affix, or otherwise use a counterfeit mark in connection
with the manufacture of goods or services, whether or not the goods or services
are intended for sale or resale.
      (2)   Possess, sell, or offer for sale tools, machines, instruments,
materials, articles, or other items of personal property with the knowledge
that they are designed for the production or reproduction of counterfeit marks.
      (3)   Purchase or otherwise acquire goods, and keep or otherwise have the
goods in the person’s possession, with the knowledge that a counterfeit mark is
attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with the goods and
with the intent to sell or otherwise dispose of the goods.
      (4)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispose of goods with the
knowledge that a counterfeit mark is attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used
in connection with the goods.
      (5)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide services with the
knowledge that a counterfeit mark is used in connection with that sale, offer
for sale, or other provision of the services.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trademark counterfeiting.
      (1)   A violation of division (A)(1) above is guilty of a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)    Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (A)(2) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
circumstances of the violation indicate that the tools, machines, instruments,
materials, articles, or other items of personal property involved in the
violation were intended for use in the commission of a felony, a violation of
division (A)(2) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the cumulative sales price of the goods or services to which or in
connection with which the counterfeit mark is attached, affixed or otherwise
used in the offense is $1,000 or more, a violation of divisions (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   A defendant may assert as an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of this section defenses, affirmative defenses, and limitations on
remedies that would be available in a civil, criminal or administrative action
or proceeding under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127, as
amended, the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as
amended, R.C. Ch. 1329 or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or common
law.
   (D)   (1)   Law enforcement officers may seize pursuant to Criminal Rule 41,
R.C. Ch. 2933, or R.C. Ch. 2981 either of the following:
         (a)   Goods to which or in connection with which a person attached,
affixed, otherwise used, or intended to attach, affix or otherwise use a
counterfeit mark in violation of this section.
         (b)   Tools, machines, instruments, materials, articles, vehicles or
other items of personal property that are possessed, sold, offered for sale, or
used in a violation of this section or in an attempt to commit or complicity in
the commission of a violation of this section.
      (2)   (a)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. Ch. 2981, if a
person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, an
attempt to violate this section, or complicity in a violation of this section,
the court involved shall declare that the goods described in division (D)(1)(a)
above and the personal property described in division (D)(1)(b) above are
contraband and are forfeited. Prior to the court’s entry of judgment under
Criminal Rule 32, the owner of a registered trademark or service mark that is
the subject to the counterfeit mark may recommend a manner in which the
forfeited goods and forfeited personal property should be disposed of.
         (b)   If that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of
disposition, the court is not bound by the recommendation.
         (c)   If that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of
disposition, the court may include in its entry of judgment an order that
requires appropriate persons to dispose of the forfeited goods and forfeited
personal property in the recommended manner.
         (d)   If the owner fails to make a timely recommendation of a manner
of disposition or if that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of
disposition but the court determines to not follow the recommendation, the
court shall include in its entry of judgement an order that requires the law
enforcement agency that employs the law enforcement officer who seized the
forfeited goods or the forfeited personal property to destroy them or cause
their destruction.
   (E)   This section does not affect the rights of an owner of a trademark or
service mark, or the enforcement in a civil action or in administrative
proceedings of the rights of an owner or a trademark or service mark under the
Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127, as amended, the Trademark
Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as amended, R.C. Ch. 1329,
or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or common law.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      COUNTERFEIT MARK.
         (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this definition, the term
means a spurious trademark or a spurious service mark that satisfies both of
the following:
            1.   It is identical with or substantially indistinguishable from a
mark that is registered on the principal register in the United States Patent
and Trademark Office for the same goods or services as the goods or services to
which or in connection with which the spurious trademark or spurious service
mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise used, or from a mark that is registered
with the Secretary of State pursuant to R.C. §§ 1329.54 through 1329.67 for the
same goods or services as the goods or services to which or in connection with
which the spurious trademark or spurious service mark is attached, affixed, or
otherwise used, and the owner of the registration uses that registered
trademark, whether or not the offender knows that the mark is registered in a
manner described in this division (a)1.
            2.   Its use is likely to cause confusion or mistake or to deceive
other persons.
         (b)   The term does not include a mark or other designation that is
attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with goods or services
if the holder of the right to use the mark or other designation authorizes the
manufacturer, producer, or vendor of those goods or services to attach, affix,
or otherwise use the mark or other designation in connection with those goods
or services at the time of their manufacture, production or sale.
      CUMULATIVE SALES PRICE. Means the product of the lowest single unit sales
price charged or sought to be charged by an offender for goods to which or in
connection with which a counterfeit mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise
used or of the lowest single service transaction price charged or sought to be
charged by an offender for services in connection with which a counterfeit mark
is used, multiplied by the total number of those goods or services, whether or
not units of goods are sold or are in an offender’s possession, custody or
control.
      REGISTERED TRADEMARK OR SERVICE MARK. Means a trademark or service mark
that is registered in a manner described in division (a) of the definition of
“counterfeit mark.”
      SERVICE MARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.
      TRADEMARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.
(R.C. § 2913.34) (2000 Code, § 131.29)
§ 131.30 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C. Ch. 2981
or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Ch. 2981.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07)
§ 131.31 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (A)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply to a transaction, if all of the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 1349.17)
   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99)
§ 131.32 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (B)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      TAMPER. Means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
      UTILITY. Means any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe- line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
   (D)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees or
receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
§ 131.33 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Means the capability of a device to
record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of
any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      FACILITY. Means a movie theater.
   (B)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of motion picture
piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (D)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (E)   Division (B) above does not limit or affect the application of any
other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is a
violation of both division (B) above and another provision of this code or the
Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the other
provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this section and
the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07) (2000 Code, § 131.32)
§ 131.34 DIGGING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall dig, move, or carry away rock, bone, stone, sod, sand,
earth, tree wood, shrub, plant, or flowers in the village real property without
the written permission to do so from the Mayor, or from the majority of the
Council. No organized group shall be permitted to do any of the above without
the written permission to do so from a majority of the Council.
   (B)   The Mayor is authorized and directed to post notice signs concerning
this section immediately.
   (C)   Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(2000 Code, § 131.31) (Ord. O-13-00, passed 9-11-2000; Ord. O-11-05, passed 7-
25-2005)
§ 131.35 RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (C)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (A), (B), or
(C) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (E) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
§ 131.36 DESECRATION.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute, or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing, or site of great historical or
archaeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. A violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   As used in this section, “cemetery” means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
(R.C. § 2927.11)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
132.01   Riot
   
132.02   Failure to disperse
   
132.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
   
132.04   Disorderly conduct
   
132.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting
   
132.06   Misconduct at an emergency
   
132.07   Telecommunications harassment
   
132.08   Inducing panic
   
132.09   Making false alarms
   
132.10   Inciting to violence
   
132.11   Unlawful display of law enforcement emblem
   
132.12   Impersonating a peace officer
   
132.13   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
   
132.14   Misconduct involving a public transportation system
   
132.15   Loud noises
   
132.16   Hours of use for powered yard maintenance equipment
   
132.17   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder
Cross-reference:
   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see §
131.28
Statutory reference:
   Misuse of “Block Parent” or “McGruff House” symbol, see R.C. § 2917.46
§ 132.01 RIOT.
   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede,
or obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031)
(2000 Code, § 132.01)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
§ 132.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) below, failure to
disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (A) above creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04) (2000 Code, § 132.02)
§ 132.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (A)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (B)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05) (2000 Code, § 132.03)
§ 132.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway, or right- of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he
or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(B) above.
   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (B) above.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2) and (E)(3) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         (a)   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         (b)   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         (c)   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
         (d)   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 2917.11(B),
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation
of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2925.01.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11) (2000 Code, § 132.04)
§ 132.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession, or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive video
conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12) (2000 Code, § 132.05)
§ 132.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13) (2000 Code, § 132.06)
§ 132.07 TELECOMMUNICATIONS HARASSMENT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5), (A)(6),
(A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10), or (A)(11) or (B) above is a misdemeanor of
the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense,
which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(4) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first
offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (A)(4) above results in
economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or agent’s provision of information,
facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s,
employee’s, or agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in
accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (F)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (G)   As used in divisions (A) through (D) above:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      CALLER. Means the person described in division (A) above who makes or
causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a telecommunication to be
made from a telecommunications device under that person’s control.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means all direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         (a)   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(A)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
division (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law marital
relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who otherwise
has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date of the
alleged commission of the act in question.
      SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act,” 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act,” 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21) (2000 Code, § 132.07)
§ 132.08 INDUCING PANIC.
   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) above does not apply to any person conducting an
authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1) above is a school or an
institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. “Economic harm” as described
in this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as
a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that
constituted the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including, but not limited to,
all costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue
personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subdivision.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2133.21.
      INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)
(1), community college, state community college, university branch, or
technical college;
         (b)   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Chancellor of Higher Education pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713;
         (c)   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C. Ch.
3332.
      SCHOOL. Means any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or
serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or
radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;
         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one- quarter ounce, mine, or
similar device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
(d)1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31) (2000 Code, § 132.08)
§ 132.09 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur.
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
$1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a purported,
threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32) (2000 Code, § 132.09)
§ 132.10 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01) (2000 Code, § 132.10)
§ 132.11 UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEM.
   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441) (2000 Code, § 132.11)
§ 132.12 IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Means an employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      IMPERSONATE. Means to act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND INVESTIGATION.
Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, member
of the organized police department of a municipal corporation, or township
constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a member
of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under R.C. §
3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority
under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer appointed
under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. §
5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its
agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute,
a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and
the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory
duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose primary duties are
to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to enforce the laws,
ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions.
      PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Means any security guard, special police officer,
private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person, or search the property of any person.
   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) above that
the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or of
the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. Whoever violates divisions (C) or (D) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a violation of division (D)
above is to commit or facilitate the commission of a felony, a violation of
division (D) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Whoever violates division (E) above is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51) (2000 Code, § 132.12)
Cross-reference:
   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see §
131.28
§ 132.13 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CONCERT. Means a musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. The term
does not include any performance in which music is a part of the presentation
and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion picture, a
demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an instrument,
an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      FACILITY. Means any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including, but not
limited to, a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition
hall, convention center or music hall.
      LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Means any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. The term
does not include any form of entertainment with respect to which the person
purchasing a ticket routinely participates in amusements as well as views
performers.
      PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified in
R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Means any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         (a)   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (D) below, that is held in a restricted entertainment area, and for
which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         (b)   A concert that is not exempted under division (D) below and for
which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section or any concert as described in
division (B)(1)(b) of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only.”
   (C)   Unless exempted by division (D)(1) below, no person who owns or
operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (E)
below for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any live
entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment area and
for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or offered in
return for a donation.
   (D)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) above if both of the
following apply:
         (a)   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         (b)   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   (a)   1.   The officer responsible for public safety in the
municipality may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by
division (B) above, exempt the concert from the provisions of that division if
such officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and
spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the
provisions of that division.
            2.   In determining whether to grant an exemption, the officer
shall consider the following factors: the size and design of the facility in
which the concert is scheduled; the size, age and anticipated conduct of the
crowd expected to attend the concert; and the ability of the sponsor to manage
and control the expected crowd.
            3.   If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption
under this division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate official on a
form prescribed by that official.
            4.   The official shall issue an order that grants or denies the
exemption within five days after receipt of the application. The sponsor may
appeal any order that denies an exemption to the Court of Common Pleas of the
county in which the facility is located.
         (b)   If an official grants an exemption under division (D)(2)(a)
above, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer to be
present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders to
all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) above, in the case of a concert
held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(D)(2)(a) above in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         (b)   If the officer grants an exemption under division (D)(3)(a)
above, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to be
present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders to
all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (E)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(D)(1) above, the officer responsible for public safety within the municipality
shall designate, for purposes of division (C) above, the minimum number of
entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at each live
entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce congestion
at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as the size
and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment performance,
the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance that crowds are
expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of security provided at
the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (E)(1) above, a state university law
enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04.
   (F)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (H)   This section does not prohibit the Legislative Authority from imposing
additional requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or
holding of live entertainment performances.
   (I)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C), or (F) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to the
individual’s person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40) (2000 Code, § 132.13)
§ 132.14 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county
transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 through 306.13, a
regional transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 through
306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C. §§
306.80 through 306.90.
   (B)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (C)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (D)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (E)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (F)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (G)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of divisions (B), (C), or (F) above is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (D) above is a minor misdemeanor on a first
offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of any division of this section or of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a violation of
division (D)above is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (E) above is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the treasury of the County and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the treasury of the County.
(R.C. § 2917.41)
§ 132.15 LOUD NOISES.
   (A)   No person, firm, or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated
any whistle, rattle, bell, gong, clapper, hammer, drum, horn, player piano,
calliope, radio, phonograph, cassette player, compact disc player or other
sound-producing or sound-amplifying instrument or in any other way create noise
or sound in such manner as to disturb the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or
to interfere with the transaction of business or other ordinary pursuits.
   (B)   The usual and reasonable operation of steam railroads, electric
railroads, and motor buses, or the reasonable use of automobile warning
signals, the ringing of church bells, or the reasonable and ordinary noises
attendant on athletic contests or lawful public or semipublic meetings,
parades, or celebrations are not prohibited.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1967 Code, § 133.14) (Ord. O-10-41, passed 12-8-1941) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.16 HOURS OF USE FOR POWERED YARD MAINTENANCE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   For any commercial use of lawn mowers by the village's contract grass
maintenance crew within the village, the hours of said use will be as follows:
7:30 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. seven days a week.
   (B)   For any use of powered yard maintenance equipment such as lawn mowers,
leaf blowers, chainsaws, weed eater, etc. by residents within the village or
contractors hired by residents, the hours for said work are as follows: 7:30
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. seven days a week.
(Ord. O-2-16, passed 1-11-2016)
§ 132.17 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (A) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2903.13.
(R.C. § 2917.14)
CHAPTER 133: SEX OFFENSES
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
   
133.03   Sexual imposition
   
133.04   Public indecency
   
133.05   Voyeurism
   
133.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use
   
133.07   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire
   
133.08   Soliciting; loitering to engage in
   
133.09   Prostitution
   
133.10   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.11   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.12   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.13   Rules of evidence
   
133.14   Declaratory judgment
   
133.15   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
   
133.16   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
   
133.17   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited
   
133.18   Sexually-oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
   
133.19   Unlawful advertising of massage
   
133.20   Dissemination of statutory notices
   
133.21   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images
   
133.22   Grooming
 
   
133.99   Sentencing for sexually-oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration
Statutory reference:
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see R.C. §§ 2907.28 et seq.
   Child victim, disposition of, see R.C. § 2945.481
   Suppression of information at trial, see R.C. § 2907.11
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance describing
or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic
abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Any of the following medical professionals:
      (1)   A physician assistant licensed under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (2)   A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to practice medicine
and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and
surgery;
      (3)   A massage therapist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4731.
   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser disc,
phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing capable
of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or
text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal
display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer
hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or similar data
storage device.
   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.51.
   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   NUDITY. The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of
a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible
group, judged with reference to that group, any material or performance is
“obscene” if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance,
or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place where
a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast below the
top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity
for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to
another.
   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the
person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense,
except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the
following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01) (2000 Code, § 133.01)
§ 133.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (A)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of
age or older but less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that
regard.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) below, if the
offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04) (2000 Code, § 133.02)
§ 133.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another; cause another to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when the offender knows that the sexual contact is
offensive to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in
that regard.
   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any combination of those
sections, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree and,
notwithstanding the range of jail terms prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court
may impose on the offender a definite jail term of not more than one year.
(R.C. § 2907.06) (2000 Code, § 133.03)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 133.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the persons’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4), and (C)(5)
below.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), a violation
of division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the third degree or, if
any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct
was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person
who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person
who was likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of divisions (A)(2) or (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of divisions (A)(2) or (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of
the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of divisions (A)(2) or (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), a violation
of divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) above is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) above
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
divisions (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(5), a violation
of division (B)(4) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(4) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (D)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (B)(4) of this
section:
         (a)   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         (b)   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person
and the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (E)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)
(2000 Code, § 133.06)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
§ 133.05 VOYEURISM.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) above is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) above is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (D) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (C) above is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08) (2000 Code, § 133.05)
§ 133.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant's attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender's
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      ALLEGED JUVENILE OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
      POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Means any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      PROSECUTION. Means the prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
      SEX OFFENSE. Means a violation of any provision of §§
133.02 to
133.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10)
§ 133.07 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         (a)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         (b)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured,
patronized, or otherwise involved in a violation of division(A)(1)(b) above is
under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the
offender who violates division (A)(1)(b) above knows the prostitute’s age, or
if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in
violation of division(A)(2) above is under 18 years of age at the time of the
violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates division(A)(2) above
knows the prostitute’s age, procuring is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23) (2000 Code, § 133.07)
   (B)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         PERSON WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2905.32.
         SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. An implicit or explicit agreement to provide
sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person engaging
in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to any
person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of engaging in prostitution with a
person with a developmental disability, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In sentencing an offender under this division for a
violation of division (B)(2) of this section, the court shall require the
offender to attend an education or treatment program aimed at preventing
persons from inducing, enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual
activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything of value to the
other person. Notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a) for
a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing an offender under this
division for a violation of division (B)(2) of this section, the court may
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231)
§ 133.08 SOLICITING; LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
   (E)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (F)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (E) of this section.
   (G)   As used in division (E) above:
      PUBLIC PLACE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (a) of this definition.
         (c)   A place not described in division (a) or (b) of this definition
that is open to the public.
      VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (H)   (1)   Whoever violates division (F) above is guilty of loitering to
engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
(2000 Code, § 133.08)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.09 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25) (2000 Code, § 133.09)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.10 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license, or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) above, mistake of age is not
a defense to a charge under this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31)
   (F)   Presumptions, notice and defense.
      (1)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager,
of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged
in selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by this section is presumed to have knowledge
of the character of the material or performance involved if the owner, manager,
or agent or employee of the owner or manager has actual notice of the nature of
such material or performance, whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or
employee of the owner or manager has precise knowledge of its contents.
      (2)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. Such notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.
      (3)   This §
133.10 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
      (4)   (a)   The provisions of §§
133.10,
133.11 and
133.12(A) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
         (b)   Division (F)(4)(a) above does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §
133.10,
133.11, or
133.12 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
         (c)   Division (F)(4)(a) above does not apply to a person who provides
access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of §
133.10,
133.11, or
133.12 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
      (5)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §
133.10,
133.11, or
133.12 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
         (a)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the
employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
         (b)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
      (6)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §
133.10 or
133.11 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35)
(2000 Code, § 133.10)
§ 133.11 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) above if the material in
question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar devices
that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the material in
question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the material in
question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that is harmful to
juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2907.311) (2000 Code, § 133.11)
Cross-reference:
   Presumptions, notice, and defense, see §
133.10(F)
§ 133.12 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (B) above shall be adjudged an unruly child, with the
disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Ch. 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33) (2000 Code, § 133.12)
Cross-reference:
   Presumptions, notice and defense, see §
133.10(F)
Statutory reference:
   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Ch. 2151
§ 133.13 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation
of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of
whether such place is or is not a brothel.
   (B)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the
question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
   (C)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
133.07 through
133.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (D)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a
husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and the
accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
133.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
133.08(A) or §
133.09.
(R.C. § 2907.26) (2000 Code, § 133.13)
§ 133.14 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Ch. 2721, involving the same
issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(A) above is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the merits within
five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render judgment
within five days after trial is concluded.
   (C)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (A) above
shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or criminal
prosecution when the character of the particular materials or performances
involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (D)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (E)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36) (2000 Code, § 133.14)
§ 133.15 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation. The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to
trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the
court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (B)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or
R.C. § 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Ch. 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37) (2000 Code, § 133.15)
Statutory reference:
   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles, felony, see R.C. § 2907.31
   Pandering obscenity, felony, see R.C. § 2907.32
§ 133.16 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Means an entity that is open to the public and
to which either of the following applies:
         (a)   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances
depicting sexual conduct.
         (b)   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental, or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES. Means films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video, or other motion pictures.
   (B)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any aperture, hole, or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge,
or other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or
performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38) (2000 Code, § 133.17)
§ 133.17 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ADULT ARCADE. Means any place to which the public is permitted or invited
in which coin- operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
         (a)   Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         (b)   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. §
2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials exhibiting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle
club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages
are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity;
         (b)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals, or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or semi-nude model studio, or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not
limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an
“adult entertainment establishment”.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      ADULT THEATER. Means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON. Means the dominant
or principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so described are
those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      NUDE OR SEMI-NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or semi-nudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or semi-nude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         (a)   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         (b)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         (c)   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or semi-nudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or semi-nude model
is on the premises at any one time.
      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY. Means the showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. Means a consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      SEMI-NUDE or STATE OF SEMI- NUDITY. Means a state of dress in which
opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple of
the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISH MENT.
         (a)   Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or semi-nude for the purpose
of displaying their nude or semi-nude bodies for their receipt of consideration
or compensation in any type or form.
         (b)   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a “sexual
encounter establishment”.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male
or female genitals, or the female breast.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         (b)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of
the activities described in division (a) of this definition.
   (B)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including, but not
limited to, a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on
the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (C)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (D)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (B)
above if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or, in a
nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a preponderance of
the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor made a
bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance
to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification
presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the
identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the
identification had not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (E)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (D) above is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the deputy
registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or deputy
registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of permitting a
juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division constitutes a
separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of use by a juvenile
of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39) (2000 Code, § 133.18)
§ 133.18 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Means a commercial establishment
that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or
inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of an
item.
      EMPLOYEE. Means any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually- oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      NUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      OPERATOR. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually-oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      PATRON. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually-oriented
business except for any of the following:
         (a)   An operator or an employee of the sexually-oriented business;
         (b)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         (c)   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      PREMISES. Means the real property on which the sexually-oriented business
is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but not
limited, to the sexually-oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and
parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually-
oriented business.
      REGULARLY. Means consistently or repeatedly.
      SEMI-NUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      SEXUAL DEVICE. Means any three- dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts
or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including, but not
limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the
human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. Means a commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. Means a business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
semi-nude.
      SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS. Means an adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or sexual
encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of its
showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic region, and
buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
      STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      STATE OF SEMI-NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
   (B)   No sexually-oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually-
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C. Ch. 4303 may
remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer, or allow sexually-oriented entertainment activity in which the
performers appear nude.
   (C)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or semi- nude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or semi-nude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or semi-nude on the premises
of a sexually- oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually-
oriented business and while nude or semi- nude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of illegally operating a
sexually-oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of illegal sexually-
oriented activity in a sexually- oriented business. If the offender touches a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) above is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a specified anatomical area
of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a specified anatomical
area, a violation of division (C) above is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55
§ 133.19 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17)
§ 133.20 DISSEMINATION OF STATUTORY NOTICES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police, upon receipt of the notice from the county
sheriff or the Ohio Attorney General pursuant to R.C. § 2950.11, or the
administrative regulations adopted under authority of R.C. § 2950.13
(hereinafter “2950 notice”), in addition to any notice required under R.C. Ch.
2950 of the Revised Code and any regulations adopted thereunder, shall provide
a copy of the 2950 notice to all residences located within a radius of 500 feet
of the address listed within the 2950 notice of the residence of the sexual
predator or habitual sex offender. The Chief of Police shall send such notice
within 72 hours of the receipt of the 2950 notice from the County Sheriff or
Ohio Attorney General. The delivery of this notice may be accomplished by
personal delivery to a principal adult occupant of the residences in the area
described above, or by mailing a copy of the notice by ordinary U.S. mail
addressed to the owner or principal occupant of the residences in the affected
areas as such owner or principal occupant is identified within the business
records maintained by the Police Department.
   (B)   As a public record, the Chief of Police also is authorized to release
a copy of the 2950 notice to a newspaper in general circulation within the
village community which regularly receives crime reports or statistics from the
Police Department.
   (C)   The procedure set forth herein is not intended to create a cause of
action against any official, administrative officer, employee, or agent of the
village, nor is the procedure adopted herein intended in any way to impact the
immunity extended to such persons pursuant to R.C. § 2950.12. Such statutory
immunity is reserved to all protected individuals and organizations as outlined
in R.C. § 2950.12 or successor statute. As a public record subject to
publication and disclosure, this section is intended to provide a procedure for
effectively disseminating the public information provided to the Police
Department concerning sexual predators or habitual sex offenders residing
within the community. The procedure adopted herein is intended to ensure
appropriate public safety, and it is not intended to create any obligation upon
the Police Department nor any official or employee of the village to
disseminate such information or to crate liability for the failure to
disseminate such information in a timely and complete manner.
(2000 Code, § 133.16) (Ord. O-12-02, passed 8-26- 2002)
§ 133.21 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. §
303, as amended.
      DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer device,
computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or other
depiction or portrayal of a person.
      INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      INTERNET PROVIDER. Means a provider of internet service, including all of
the following:
         (a)   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         (b)   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         (c)   Internet protocol- enabled services, as defined in R.C. §
4927.01.
      MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended.
      SEXUAL ACT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sexual activity;
         (b)   Masturbation;
         (c)   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         (d)   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153,
as amended.
      VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (D)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (E)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(1)(b), (F)(1)
(c), or (F)(1)(d) of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is
a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of
private sexual images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (d)   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         (a)   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         (b)   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (G)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
§ 133.22 GROOMING.
   (A)   As used in this section, PATTERN OF CONDUCT has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2903.211.
   (B)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor who is less than 16 years of age and who is four or more
years younger than the person, when the pattern of conduct would cause a
reasonable adult person to believe that the person is communicating with the
minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (C)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor if the person and the minor are in any of the
relationships described in R.C. § 2907.03(A)(5) to (A)(13), when the pattern of
conduct would cause a reasonable adult person to believe that the person is
communicating with the minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person's purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of grooming.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age or if the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age and if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense
or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the
offense, a violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually
oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense and the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a
violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of
age or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim
oriented offense, a violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less
than 13 years of age and if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or
a child-victim oriented offense or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of
abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of division (C) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the this code or the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under this section or any other section of this code or the
Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the other section of
this code or the Revised Code, or both sections.
(R.C. § 2907.071)
§ 133.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY- ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (A)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually-oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C. §
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C. §
2901.07.
   (B)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually-oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and
2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender,
at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required
under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in
that section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall
perform the duties specified in that division.
(2000 Code, § 133.99) (R.C. § 2929.23)
CHAPTER 134: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
134.01   Definitions
   
134.02   Prohibitions against gambling; exception
   
134.03   Operating a gambling house
   
134.04   Public gaming
   
134.05   Cheating
   
134.06   Regulations concerning operation of licensed bingo game
   
134.07   Records to be kept
   
134.08   Requirements for bingo game operators
   
134.09   Bingo games for amusement only
   
134.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
   
134.11   Raffle drawings
   
134.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
   
134.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
   
134.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
   
134.15   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct
Statutory reference:
   Conducting an illegal bingo game, felony, see R.C. § 2915.07
   Licensing bingo games by Attorney General, see R.C. § 2915.08
   Licensing distributors of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §
2915.081
   Licensing manufacturers of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §
2915.082
§ 134.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with
each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a
letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free
space;
         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who performs
work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to collecting
money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover
spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that
contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or
sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing
prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, selling or
redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers, accessing an
electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant, supervising the
operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets
from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and
preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. BINGO GAME OPERATOR does not
include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or repairing an
electronic instant bingo system.
   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in this section,
instant bingo, and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are "bingo supplies" are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Ch. 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, "bingo supplies" are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals, and
businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(6).
   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2) of
the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a charitable
organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08 and the
proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and
is a charitable organization as defined in this section. The term does not
include a charitable organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and that is created by a
veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in
regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means either of the following:
         (a)   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or
otherwise transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC §§ 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2),
or 509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the Ohio
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC § 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or prepare
for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a
sweepstakes.
   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of electronic
instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does
either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   An electronic device used by a participant to monitor bingo cards
or sheets purchased at the time and place of a bingo session and that does all
of the following:
         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant
to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   The term does not include any device into which a coin, currency,
token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant's electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         (b)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         (c)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         (d)   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo
ticket, the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         (e)   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate
an entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         (f)   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   The term shall not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, "video lottery terminal" has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         (b)   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         (c)   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         (b)   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran's or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of
the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Ch. 2915.
   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a board or
placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to produce
income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not
include bingo.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section
plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in
division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the
payment of prize awards.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a person
receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or
for the expenses of conducting bingo. The term does not include any money
directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a
railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or
paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as
prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined
by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card
or bingo blower. "Instant bingo" also includes a punch board game. In all
"instant bingo" the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term
does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated by
the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains
as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying
numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non- winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE (IRC). The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw
materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR ELECTRONIC
INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable
expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose of
conducting instant bingo or electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran's, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm or any
other legal entity, however organized.
   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a number
of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and
randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from
the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper
from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if
the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board
includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or
more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the
raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from
a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to
all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the drawing of a
ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a
professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other noncash
representation of value.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that is
not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership for
regular worship and religious observances.
   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a
license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Ch. 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Ch. 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for profit,
or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration for a
chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based amusement
machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance” includes the
use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry if valuable
consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win a prize.
Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a prize in the
following instances:
         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of
chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by
participants at any one location;
         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than
20% of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain
any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic
device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors. "Electronic
device" does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or symbols.
   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a Sheriff, deputy
sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 through 109.79 and
who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill- based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill- based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined
by game features not visible or known to the player;
         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         (a)   As used in this definition of “skill- based amusement machine”,
GAME and PLAY mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until
the results of play are determined without payment of additional consideration.
An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest,
competition, or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes based on the results of play.
         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play.
         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest,
competition, or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a
defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in competition for
scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest,
competition, or tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill- based amusement machine.
   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Either of the following:
         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   The term does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization, other
than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for
profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization,
including, but not limited to, the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and that has been
in continuous existence in this state for a period of three years.
   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Ch. 2915,
pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Ch. 3769, lotteries conducted by the
State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Ch. 3770, and casino gaming as
authorized by R.C. Ch. 3772.
   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
134.02:
         ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize
offered in a sweepstakes.
         ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward, or
any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this state where
a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant, except
as provided in §
134.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Any individual post or state headquarters of a national veteran’s
association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a national veteran’s
association, which post, state headquarters, or auxiliary unit is incorporated
as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a letter from the state
headquarters of the national veteran’s association indicating that the
individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with the national
veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national veteran’s
association indicating that the state headquarters is in good standing with the
national veteran’s association.
      (2)   As used in this definition, NATIONAL VETERAN’S ASSOCIATION means
any veteran’s association that has been in continuous existence as such for a
period of at least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the
United States Congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least
5,000 persons.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.
   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as defined
in R.C. § 4765.01.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit,
that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or
to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or younger
by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support
of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         (a)   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support of an
athletic team, club, league, or association.
         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity
at any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01) (2000 Code, § 134.01)
§ 134.02 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST GAMBLING; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use
in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or
with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         (a)   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         (b)   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate divisions (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
(A)(5), or (A)(6) above acquire, possess, control, or operate any gambling
device.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A)(1) above, a person facilitates bookmaking
if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking operation,
including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged in or
facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (A)(2) above, a
person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme of chance
if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation of any such
game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such game or scheme.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         (b)   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)
(3).
         (c)   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable organization
shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that
exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may
pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         (d)   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3).
         (e)   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (E)   Division (D) above shall not be construed to authorize the sale,
lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct games
of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization that is
granted that right.
   (F)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (G)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         (a)   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         (b)   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         (c)   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Ch. 3770 will be conducted at the business location or in
an adjoining area of the business location;
         (d)   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         (e)   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         (f)   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semi-annual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (F) above or the semi-annual report
required by division (G) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.02(A) through (G), (K)) (2000 Code, § 134.02)
§ 134.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. §
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of operating a gambling
house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Ch. 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03) (2000 Code, § 134.03)
§ 134.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (A)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (A) above.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) above do not prohibit conduct in connection with
gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) above
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Ch. 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04) (2000 Code, § 134.04)
§ 134.05 CHEATING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of cheating.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is $1,000 or more or if
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense or of any
theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of corrupting sports.
Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05) (2000 Code, § 134.05)
§ 134.06 REGULATIONS CONCERNING OPERATION OF LICENSED BINGO GAME.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) below, use all of
the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement of expenses
for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for reimbursement of
expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used in conducting
bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security personnel, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for reimbursement of
other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition for “expenses” in
R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so spent is not more
than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase, lease, hiring,
advertising, or expense. If the building in which bingo is conducted is owned
by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the bingo conducted
includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo”
in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct from the total amount
of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to the lesser of $600 or
45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in that division as
consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size, and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a charitable
organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is
empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per calendar
week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than
nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), conduct more
than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer firefighter’s
organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that conducts not more
than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more than three bingo
sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney General when it
will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo.
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Ch.
119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include a
requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) below, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) prohibits an employee of a fraternal
organization, veteran’s organization, or sporting organization from selling
instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or invited guests,
as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid from any receipts
of bingo.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) above, a charitable organization that,
prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of
premises it owns to another charitable organization or other charitable
organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that more than two bingo
sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises, and a person that is
not a charitable organization and that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered
into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns to charitable
organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions per calendar
week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those charitable
organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are conducted per
calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has notified the Attorney
General in writing of the organizations that will conduct the sessions and the
days of the week and the times of the day on which the sessions will be
conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each organization that will
conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General prior to December 6,
1977, and that each organization that will conduct the sessions was issued a
license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General prior to December 6,
1977.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) above is guilty of illegally
conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates divisions (A)
(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D) above is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of
a violation of divisions (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through
(C)(11), or (D) above, a violation of divisions (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D)above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Whoever violates division (C)(12) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (C)(12) above, a violation of division (C)(12) above is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09) (2000 Code, § 134.06)
§ 134.07 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), R.C. § 2915.02(D), or R.C. § 2915.101,
a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each
purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C. § 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (B)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (A) above at its principal place of business
in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify the
Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (C)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in
divisions (1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be
deposited into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or
game. Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session
or game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the
bingo session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers
drawn on the bingo session or game account.
   (D)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (E)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Ch. 119
that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and reporting to ensure
that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted for.
   (F)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (G)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (H)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games
of chance;
         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (I)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.
   (J)   Whoever violates divisions (A) or (I) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10) (2000 Code, § 134.07)
§ 134.08 REQUIREMENTS FOR BINGO GAME OPERATORS.
   (A)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11) (2000 Code, § 134.08)
§ 134.09 BINGO GAMES FOR AMUSEMENT ONLY.
   (A)   Sections
134.06 through
134.13 and
134.15 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (A)(1) or
(A)(2) of this section.
      (1)   (a)   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         (b)   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.
         (c)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (d)   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten
hours of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in R.C. §
2915.01(O)(2).
         (e)   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   (a)   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         (b)   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.
         (c)   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to
cover spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay
winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         (d)   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.
         (e)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (f)   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.15 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).
         (g)   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         (h)   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (B)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either divisions
(A)(1) or (A)(2) above. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by action in
the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement agency
gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12) (2000 Code, § 134.09)
§ 134.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         (a)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in
compliance with R.C. Ch. 1716;
         (b)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC § 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under
R.C. § 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling,
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   (a)   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo
game operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo
tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are
working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         (b)   Division (A)(12)(a) above does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Ch. 2915.
   (B)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (C)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Ch. 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) above or a rule adopted under division
(C) above is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (A) above or of such a rule adopted under division (C) above,
illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091) (2000 Code, § 134.10)
§ 134.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         (a)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         (c)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (A)(1)(c) of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state,
or any political subdivision.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (B) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092) (2000 Code, § 134.11)
§ 134.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services,
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (B)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (F) below, no charitable instant bingo
organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session at a
location where the primary source of retail income from all commercial activity
at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (B) above shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items provided for
in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (4)   As used in this division, FULL GROSS PROFIT means the amount by
which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal has been
sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all prizes were
redeemed.
   (E)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (B) above with an owner or lessor of
a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (B) above with a new owner or lessor of a
location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Ch. 2915.
   (F)   Division (C) above does not apply to a volunteer firefighter’s
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo other than at a bingo
session on the premises where the organization conducts firefighter training,
that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at least five years prior to
July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five years, had gross receipts of
at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (G)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran's organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         (b)   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         (c)   The veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC §
509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written
contract with that organization as required in division (G)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing
in this state, the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is
described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order
to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo. That contract shall
include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran's,
fraternal, or sporting organization will be distributing to the organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this
state.
      (3)   (a)   If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation, or cancellation if the veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         (b)   No veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (G)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (G) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(2000 Code, § 134.12) (R.C. § 2915.13)
§ 134.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (A)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (B)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (C)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) above shall violate any provision of this chapter
or R.C. Ch. 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Ch. 2915.
   (D)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) above shall violate the terms of the contract.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (C) or (D) above is guilty of illegal
instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of divisions (C) or (D) above,
illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates divisions (C) or (D) above, any license that the owner or
lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or lessor’s
premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is subject to
suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the request of the
Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094) (2000 Code, § 134.13)
§ 134.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(1), (2), (3), or (4) of the definition for “merchandise prize” in §
134.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward
for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or
reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of skill-based amusement
machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A) above is a misdemeanor
of the first degree for each redemption of a prize that is involved in the
violation. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (A) above, a violation of that division is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.06)
   (C)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.
(R.C. § 2915.061)
§ 134.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran's organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran's organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran's organization described in IRC § 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), and is described in
IRC § 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization's type II or type III license issued
under R.C. §
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization's principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         (a)   The charitable organization's bingo license;
         (b)   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(12)(b) of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         (b)   Division (B)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit an
employee of a veteran's organization or fraternal organization from redeeming
electronic instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization's members or
invited guests, so long as no portion of the employee's compensation is paid
from any bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (D)   Whoever knowingly violates division (A), (B), or (C) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Negligent homicide
   
135.03   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault
   
135.04   Assault; negligent assault
   
135.05   Injury to persons by hunters
   
135.06   Menacing; aggravated menacing; menacing by stalking
   
135.07   Unlawful restraint
   
135.08   [Reserved]
   
135.09   Coercion
   
135.10   Bigamy
   
135.11   Illegal use of a tracking device or application
   
135.12   Misrepresentation relating to provision of child care
   
135.13   Nonsupport of dependents
   
135.14   Endangering children
   
135.15   Interference with custody; interference with support orders
   
135.16   Domestic violence
   
135.17   Hazing prohibited
   
135.18   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child
   
135.19   Failure to provide for a person with a functional impairment
   
135.20   Patient abuse or neglect; patient endangerment; exceptions; false
statements; retaliation
   
135.21   Interference with right of person to engage in housing transactions
because of race, religion, or the like
   
135.22   Ethnic intimidation
   
135.23   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state
   
135.24   Adulteration of food
   
135.25   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans
   
135.26   Nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly
   
135.27   Spreading contagion
   
135.28   Abuse of a corpse
   
135.29   Unlawful collection of bodily substances
Statutory reference:
   Child care, misrepresentations by providers and failure to disclose death or
serious injuries, misdemeanors, see R.C. §§ 2919.223 et seq.
   Extortionate extension of credit, see R.C. §§ 2905.21 through 2905.24
   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
   Rights of victims of crimes, see R.C. Ch. 2930
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of §§
135.01 through
135.06, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ANOTHER’S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. A member of the species Homo
sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
      UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of an
unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of
another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins with
fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, in no case shall the definitions
of the terms “another’s unborn”, “other person’s unborn” and “unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy” that are set forth in division (A) above be
applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(1) above, in a manner
so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any pregnant woman
or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of the pregnant
woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a medical
emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to consent
to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that violates
the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be punished
as any violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05,
2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that
does not violate the conditions described in the second immediately preceding
sentence but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151,
2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be
punished as a violation of such section, as applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         (a)   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         (b)   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
         (c)   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         (d)   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         (e)   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09) (2000 Code, § 135.01)
§ 135.02 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05) (2000 Code, § 135.02)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
§ 135.03 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, snowmobile, locomotive,
watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another's pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   As the proximate result of committing an OVI offense.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Recklessly;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided
that this division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose
pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of
the offender's commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Negligently;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender's
commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply
as described in division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is guilty of
aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) above is guilty of vehicular
manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular manslaughter is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the offense, the offender
was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Ch. 4510 or
any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C.
§ 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter,
or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, any
traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, or a traffic-
related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class four
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (A)(3)(b) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) above do not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 in
a particular construction zone in accordance with those guidelines and design
specifications does not limit or affect the application of divisions (A)(1),
(A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a), or (A)(4) above in that construction zone or the
prosecution of any person who violates any of those divisions in that
construction zone.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section:
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MINI-TRUCK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         OVI OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), a violation R.C.
§ 1547.11(A), a violation of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Means a
violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that
section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT, OR ATTEMPTED MURDER
OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 in circumstances
in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the
violation, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the
deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an
attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
         UTILITY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06) (2000 Code, § 135.03)
   (F)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, or mini-truck, shall cause serious
physical harm to another person or another's unborn as the proximate result of
committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor
vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, or motorcycle in a construction zone, a
speeding offense, provided that this division applies only if the person to
whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious
physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender's commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (F)(4) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (F)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (F)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (F)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (F)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (F)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (F):
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (F), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
   Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 135.04 ASSAULT; NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (A)   Assault.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to another or to another’s unborn.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another
or to another’s unborn.
      (3)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is guilty of
assault. Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (4)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when
it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment, or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
      (5)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of
the Ohio Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of
behavior that can be prosecuted under division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section and also is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct involving the same
victim that was the basis of the violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import under R.C. §
2941.25.
(R.C. § 2903.13)
   (B)   Negligent assault.
      (1)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another
or to another’s unborn.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) above is guilty of negligent
assault, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14)
(2000 Code, § 135.04)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see R.C. § 2903.08
   Felony assault offenses, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
   Strangulation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.18
§ 135.05 INJURY TO PERSONS BY HUNTERS.
   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing a wild
animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to injure
persons.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 135.05)
Statutory Reference:
   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) through (E)
§ 135.06 MENACING; AGGRAVATED MENACING; MENACING BY STALKING.
   (A)   Menacing.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person's belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person's unborn, or a member of the other person's immediate
family, the other person's belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
         (b)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
            1.   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person's specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
            2.   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker
of an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know
that the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder, and it is the person's specific purpose to engage
in the specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder's official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense
related to the officer's or employee's performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or to the responder's performance of the
responder's official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this section does
not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (A) of this section or any other section of
the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (A) of this section, the
other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or both sections. However, if an
offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of
this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. §
2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance, based on the same
conduct involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of
division (A) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         CO-WORKER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
         EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
   (B)   Aggravated menacing.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, such other person’s unborn, or a member of such other person’s
immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief
that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of
the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) above is guilty of aggravated
menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(2), aggravated
menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is
an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child
placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties,
aggravated menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law
or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an
offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency,
and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   As used in this division (B), ORGANIZATION includes an entity that
is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.21)
   (C)   Menacing by stalking.
      (1)   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         (b)   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (C)(1)(a) of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (C)
(1)(a) of this section.
         (c)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate divisions (C)
(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) above.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) above is guilty of menacing by
stalking.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) above,
menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under divisions (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)
(b), or (C)(1)(c) above, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under divisions (C)
(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) above, a third person induced by the offender’s posted
message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under divisions (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)
(b), or (C)(1)(c) above, the offender trespassed on the land or premises where
the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an offense
committed under divisions (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) above, a third person induced
by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or premises where the
victim lives, is employed, or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a) above or
a violation of divisions (C)(1)(c) above based on conduct in violation of
division (C)(1)(a) above, the offender had a deadly weapon on or about the
offender’s person or under the offender’s control. This division (C)(2)(b)6.
does not apply in determining the penalty for a violation of division (C)(1)(b)
above or a violation of division (C)(1)(c) above based on conduct in violation
of division (C)(1)(b) above.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or R.C. §
2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the
order is the victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)
(b),or (C)(1)(c) above, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (C)(1)(b) above or an
offense committed under division (C)(1)(c) above based on a violation of
division (C)(1)(b) above, a third person induced by the offender’s posted
message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that real property, or
any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then- present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
      (4)   As used in this division (C):
         COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER NETWORK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
         EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section is committed is
the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         MENTAL DISTRESS. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Means two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more  persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions
or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s, or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including, but not limited to, a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct.”
         PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived
with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this
section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         POST A MESSAGE. Means transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating
another.
         PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
         SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
         TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         THIRD PERSON. Means, in relation to conduct as described in division
(C)(1)(b) above, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim of
the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under this
division (C) that a person requested or received psychiatric treatment,
psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to show that
the person was caused mental distress as described in division (2) of the
definition for “mental distress” in this section.
      (6)   (a)   This division (C) does not apply to a person solely because
the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that it believes is or will
be sent in violation of this division (C).
         (b)   Division (C)(6)(a) above does not create an affirmative duty for
any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block the
receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes
is or will be sent in violation of this division (C) except as otherwise
provided by law.
         (c)   Division (C)(6)(a) above does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this division (C) or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211)
(2000 Code, § 135.06)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
Statutory reference:
   Authority of corporations to seek protection orders in certain
circumstances, see R.C. § 2903.215
   Conditions of bail for violators, see R.C. § 2903.212
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
§ 135.07 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person’s liberty.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2971.01.
(R.C. § 2905.03) (2000 Code, § 135.07)
§ 135.08 [RESERVED]
§ 135.09 COERCION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom of choice,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage any person’s personal or
business repute, or to impair any person’s credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which the accused is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing a community control sanction on certain conditions,
including without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or
redress to the victim of the offense.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3), (A)
(4), or (A)(5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable
response to the circumstances which occasioned it, and that the actor’s purpose
was limited to any of the following:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      THREAT. Includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12) (2000 Code, § 135.09)
§ 135.10 BIGAMY.
   (A)   No married person shall marry another or continue to cohabit with such
other person in this municipality.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor’s spouse was continuously absent for five years immediately preceding the
purported subsequent marriage, and was not known by the actor to be alive
within that time.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of bigamy, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.01) (2000 Code, § 135.10)
§ 135.11 ILLEGAL USE OF A TRACKING DEVICE OR APPLICATION.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      BUSINESS ENTITY. Means any form of corporation, partnership, association,
cooperative, joint venture, business trust, or sole proprietorship that
conducts business in this state.
      BUSINESS OF PRIVATE INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4749.01.
      DISABLED ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      ELDERLY PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means any organization or unit comprised of law
enforcement officers, and also includes any federal or military law enforcement
agency.
      OHIO PROTECTION ORDER. Means a protection order filed or issued or a
consent agreement approved pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31, a protection
order filed or issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, or 2903.214, or a
no contact order issued as any of the following:
         (a)   As part of a person's sentence under a community control
sanction imposed under R.C. § 2929.16, 2929.17, 2929.26, or 2929.27;
         (b)   As a term or condition of a person's release under R.C. §
2929.20;
         (c)   As a post-release control sanction imposed as a condition of a
person's post-release control under R.C. § 2967.28;
         (d)   As a term of supervision for a person transferred to
transitional control under R.C. § 2967.26;
         (e)   As a term or condition of the intervention plan of a person
granted intervention in lieu of conviction under R.C. § 2951.041.
      PERSON. Means an individual, but does not include a business entity.
      PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4749.01.
      PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE. Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2919.27.
      TRACKING APPLICATION. Means any software program that permits a person to
remotely determine or track the position or movement of another person or
another person's property.
      TRACKING DEVICE. Means an electronic or mechanical device that permits a
person to remotely determine or track the position or movement of another
person or another person's property, including an electronic monitoring device.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D) of this section, no
person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Install a tracking device or tracking application on another
person's property without the other person's consent or cause a tracking device
or tracking application to track the position or movement of another person or
another person's property without the other person's consent;
      (2)   If the person installed a tracking device or tracking application
on another's property with the other person's consent and the other person
subsequently revokes that consent, fail to remove or ensure the removal of the
device or application after the other person revokes the consent.
   (C)   (1)   For purposes of this section, if a person has given consent for
another to install a tracking device or tracking application on the consenting
person's property, it is presumed that the consenting person has revoked that
consent if any of the following applies:
         (a)   The consenting person and the person to whom consent was given
are lawfully married and one of them files a complaint for divorce or a
petition for dissolution of marriage from the other. Not later than 72 hours
after being served with a complaint for divorce or a petition for dissolution
of marriage, the person to whom consent was given shall lawfully uninstall or
discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application. If the person
to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the
tracking device or tracking application, the person to whom consent was given
shall notify the court in which the complaint for divorce or the petition for
dissolution of marriage was filed in writing.
         (b)   The consenting person or the person to whom consent was given
files an Ohio protection order against the other person or an Ohio protection
order is issued against the other person, and the person to be protected under
the order is the consenting person. Not later than 72 hours after being served
with the Ohio protection order, the person to whom consent was given shall
lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking
application. If the person to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall
or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application, the person
to whom consent was given shall notify the court that issued the Ohio
protection order in writing that the person to whom consent was given has
installed or is using a tracking device or tracking application on the
previously consenting person's person or the person's property and cannot
uninstall or discontinue its use without violating the Ohio protection order.
      (2)   Revocation of consent under this division is effective upon the
service of the petition or motion or an Ohio protection order.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer, or any law enforcement agency, that
installs a tracking device or tracking application on another person's property
or causes a tracking device or tracking application to track the position or
movement of another person or another person's property as part of a criminal
investigation, or a probation officer, parole officer, or employee of the
department of rehabilitation and correction, a halfway house, or a community-
based correctional facility when engaged in the lawful performance of the
officer's or employee's official duties;
      (2)   A parent or legal guardian of a minor child who installs or uses a
tracking device or tracking application to track the minor child if any of the
following applies:
         (a)   The parents or legal guardians of the child are lawfully married
to each other and are not separated or otherwise living apart, and either of
those parents or legal guardians consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application;
         (b)   The parent or legal guardian of the child is the sole surviving
parent or legal guardian of the child;
         (c)   The parent or legal guardian of the child has sole custody of
the child;
         (d)   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart and neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and both consent to the installation of the tracking device or tracking
application;
         (e)   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart, neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and either only one parent consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application or one parent revokes consent, if the consenting
parent only uses the tracking device or tracking application during that
parent's parenting or custodial time and disables or removes the tracking
device or application during the nonconsenting parent's parenting or custodial
time.
      (3)   A caregiver of an elderly person or disabled adult, if the elderly
person's or disabled adult's treating physician certifies that the installation
of a tracking device or tracking application onto the elderly person's or
disabled adult's property is necessary to ensure the safety of the elderly
person or disabled adult;
      (4)   A person acting in good faith on behalf of a business entity for a
legitimate business purpose, provided that this division does not apply to a
private investigator engaged in the business of private investigation on behalf
of another person;
      (5)   (a)   A private investigator or other person licensed under R.C. §
4749.03, who is acting in the normal course of the investigator's business of
private investigation on behalf of another person and who has the consent of
the owner of the property upon which the tracking device or tracking
application is installed, for the purpose of obtaining information with
reference to any of the following:
            1.   Criminal offenses committed, threatened, or suspected against
the United States, a territory of the United States, a state, or any person or
legal entity;
            2.   Locating an individual known to be a fugitive from justice;
            3.   Locating lost or stolen property or other assets that have
been awarded by the court;
            4.   Investigating claims related to workers' compensation.
         (b)   This division does not apply if the person on whose behalf the
private investigator is working is the subject of an Ohio protection order or a
protection order issued by a court of another state or if the private
investigator knows or reasonably should know that the person on whose behalf
the private investigator is working seeks the investigator's services to aid in
the commission of a crime.
      (6)   An owner or lessee of a motor vehicle who installs, or directs the
installation of, a tracking device or tracking application on the vehicle
during the period of ownership or lease, if any of the following applies:
         (a)   The tracking device or tracking application is removed before
the vehicle's title is transferred or the vehicle's lease expires;
         (b)   The new owner of the vehicle, in the case of a sale, or the
lessor of the vehicle, in the case of an expired lease, consents in writing to
the non-removal of the tracking device or tracking application;
         (c)   The owner of the vehicle at the time of the installation of the
tracking device or tracking application was the original manufacturer of the
vehicle.
      (7)   A person who installs a tracking device or application on property
in which the person has an ownership or contractual interest, unless the person
is the subject of a protective order and the property is likely to be used by
the person who obtained the protective order;
      (8)   A person or business entity that installs a tracking device or
tracking application on any fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft operated or
managed by the person or business entity pursuant to 14 C.F.R. part 91 or part
135 to track the position or movement of the fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft;
      (9)   A surety bail bond agent, or any employee or contractor of a surety
bail bond agent, that installs a tracking device or tracking application on
another person's property or causes a tracking device or tracking application
to track the position or movement of another person or another person's
property as part of the surety bail bond agent's, employee's, or contractor's
official responsibilities or duties.
   (E)   For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section, a probation officer,
parole officer, or employee of the department of rehabilitation and correction,
a halfway house, or a community-based correctional facility is engaged in the
lawful performance of the officer's or employee's duties if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The court or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction
imposes electronic monitoring on a person.
      (2)   The officer or employee installs or uses an electronic monitoring
device on that person in accordance with the court's or department's imposition
of electronic monitoring of that person.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal use of a tracking
device or application.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(2) of this section,
illegal use of a tracking device or application is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Illegal use of a tracking device or application is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law if any of the following applies:
         (a)   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2903.216, or R.C. § 2903.211 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether the person to be protected under the order is the victim
of the offense or another person.
         (c)   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
         (d)   The offender has a history of violence toward the victim or a
history of other violent acts towards the victim.
(R.C. § 2903.216)
§ 135.12 MISREPRESENTATION RELATING TO PROVISION OF CHILD CARE.
   (A)   No child care provider shall knowingly misrepresent any factor or
condition that relates to the provision of child care and that substantially
affects the health or safety of any child or children in that provider's
facility or receiving child care from that provider to any of the following:
      (1)   A parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the
care of a child in the provider's facility or receiving child care from the
provider;
      (2)   A parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the
care of a child who is considering the provider as a child care provider for
the child;
      (3)   A public official responsible for issuing the provider a license or
certificate to provide child care;
      (4)   A public official investigating or inquiring about the provision of
child care by the provider;
      (5)   A peace officer.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, "any factor or condition that
relates to the provision of child care" includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   The person or persons who will provide child care to the child of
the parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the care of
the child, or to the children in general;
      (2)   The qualifications to provide child care of the child care
provider, of a person employed by the provider, or of a person who provides
child care as a volunteer;
      (3)   The number of children to whom child care is provided at one time
or the number of children receiving child care in the child care facility at
one time;
      (4)   The conditions or safety features of the child care facility;
      (5)   The area of the child care facility in which child care is
provided.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
misrepresentation by a child care provider, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.224)
§ 135.13 NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   The person's spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   The person's child who is under age 18, or the persons's child with
a mental or physical disability who is under age 21;
      (3)   The person's aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from
lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for the parent's own
support.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         (a)   Is legally obligated to support; or
         (b)   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (B)(1)(b) of this section shall begin to run on the date the person’s
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (C)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to
a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined
in R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (A) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (B) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or had a mental or
physical disability and was under age 21.
   (F)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the
offender has failed to provide support under division (A)(2) or (B) of this
section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or
(B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231,
2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401, or
former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of division (C) of this section is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21) (2000 Code, § 135.13)
§ 135.14 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (B)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use, or
allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually-oriented matter, or is nudity-oriented matter;
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of
the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the violation
of this division.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01,
within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division. For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 through 4511.197
and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   As used in division (C)(1) above:
         CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B)(5) below does not apply to any material or
performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (B)(5)
below.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (B)(5) below, the trier of fact may
infer that an actor, model, or participant in the material or performance
involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its title, text,
visual representation, or otherwise, represents or depicts the actor, model, or
participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   As used in this division and division (B)(5) above:
         MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance that shows a
minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         OBSCENE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         PERFORMANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         SEXUALLY-ORIENTED MATTER. Means any material or performance that shows
a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation, or
bestiality.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division, (A) or (B)(1) above, endangering
children is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(1)(b), (E)(1)(c),
or (E)(1)(d), a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense
under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to
the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided
in divisions (E)(1)(c) or (E)(1)(d) below, endangering children is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation is a violation of division (A) above and
results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering children is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1) above and
results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering children is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates divisions (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5),
or (B)(6) above, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (C) above, the offender shall be
punished as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in divisions (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c) below,
endangering children in violation of division (C) above is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         (b)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
or if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any
offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the delinquency of
or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (E)(3)
(c) below, endangering children in violation of division (C) above is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. § 2903.07 as it
existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (C) above is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
divisions (E)(3)(a), (E)(3)(b), or (E)(3)(c) above or pursuant to any other
provision of law, and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under R.C. Ch. 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511, or any other provision of
law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
         (e)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to divisions
(E)(3)(a), (E)(3)(b), (E)(3)(c), or (E)(3)(d) above or pursuant to any other
provision of law for the violation of division (C) above, if as a part of the
same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or pleads guilty to
a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (C) above, the offender also shall be sentenced in
accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, for that violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (F)   (1)   If a person violates division (C) above and if, at the time of
the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in the
motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (C) above for each of the children, but the court may
sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of division (C) above but the person is not also convicted of and does not also
plead guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (C) above, both the following apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (C) above shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (F)(2)(a)1. above, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (C) above shall constitute a conviction or plea of guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (C) above and the person also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the violation of
division (C) above, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (C) above shall not constitute, for the purposes of any provision of
law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a conviction of
or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A) through (E), (H)) (2000 Code, § 135.14)
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 135.15 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY; INTERFERENCE WITH SUPPORT ORDERS.
   (A)   Interference with custody.
      (1)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a person
identified in division (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b), or (A)(1)(c) below from the
parent, guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division (A)(1)(a),
(A)(1)(b), or (A)(1)(c) below:
         (a)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or
physical disability under the age of 21;
         (b)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent,
unruly, neglected, abused, or dependent children;
         (c)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with
mental illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
      (2)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department, or institution without legal consent.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking
under division (A)(1)(a) above that the actor reasonably believed that his or
her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety. It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (A)(1)
above that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or judicial
authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed person came
under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
      (4)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with
custody.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who
is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1)(a) above is removed from the
state or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (A)(1)(a) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) above suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a
violation of division (A)(1)(a) above is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
         (b)   A violation of divisions (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) above is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (c)   A violation of division (A)(2) above is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. Each day of a violation of division (A)(2) above is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23)
   (B)   Interference with support orders.
      (1)   No person, by using physical harassment or threats of violence
against another person, shall interfere with the other person’s initiation or
continuance of, or attempt to prevent the other person from initiating or
continuing, an action to issue or modify a support order under R.C. Ch. 3115,
or under R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 2151.36, 2151.361,
2151.49, 3105.18, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3109.19, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.07, or
3113.31.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of interfering with an
action to issue or modify a support order, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this division (B) or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or R.C. § 3111.19, interfering with an action to issue or
modify a support order is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2919.231)
(2000 Code, § 135.15)
§ 135.16 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to a
family or household member.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family or
household member.
   (C)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (D)(2) to
(D)(5) below.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D)(3), (D)(4), or (D)(5)
below, a violation of division (C) above is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
and a violation of divisions (A) or (B) above is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(4) below, if the
offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of domestic
violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent
to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. § 2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12,
2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a family or household
member at the time of the violation, a violation of an existing or former
municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that
is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the victim of the
violation was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the offense was a family
or household member at the time of the commission of the offense, a violation
of divisions (A) or (B) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law, and a violation of division (C) is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or
offenses of the type described in division (D)(3) of this section involving a
person who was a family or household member at the time of the violations or
offenses, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (C) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more offenses of domestic
violence or two or more violations or offenses of the type described in
division (D)(3) of this section involving a person who was a family or
household member at the time of the violations or offenses, and the offender
knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time of the
violation, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D)(3) or (D)(4) above,
if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time
of the violation, a violation of divisions (A) or (B) above is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (C) above
is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or unit
of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or money in
connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the person
violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to this
section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or a
former spouse of the offender;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting
with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender within five
years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question.
(R.C. § 2919.25) (2000 Code, § 135.16)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
Statutory reference:
   Temporary protection orders, see R.C. § 2919.26
   Violation of protection order or consent agreement, factors to consider,
bail, see R.C. § 2919.251
§ 135.17 HAZING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      HAZING. Means doing any act or coercing another, including the victim, to
do any act of initiation into any student or other organization or any act to
continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student or other
organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental or
physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume alcohol or a
drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      ORGANIZATION. Includes a national or international organization with
which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs
of abuse resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (D)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (E)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
      (1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other public or private educational institution,
who is acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
      (2)   A violation of division (E)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
(2000 Code, § 135.17)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 135.18 CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (B)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24) (2000 Code, § 135.18)
Statutory reference:
   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
§ 135.19 FAILURE TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (A)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker's care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (B)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker's care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender's care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (D)   As used in this section:
      CARETAKER. A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care and
protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The term
does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT. Any person who has a physical or
mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the person's own
care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from
providing for the person's own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
(2000 Code, § 135.19)
§ 135.20 PATIENT ABUSE OR NEGLECT; PATIENT ENDANGERMENT; EXCEPTIONS; FALSE
STATEMENTS; RETALIATION.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      ABUSE. Means knowingly causing physical harm or recklessly causing
serious physical harm to a person by physical contact with the person or by the
inappropriate use of a physical or chemical restraint, medication or isolation
on the person.
      CARE FACILITY. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any “home” as defined in R.C. § 3721.10.
         (b)   Any “residential facility” as defined in R.C. § 5119.34 or
5123.19.
         (c)   Any institution or facility operated or provided by the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or by the Department of
Developmental Disabilities pursuant to R.C. §§ 5119.14 and 5123.03.
         (d)   Any unit of any hospital, as defined in R.C. § 3701.01, that
provided the same services as a nursing home, as defined in R.C. § 3721.01.
         (e)   Any institution, residence or facility that provides, for a
period of more than 24 hours, whether for consideration or not, accommodations
to one individual or two unrelated individuals who are dependent upon the
services of others.
      GROSS NEGLECT. Means knowingly failing to provide a person with any
treatment, care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or
safety of the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the
person.
      INAPPROPRIATE USE OF A PHYSICAL OR CHEMICAL RESTRAINT, MEDICATION OR
ISOLATION. Means the use of physical or chemical restraint, medication or
isolation as punishment, for staff convenience, excessively, as a substitute
for treatment, or in quantities that preclude habilitation and treatment.
      NEGLECT. Means recklessly failing to provide a person with any treatment,
care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of
the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the person.
(R.C. § 2903.33)
   (B)   Patient abuse or neglect; spiritual treatment; defense.
      (1)   No person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an agent or
employee of a care facility shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Commit abuse against a resident or patient of the facility.
         (b)   Commit gross neglect against a resident or patient of the
facility.
         (c)   Commit neglect against a resident or patient of the facility.
      (2)   (a)   A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through
prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious
denomination, shall not be considered neglectful under division (B)(1)(c) above
for that reason alone.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of gross neglect or
neglect under this section that the actor’s conduct was committed in good faith
solely because the actor was ordered to commit the conduct by a person with
supervisory authority over the actor.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) above is guilty of
patient abuse, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(b) above is guilty of gross
patient neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient
neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(c) above is guilty of patient
neglect, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient
neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.34)
   (C)   Patient endangerment; spiritual treatment; defense.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES CARETAKER. Means any developmental
disabilities  employee or any person who assumes the duty to provide for the
care and protection of a person with a developmental disability on a voluntary
basis, by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a
result of a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. The phrase includes a person who is an employee of a care
facility and a person who is an employee of an entity under contract with a
provider. The phrase does not include a person who owns, operates, or
administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility unless that
person also personally provides care to a person with a developmental
disability.
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5123.50.
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5123.01.
      (2)   No developmental disabilities caretaker shall create a substantial
risk to the health or safety of a person with a developmental disability. A
developmental disabilities caretaker does not create a substantial risk to the
health or safety of a person with a developmental disability under this
division when the developmental disabilities caretaker treats a physical or
mental illness or disability of the person with a developmental disability by
spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a
recognized religious body.
      (3)   No person who owns, operates, or administers a care facility or who
is an agent of a care facility shall condone, or knowingly permit, any conduct
by a developmental disabilities caretaker who is employed by or under the
control of the owner, operator, administrator, or agent that is in violation of
division (C)(2) of this section and that involves a person with a developmental
disability who is under the care of the owner, operator, administrator, or
agent. A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious denomination,
shall not be considered endangered under this division for that reason alone.
      (4)   (a)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section that the actor’s conduct was
committed in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to commit the
conduct by a person to whom one of the following applies:
            1.   The person has supervisory authority over the actor.
            2.   The person has authority over the actor’s conduct pursuant to
a contract for the provision of services.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(3) of this section that the person who owns, operates, or
administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility and who is
charged with the violation is following the individual service plan for the
involved person with a developmental disability or that the admission,
discharge, and transfer rule set forth in the Ohio Administrative Code is being
followed.
         (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(3) of this section that the actor did not have readily available a
means to prevent either the harm to the person with a developmental disability
or the death of such a person and the actor took reasonable steps to summon
aid.
      (5)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(5)(b) or (C)(5)(c) of this
section, whoever violates division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section is guilty
of patient endangerment, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded
guilty to, a violation of this section, patient endangerment is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the person
with a developmental disability, patient endangerment is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.341)
   (D)   False statements.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly
swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, alleging a
violation of division (B) above when the statement is made with purpose to
incriminate another.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of filing a false
patient abuse or neglect complaint, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.35)
   (E)   Retaliation against person reporting patient abuse or neglect. No care
facility shall discharge or in any manner discriminate or retaliate against any
person solely because such person, in good faith, filed a complaint, affidavit,
or other document alleging a violation of division (B) above or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.34.
(R.C. § 2903.36)
(2000 Code, § 135.20)
Statutory reference:
   License revocation for felony violations, see R.C. § 2903.37
§ 135.21 INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PERSON TO ENGAGE IN HOUSING TRANSACTIONS
BECAUSE OF RACE, RELIGION, OR THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (A)(1) above;
         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (A)(1) above, or participating lawfully in
speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so
participate.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03) (2000 Code, § 135.21)
§ 135.22 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (A)   No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, or 2909.07,
or R.C. § 2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5), by reason of the race, color,
religion, or national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation.
      (2)   Ethnic intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than
the offense the commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic
intimidation.
      (3)   In the case of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first
degree, ethnic intimidation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12) (2000 Code, § 135.22)
§ 135.23 VIOLATING A PROTECTION ORDER, CONSENT AGREEMENT, ANTI-STALKING
PROTECTION ORDER OR ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the following:
      (1)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to
R.C. § 2919.26 or R.C. § 3113.31;
      (2)   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214;
      (3)   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating a
protection order.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division s(B)(3) or (B)(4) below,
violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
         (b)   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, or
2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
         (c)   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
      (4)   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) above
that the protection order issued by a court of another state does not comply
with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a protection order
that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of this state or that it
is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. § 2265(c).
   (D)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not necessary
for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent agreement was
served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the defendant was shown
the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of either or a judge,
magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the defendant that a protection
order or consent agreement had been issued, and proves that the defendant
recklessly violated the terms of the order or agreement.
   (E)    As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF
ANOTHER STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(R.C. § 2919.27) (2000 Code, § 135.23)
§ 135.24 ADULTERATION OF FOOD.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (A)(1) above.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 135.24)
Statutory reference:
   Adulteration of food generally, see R.C. § 3715.59
§ 135.25 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (A)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         AGE VERIFICATION. A service provided by an independent third party
(other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         DISTRIBUTE. Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Means any device that can be used to
deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately,
and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the
use of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver's license, a commercial driver's license,
a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 21 years of age or
older.
         TOBACCO PRODUCT. Means any product that is made or derived from
tobacco or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component
or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic
smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not
include any product that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those
terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         VAPOR PRODUCT. Means a product, other than a cigarette or other
tobacco product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or
derived from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes:
            1.   To any person under 21 years of age; or
            2.   Without first verifying proof of age.
         (b)   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         (c)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         (d)   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         (e)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         (f)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification.
         (g)   Allow an employee under 18 years of age to sell any tobacco
product;
         (h)   Give away or otherwise distribute free samples of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or coupons redeemable
for cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alterative tobacco products.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         (a)   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         (b)   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         (c)   Any other place not identified in division (A)(3)(a) or (A)(3)
(b) of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products.”
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(A)(2)(a) of this section:
         (a)   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         (b)   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (A)(2)(a) of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   (a)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of
this section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21
years of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
            1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under
21 years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
            2.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
            3.   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section for an employer to permit an employee 18, 19, or 20 years of age to
sell a tobacco product.
      (6)   (a)   No delivery service shall accept from, transport or deliver
to, or allow pick-up by, a person under 21 years of age with respect to any of
the following:
            1.   Alternative nicotine products;
            2.   Papers used to roll cigarettes;
            3.   Tobacco products other than cigarettes.
         (b)   A delivery service shall require proof of age as a condition of
accepting, transporting, delivering, or allowing pickup of the items described
in divisions (A)(6)(a)1. to 3. of this section.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d), (A)(2)
(e), (A)(2)(f), (A)(2)(g), (A)(2)(h), (A)(3) or (A)(6) of this section is
guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to illegal distribution of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (8)   (a)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2), if an offender is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A)(2)(a) of this
section, the court shall impose a fine in the following amount:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(8)(a)2., (A)(8)
(a)3., (A)(8)(a)4., and (A)(8)(a)5. of this section, not more than $250;
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(8)(a)3., (A)(8)
(a)4., and (A)(8)(a)5. of this section, if an offender has previously been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(2)(a) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, not
more than $500;
            3.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(8)(a)4. and (A)
(8)(a)5. of this section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (A)(2)(a) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $500;
            4.   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(8)(a)5. of this
section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
three or more violations of division (A)(2)(a) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,000;
            5.   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to four or more violations of division (A)(2)(a) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,500.
         (b)   The financial sanctions required by division (A)(8)(a) of this
section are in lieu of the financial sanctions described in R.C. § 2929.28(A)
(2), but are in addition to any other sanctions or penalties that may apply to
the offender, including other financial sanctions under that section or a jail
term under R.C. § 2929.24.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(c) of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (A)(2)(c) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (10)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (B)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (C) below:
         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent, or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 through 4507.52.
         SELLER. Means a seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (A) above.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (B)(2)(a) above fails to match the information printed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information so
printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee of
the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (B)(2)(a) above does not preclude a seller or an agent
or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check the
validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that
may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (B) and division (C) below
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (B)(4)(a) above, except for purposes of
division (C) below.
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) above.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (C) below or another
section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this divisions (B) or division (C) below relieves a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to comply with
any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules governing the sale,
giving away, or other distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates divisions (B)(2)(b) or (B)(4) above is guilty of
engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (C)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (A) above in which the age of the
purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away, or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) above, the trier
of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (A) above shall
consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and implemented and
that is intended to prevent violations of division (A) above. For purposes of
division (C)(1)(c) above, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable
reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan
may require a seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable
diligence to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not
excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable
diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (C)(1) above is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy
registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (D)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (D):
         AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Means:
            1.   In the case of cigarettes, a person who is:
               a.    Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. §
5743.15;
               b.    Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person
purchases cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
               c.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Internal
Revenue Code § 5702;
               d.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               e.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               f.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
               g.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by
the Ohio Tax Commissioner under R.C. §
            2.   In the case of electronic smoking devices or vapor products, a
person who is:
               a.    Licensed as a distributor of tobacco or vapor products
under R.C. § 5743.61;
               b.   A retail dealer of vapor products, as defined in R.C. §
5741.01(C)(3), that is not licensed as a vapor distributor, as long as the tax
levied by R.C. § 5743.51, 5743.62, or 5743.63, as applicable, has been paid;
               c.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               d.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               e.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state.
         MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the sale of cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to minors and to ensure
compliance with the Master Settlement Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   (a)   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in this
municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
         (b)   No motor carrier, or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality that the carrier or other person reasonably believes is not
an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If cigarettes, electronic smoking
devices, and vapor products are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products were delivered
was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products who ships or causes to be shipped
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original
container or wrapping shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of
the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices,
and vapor products are shipped with the words "cigarettes", "electronic smoking
devices", or "vapor products", as applicable.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
divisions (D)(3)(a), (D)(3)(b) or (D)(4) above.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
(2000 Code, § 135.25)
   (E)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
§ 135.26 NONSMOKING AREAS IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including, but not limited to, a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in such
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for persons with mental illnesses and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency, or a
political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is a place of public assembly if
it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to the public.
Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes, cafeterias, or
other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as bowling alleys
and places licensed by the State Liquor Control Commission to sell intoxicating
beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of public assembly.
   (B)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (A)(1) above, the local fire
authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In places
included in division (A)(2) above that are owned by the state or its agencies,
the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate the area, and if
the place is owned by a political subdivision, its Legislative Authority shall
designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places included in
division (A)(3) above, the person having control of the operations of the place
of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area. In places included in
division (A)(2) above which are also included in division (A)(1) above, the
officer who has authority to designate the area in places in division (A)(2)
above shall designate the no smoking area. A no smoking area may include the
entire place of public assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of
signs that are clearly visible and that state “no smoking.” No person shall
remove signs from areas designated as no smoking areas.
   (C)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
R.C. § 3313.751(B).
   (D)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (B) above.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031) (2000 Code, § 135.26)
§ 135.27 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (A)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (B)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (C)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 135.27)
Statutory reference:
   Contagion and quarantine, see R.C. §§ 3707.04 et seq.
   Power to prevent contagious diseases, see R.C. § 715.37
§ 135.28 ABUSE OF A CORPSE.
   (A)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that he or she knows would outrage reasonable family sensibilities.
   (B)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that would outrage reasonable community sensibilities.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of abuse of a corpse, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty
of gross abuse of a corpse, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2927.01) (2000 Code, § 135.28)
§ 135.29 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) above does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         (b)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) above shall not be construed as implying that the
persons identified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(b) above do not have
privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as described in
those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set forth in R.C.
§ 2901.01.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of unlawful collection
of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this division, unlawful
collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (A) above or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15)
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Falsification
   
136.03   Compounding a crime
   
136.04   Failure to report a crime
   
136.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
   
136.06   Obstructing official business
   
136.07   Obstructing justice
   
136.08   Resisting arrest
   
136.09   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
   
136.10   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
   
136.11   Dereliction of duty
   
136.12   Interfering with civil rights
   
136.13   Illegal conveyance of prohibited items onto grounds of a detention
facility or other specified governmental facility
   
136.14   False report of child abuse or neglect
   
136.15   Assaulting police dog or horse, or assistance dog
   
136.16   Disclosure of confidential peace officer information
   
136.17   Intimidation of crime victim or witness
   
136.18   Using sham legal process
   
136.19   Making false allegation of peace officer misconduct
   
136.20   Misuse of 9-1-1 system
   
136.21   Failure to disclose personal information
Cross-reference:
   Contempt of court, see §§
33.20 through 33.30
   Failure to comply with order or signal of a police officer, see § 70.02
Statutory reference:
   Escape from detention, see R.C. § 2921.34
   Harassment by inmates by causing or attempting to cause contact with blood,
semen, urine, feces or other bodily substance; knowledge of AIDS, hepatitis or
tuberculosis infection; felony offenses, see R.C. § 2921.38
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. § 2945.37,
2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement in any
vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures;
detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this division,
supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures that is
incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in the
facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of
the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state into this
state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under
R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail
who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30,
the term includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from the
work site.
   DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the confinement of
a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or another state
or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent
child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States.
   LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.
   PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a
political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he or
she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party affairs
at any level of responsibility.
   POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   POLITICAL PARTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or agent of the
state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or permanent
capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges, and law
enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   PUBLIC SERVANT.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   Any public official.
         (b)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including,
but not limited to, a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor, or consultant.
         (c)   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general, or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general, or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes but is not limited to a
contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was
not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(R.C. § 2921.01) (2000 Code, § 136.01)
§ 136.02 FALSIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including but not limited to an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)
(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(10), (A)(11), (A)(13) or (A)(15) of this
section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
   (G)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications
device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a
peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial
responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
(2000 Code, § 136.02)
§ 136.03 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. §
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (B) above, the abandonment or agreement in no way binds the
state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21) (2000 Code, § 136.03)
§ 136.04 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) below, no person, knowing
that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly fail to report
the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (E) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (C)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (C) above was made, or to any law enforcement
officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to investigate the
circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or her knowledge that
may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the following:
         (a)   Second or third degree burns;
         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         (c)   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of a
hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is attended
or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent,
malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately
to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in
which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under divisions
(E)(2) or (E)(3) above shall fail to file, within three working days after
attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury with the
office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form provided
by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (E) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (E) of this section.
   (F)   (1)   No person who knows that a licensed medical professional has
committed an offense under R.C. Chapter 2907, a violation of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to such offense, or a substantially
equivalent criminal offense in another jurisdiction, against a patient of the
licensed medical professional shall fail to report such knowledge to law
enforcement authorities within 30 days of obtaining the knowledge.
      (2)   Except for a self-report or participation in the offense or
violation being reported, any person who makes a report within the 30-day
period provided in division (F)(1) of this section or any person who
participates in a judicial proceeding that results from such report is immune
from civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as
a result of making that report or participating in that proceeding so long as
the person is acting in good faith without fraud or malice.
      (3)   The physician-patient relationship or physician assistant-patient
relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding the person's
knowledge of a licensed medical professional's commission of an offense or
violation reported under division (F)(1) of this section, against that licensed
medical professional in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report made
under that division.
      (4)   As used in division (F) of this section, LICENSED MEDICAL
PROFESSIONAL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
   (G)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (G)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (H)   Divisions (A) or (D) above does not require disclosure of information,
when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member's capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. §
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor's duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or R.C. § 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, "counseling services" include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
   (I)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), or (F)(1) of this section is
guilty of failure to report a crime. Violation of division (A)(1) or (F)(1) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (A)
(2) or (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (K)   Whoever violates divisions (C) or (D) above is guilty of failure to
report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (L)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (E) above is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (E) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (M)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(R.C. § 2921.22) (2000 Code, § 136.04)
§ 136.05 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23) (2000 Code, § 136.05)
§ 136.06 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31) (2000 Code, § 136.06)
§ 136.07 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (A) above regardless
of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for, is charged
with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child
for committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed. The crime
or act the person or child aided committed shall be used under division (C)
below in determining the penalty for violation of division (A) above,
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charge with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      ACT OF TERRORISM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32) (2000 Code, § 136.07)
§ 136.08 RESISTING ARREST.
   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (A) above is a misdemeanor of the second degree. A
violation of division (B) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A
violation of division (C) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33) (2000 Code, § 136.08)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from a law enforcement officer, felony
offense, see R.C. § 2911.01
§ 136.09 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any
brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family, or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (D)   Division (A)(4) above does not prohibit participation by a public
employee in any housing program funded by public monies if the public employee
otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or influence
of the public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from the
program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the public
employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in a
public contract in violation of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of divisions (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director
appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
      PUBLIC CONTRACT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         (b)   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair, or
maintenance of any public property.
(R.C. § 2921.42) (2000 Code, § 136.09)
Statutory reference:
   Assistants and employees of Prosecutors, Law Directors, and Solicitors, see
R.C. § 2921.421
§ 136.10 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H),
(I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (B)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (F)   Divisions (A), (B), and (C) above do not prohibit any person from
making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43) (2000 Code, § 136.10)
§ 136.11 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (D)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Legislative
Authority for the use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution
with which the public official is connected.
   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (H)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes an officer or
employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
(R.C. § 2921.44) (2000 Code, § 136.11)
§ 136.12 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (A)   No public servant, under color of the public servant’s office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45) (2000 Code, § 136.12)
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 136.13 ILLEGAL CONVEYANCE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS ONTO GROUNDS OF A DETENTION
FACILITY OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building, or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services, or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. §
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in such deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01, except for
small amounts of wine for sacramental purposes when the person engaging in the
specified conduct is a cleric, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not apply to any person who conveys or
attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building, or other place under the control of the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services, or the Department
of Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place and in accordance with the written rules of the detention facility or the
institution, office building, or other place.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (A).
   (D)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio, or other
electronic communications device.
   (F)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1)
above that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being transported
in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the actor’s
person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it was
unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (C) above
that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the item to
the confined person, the child, the prisoner, or the patient and that either of
the following applies:
         (a)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building, or other place to deliver the
item to the confined person or the patient.
         (b)   The actor was given written authorization by the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place to deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) above or commits a violation of
division (C) above involving any item listed in division (A)(1) above is guilty
of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the grounds of a specified governmental
facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) above or commits a violation of
division (C) above involving any drug of abuse is guilty of illegal conveyance
of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified governmental facility, a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) above or commits a violation of
division (C) above involving any intoxicating liquor is guilty of illegal
conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a specified governmental
facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) above is guilty of illegal conveyance
of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (D) above or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) above is guilty of illegal conveyance
of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified governmental
facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) above or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance
of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention facility is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.36)
   (H)   The person in charge of a detention facility shall, on the grounds of
the detention facility, have the same power as a peace officer, as defined in
R.C. § 2935.01, to arrest a person who violates this section.
(R.C. § 2921.37)
(2000 Code, § 136.13)
Cross-reference:
   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety
zone, see §
137.11
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, see §
137.12
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 136.14 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act
or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in R.C. §
2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14) (2000 Code, § 136.14)
§ 136.15 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police
dog or horse;
         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without
the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer's duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of assaulting a
police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this division, assaulting
a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
results in physical harm to the police dog or horse other than death or serious
physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the police dog or
horse or results in its death, assaulting a police dog or horse is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of harassing a police
dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division, harassing a police
dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results in
physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not result in its death or in
serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the violation results in serous physical harm to the
police dog or horse or results in its death, harassing a police dog or horse is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) above is guilty of assaulting an
assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division, assaulting an
assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results
in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or serious physical
harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
violation results in serious physical harm to the assistance dog or results in
its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) above is guilty of harassing an
assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division, harassing an
assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation results
in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in the death or in
serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Ch. 2929 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or this code, whoever violates divisions (A), (B), (C), or (D)
above is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;
         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog
or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as
a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog
that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of
the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on
either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or
horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new
assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind,
deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or
served by the assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because
of the death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the
subject of the violation.
   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Ch. 4741.
   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      BLIND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
955.011.
      PHYSICAL HARM. Means any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Means a dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321) (2000 Code, § 136.15)
§ 136.16 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL PEACE OFFICER INFORMATION.
   (A)   No officer or employee of a law enforcement agency or court, or of the
clerk’s office of any court, shall disclose during the pendency of any criminal
case the home address of any peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting
attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth
services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case.
   (B)   Division (A) above does not prohibit a peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee from disclosing the peace officer’s, parole officer’s,
prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s, correctional
employee’s, or youth services employee’s own home address, and does not apply
to any person who discloses the home address of a peace officer, parole
officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional
employee, or youth services employee pursuant to a court-ordered disclosure
under division (C) below.
   (C)   The court in which any criminal case is pending may order the
disclosure of the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case, if
the court determines after a written request for the disclosure that good cause
exists for disclosing the home address of the peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of disclosure of
confidential information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2921.24)
   (E)   No judge of a court of record, or Mayor presiding over a Mayor’s
Court, shall order a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney,
assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth services
employee who is a witness in a criminal case, to disclose the peace officer’s,
parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s,
correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s home address during the
peace officer’s, parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant
prosecuting attorney’s, correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s
examination in the case unless the judge or Mayor determines that the defendant
has a right to the disclosure.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      CORRECTIONAL EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.
      YOUTH SERVICES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.
(R.C. § 2921.25)
(2000 Code, § 136.16)
§ 136.17 INTIMIDATION OF CRIME VICTIM OR WITNESS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly attempt to intimidate or hinder the victim
of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or prosecution of criminal charges
or a delinquent child action or proceeding, and no person shall knowingly
attempt to intimidate a witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of
the person being a witness to that act.
   (B)   No person, knowingly and by force or by unlawful threat of harm to any
person or property or by unlawful threat to commit any offense or calumny
against any person, shall attempt to influence, intimidate, or hinder any of
the following persons:
      (1)   The victim of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or
prosecution of criminal charges or a delinquent child action or proceeding;
      (2)   A witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of the person
being a witness to that act;
      (3)   An attorney by reason of the attorney’s involvement in any criminal
or delinquent child action or proceeding.
   (C)   Division (A) above does not apply to any person who is attempting to
resolve a dispute pertaining to the alleged commission of a criminal offense,
either prior to or subsequent to the filing of a complaint, indictment, or
information by participating in the arbitration, mediation, compromise,
settlement or conciliation of that dispute pursuant to an authorization for
arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement, or conciliation of a dispute of
that nature that is conferred by any of the following:
      (1)   A section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (2)   The Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Rules of Superintendence for
Municipal Courts and County Courts, the Rules of Superintendence for Courts of
Common Pleas, or another rule adopted by the Ohio Supreme Court in accordance
with Ohio Constitution, Article IV, Section 5.
      (3)   A local rule of court, including, but not limited to, a local rule
of court that relates to alternative dispute resolution or other case
management programs and that authorizes the referral of disputes pertaining to
the alleged commission of certain types of criminal offenses to appropriate and
available arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement or other conciliation
programs.
      (4)   The order of a judge of a municipal court, county court, or court
of common pleas.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of intimidation of an
attorney, victim or witness in a criminal case. A violation of division (A)
above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of division (B) above
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, WITNESS means any person who has or claims to
have knowledge concerning a fact or facts concerning a criminal or delinquent
act, whether or not criminal or delinquent child charges are actually filed.
(R.C. § 2921.04) (2000 Code, § 136.17)
Statutory reference:
   Retaliation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2921.05
§ 136.18 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      LAWFULLY ISSUED. Means adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance with
the United States Constitution, the Constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state, and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Means municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. Means an instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         (a)   It is not lawfully issued.
         (b)   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order of a court, a
law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.
         (c)   It is designed to make another person believe that it is
lawfully issued.
      STATE. Means a state of the United States, including without limitation
the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the state. The term does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (B)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or otherwise use
sham legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under divisions (B)(1) or (B)
(2) above that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful purpose.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (B)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A
violation of division (B)(2s (B)(3) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree,
except that if the purpose of a violation of division (B)(3) above is to commit
or facilitate the commission of a felony, a violation of division (B)(3) above
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (B)(4) above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A) through (D)) (2000 Code, § 136.18)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability, see R.C. § 2921.52(E)
§ 136.19 MAKING FALSE ALLEGATION OF PEACE OFFICER MISCONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace officer
that alleges that the peace officer engaged in misconduct in the performance of
the officer’s duties if the person knows that the allegation is false.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of making a false
allegation of peace officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.15) (2000 Code, § 136.19)
§ 136.20 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, 9-1-1 SYSTEM means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the access number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Ch. 128 to report an emergency if the person knows that
no emergency exists.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Ch. 128, except
for any of the following purposes or under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of
such information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.96(F) through (H))
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (C) or (D) above is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
(2000 Code, § 136.20)
§ 136.21 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offenses identified in divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above;
         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
divisions (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) above has been, is being, or is
about to be committed.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of failure to disclose
one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A) above requires a person to answer any
questions beyond that person’s name, address, or date of birth. Nothing in
division (A) above authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a person for
not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address, or date of
birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (D)   It is not a violation of division (A) above to refuse to answer a
question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is an element
of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
   (E)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (F)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (E)
above from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
(2000 Code, § 136.21)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS CONTROL
Section
   
137.01   Definitions
   
137.02   Carrying concealed weapons
   
137.03   Using weapons while intoxicated
   
137.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
   
137.05   Possessing criminal tools
   
137.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance
   
137.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons
   
137.08   Underage purchase of firearm or handgun
   
137.09   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
   
137.10   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance
   
137.11   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone
   
137.12   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention
   
137.13   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession
   
137.14   Defaced firearms
   
137.15   Air rifles
Cross-reference:
   Conveyance into certain facilities, see § 136.13
   Injury to persons by hunters, see § 135.05
   Injury to property by hunters, see § 131.24
   Using weapons to endanger or damage aircraft or airport operations, see §
131.05
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 137.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a
spring-operated mechanism.
   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife.
         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite,
TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol,
pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic
explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium
nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting
agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power
to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in
mining, quarrying, excavating, or demolitions.
         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         (f)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use
in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         (b)   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         (d)   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)(c) of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition.
         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot
readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy,
souvenir, curio, or museum piece.
         (f)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.
         (g)   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting death,
and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried,
or used as a weapon.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes all materials
that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3, or
division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not include “fireworks,”
as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any activity described in R.C.
§ 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws, rules, and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of
R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. §
3737.82.
   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical
harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an
explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. The term includes
without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any blasting cap
or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure vessel that has
been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. The term
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including
but not limited to the representations and actions of the individual exercising
control over the firearm.
   HANDGUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR. The
phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a
rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than
26 inches long overall. SAWED-OFF FIREARM does not include any firearm with an
overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the Federal
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the “Gun Control Act
of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau
not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26
U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to
fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under
a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a
suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the license
was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1), under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this
state in which the license was issued.
   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11) (2000 Code, § 137.01)
§ 137.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to
and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (C)(1)(b) does not apply
to the person;
         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) above
of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and other than a
dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from
having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (E)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2), (F)
(6), and (F)(7) below, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A)
above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as otherwise provided in
this division or divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7) below, if the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of this section or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A)
above is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as
otherwise provided in divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7) below, if the
offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed
weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying
concealed weapons in violation of division (A) above is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (A)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (b)   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (c)   If divisions (F)(2)(a) and (F)(2)(b) and (F)(6) of this section
do not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (F)(1) or (F)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of divisions (B)(2) or (B)
(4) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of divisions (B)(2) or
(B)(4) above or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In addition to any other
penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation of divisions (B)(2) or
(B)(4) above, the offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(3) above is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         (a)   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         (b)   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, “deadly weapon” or “weapon” does not
include any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used
as a weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12) (2000 Code, § 137.02)
Statutory reference:
   Concealed carry by a qualifying adult, see R.C. § 2923.111
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see R.C. §§
2923.124 et seq.
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see R.C. §
2923.121
§ 137.03 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15) (2000 Code, § 137.03)
§ 137.04 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division is
the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (E)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer.
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including,
but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands
in plain sight.
   (F)   (1)   Divisions (A), (B), (C), and (E) above do not apply to any of
the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (A) above does not apply to a person if all of the
following circumstances apply:
         (a)   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         (b)   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm
is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(2)
(b) above, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including, but not
limited to, a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (A) above does not apply to a person if all of the
following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including, but not
limited to, a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (B) and (C) above do not apply to a person if all of the
following circumstances apply:
         (a)   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         (b)   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(4)
(b) above, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that real
property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is the
spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real property.
         (d)   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (F)(4)(b) above, did not transport or possess a firearm in the motor
vehicle in a manner prohibited by divisions (B) or (C) above while the motor
vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public or private
property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (B) and (C) above do not apply to a person who transports
or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (B) and (C) above do not apply to a person if all of the
following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (G)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under divisions (B) or (C) above
that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under divisions (B) or (C)
above of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the actor
transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful purpose and
while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided that this
affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately prior to
arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the firearm
in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division s(B) or (C) above while
the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway, or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (H)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of divisions (B), (C),
or (D) above shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a
condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (E) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) or
(E)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (B) or
(C) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, due to the application of
division (F)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (D) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person's person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (E)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (E)(3) or (E)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemean or violation
of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section, the offender's concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (J)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (K)   As used in this section:
      AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25(A).
      HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. Means the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      UNLOADED.
         (a)   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division (d) of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (a)2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         (c)   For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper- clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         (d)   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (L)   Divisions (a) and (b) of the definition of "unloaded" in division (K)
of this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16) (2000 Code, § 137.04)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 137.05 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (A)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (B)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24) (2000 Code, § 137.05)
§ 137.06 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To ensure the safety of persons and property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19) (2000 Code, § 137.06)
§ 137.07 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C. §
2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (A)(1) above;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (A)(3) or (A)(4) of this section;
      (6)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license, or
permit showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of
the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the sheriff of
the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (7)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person’s
possession and under his or her control.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer’s duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (A)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.
      FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
      MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Means information regarding the transfer of
a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as legal or a
legal transaction as illegal.
      PRIVATE SELLER. Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or transfers a
firearm or  ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms dealer.
(R.C. § 2923.20) (2000 Code, § 137.07)
§ 137.08 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of underage purchase of
a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever violates
division (B) above is guilty of underage purchase of a handgun, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.211) (2000 Code, § 137.08)
Statutory reference:
   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor, felony, see R.C. § 2923.21
§ 137.09 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (A)   Discharge of firearms on or near prohibited premises. No person shall
do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (B)(1) below, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or within
100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(2) below, discharge of a firearm on a lawn,
park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant to a schoolhouse,
church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a charitable
institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (B)   Application of division (A) above.
      (1)   Division (A)(1) above does not apply to a person who while on the
person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) above does not apply to a person who owns any type
of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s own
enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (C)   Penalty for violation of division (A) above. Whoever violates division
(A) above is guilty of discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A
violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) above is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (A)(3) above shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) above, a violation
of division (A)(3) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(A)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.162)
   (D)   Hunting near township park.
      (1)   No person shall hunt, shoot, or kill game within one-half mile of a
township park unless the Board of Township Park Commissioners has granted
permission to kill game not desired within the limits prohibited by this
division.
(R.C. § 3773.06)
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) above is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3773.99(A))
   (E)   Unlawful discharge. No person shall discharge any BB gun, air gun, or
firearm, or make use of any sling, bow and arrow, or crossbow, within the
corporate limits of the municipality.
   (F)   Unlawful pointing or aiming. No person shall, intentionally and
without malice, point or aim any BB gun, air gun, or firearm, or any sling, bow
and arrow, or crossbow at or toward another.
   (G)   Penalty for violations of division (E) or (F) above. Whoever violates
divisions (E) or (F) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (H)   Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit the firing of a military
salute or the firing of weapons by persons of the nation’s armed forces acting
under military authority, and shall not apply to law enforcement officials or
other government officials in the proper enforcement of the law, or to any
person in the proper exercise of the right of self defense, or to any person
otherwise lawfully permitted by proper federal, state or local authorities to
discharge a BB gun, air gun, or firearm, or to use a sling, bow and arrow, or
crossbow in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section. Division (E)
above does not extend to cases in which BB guns, air guns, or firearms, or
slings, bows and arrows, or crossbows are used in the confines of structures or
used within the confines of a person’s own property, provided such use is under
adult supervision and is approved by the municipality.
   (I)   (1)   This section is hereby amended to read that a Bow Hunting of
Deer Program may exist on the south 80 acres only within the village and that
in all other respects, this section shall remain unchanged and in full force
and effect.
      (2)   Any bow hunting done on the South 80 Acres must comply with the
rules and regulations that have been prepared by the Chief of Police and Safety
Committee Chairperson, as well as a hunter application form, both of which
shall be on file with the Village Police Department. Further, any hunting done
within the village on the South 80 Acres may only be done during the bow deer
hunting season as established by the state.
      (3)   The village will establish a comprehensive public awareness program
to both educate and advise the public of the Village’s Hunting Program. Said
public awareness program shall be administered by the Chief of Police of the
village.
      (4)   The village will implement a long-term village-wide public
education program to inform residents as to what they can do to help control
and avoid incursions with deer and coyotes.
      (5)   The village will encourage a continuous public feedback program to:
         (a)   Help to determine deer and coyote population levels;
         (b)   Help to track the location of deer and coyotes in the village;
         (c)   Quantify deer damage to property;
         (d)   Report and log any safety issues such as deer/vehicle accidents,
deer or coyotes in residential areas, deer in streets, aggressive deer or
coyote encounters, and the like.
      (6)   The village will make recommendations for changes in the deer
information and control program continuously to improve safety.
(2000 Code, § 137.09) (Ord. O-12-09, passed 9-28-2009)
Statutory reference:
   Improperly discharging firearm at or into habitation or school safety zone,
felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.161
§ 137.10 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   Upon application to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (B) below, a license or temporary permit shall be issued to
qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry, or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of such business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (B)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit. The fees
shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the county or municipality. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address, and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (C)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (D)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage, or
use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (E)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non-consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (F)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.18(F),
the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance anywhere in the state.
The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous ordnance only within
the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (G)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(6) and (A)(7) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18) (2000 Code, § 137.10)
§ 137.11 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer's, agent's, or employee's duties;
         (b)   A law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance;
         (c)   A security officer employed by a board of education or governing
body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment;
         (d)   1.   Any person not described in divisions (B)(1)(a) to (B)(1)
(c) of this section who has written authorization from the board of education
or governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
into a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance
in a school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance in accordance with that authorization, provided both of the
following apply:
               a.   Either the person has successfully completed the
curriculum, instruction, and training established under R.C. § 5502.703, or the
person has received a certificate of having satisfactorily completed an
approved basic peace officer training program or is a law enforcement officer;
               b.   The board or governing body has notified the public, by
whatever means the affected school regularly communicates with the public, that
the board or governing body has authorized one or more persons to go armed
within a school operated by the board or governing authority.
            2.   A district board or school governing body that authorizes a
person under division (B)(1)(d) of this section shall require that person to
submit to an annual criminal records check conducted in the same manner as R.C.
§ 3319.39 or R.C. § 3319.391.
         (e)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
division (B)(1)(e) of this section does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         (b)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (c)   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).
         (d)   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) through (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         (c)   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         (d)   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the
motor vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of
an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession
of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm
in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the Director of Education and
Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender's probationary
driver's license, restricted license, driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary commercial driver's
license that then is in effect from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4)
and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type
during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this
state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (D)
(1) above or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction permits
specified in division (D)(1) above, the court in its discretion may choose not
to impose the suspension, revocation or denial required in division (D)(1)
above, but the court, in its discretion, instead may require the offender to
perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
   (E)   As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A
FIREARM means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C) through (G)) (2000 Code, § 137.12)
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A) and (B)
§ 137.12 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (A)   As used in this section, DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (B)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) below, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be prosecuted under
state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.131) (2000 Code, § 137.13)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 137.13 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (A)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (B)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
      (1)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125
shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee's license expires during which the licensee's license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the license is valid when the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed
handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the licensee's
residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after
that change.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B)
or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license does not
authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the following
places:
         (a)   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         (b)   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;
         (c)   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         (d)   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun
is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
         (e)   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university, or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in
a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing
the handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         (f)   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         (g)   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (B)(2)(c) of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building;
         (h)   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (B) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         (b)   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises or property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by
the private employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose.
A private employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to
the private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744,
for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2744.01.
            3.    An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
            4.   A nonprofit corporation shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises of the nonprofit corporation, including any motor vehicle owned by the
nonprofit corporation, or to any event organized by the nonprofit corporation,
unless the nonprofit corporation acted with malicious purpose. A nonprofit
corporation is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death,
or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
nonprofit corporation's decision to permit a licensee to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the nonprofit corporation or to any event organized by the
nonprofit corporation. The immunities described in this division apply to an
entity that leases its property to the nonprofit corporation or permits its
property to be used by the nonprofit corporation for any purpose.
         (c)   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (B)(3)(c)2. of this
section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land or
premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or
onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a
posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was
a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
care center, type A family child care home, or type B family child care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family child care home
or type B family child care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass
in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (B)(3)(c) of this section:
               LANDLORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
               RENTAL AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
               RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01,
except the term does not include a dwelling unit that is owned or operated by a
college or university.
               TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who has been
issued a license under that section that is valid at the time in question.
      (5)   (a)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (B).
         (c)   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
         (d)   A fire investigator who is qualified to carry firearms while on
duty under R.C. § 109.774 has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. §
2923.125.
      (6)   (a)   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (B)(6)(c) of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who has been issued a license issued under that section that is valid at
the time in question. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer
identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a
valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to division (B)(6)
(c) of this section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)
(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(B)1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (B)(6)(c) of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(B)(6)(b)1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED”.
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section.
         (c)   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)
(b)1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. §
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (B)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)
(6)(b)1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (B)(6)(b) of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   As used in division (B) of this section:
         FIRE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71.
         GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THIS
STATE. Means any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. Means a person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)
(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         NONPROFIT CORPORATION. Means any private organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation pursuant to subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification
card that is issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section to a person
who is a retired peace officer.
         TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.71.
         VALIDATING IDENTIFICATION. Means photographic identification issued by
the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that identifies
the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
   (C)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. § 2923.126(B) as
a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a
concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall post
in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign that
contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”
(R.C. § 2923.1212)
(2000 Code, § 137.14)
§ 137.14 DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number, or
other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) above is guilty of defacing
identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) above, defacing identification marks
of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) above is guilty of possessing a
defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing a
defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) above, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (C)   Division (A) above does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer’s serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(R.C. § 2923.201) (2000 Code, § 137.15)
§ 137.15 AIR RIFLES.
   (A)   No person shall use an air rifle within the limits of the village.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(1967 Code, § 136.03) (Ord. O-10-41, passed 12-8-1941) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 138: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
   
138.01   Definitions
   
138.02   Adult use cannabis control; limitations on conduct by individuals
   
138.03   Drug possession offenses
   
138.04   Possessing drug abuse instruments
   
138.05   Permitting drug abuse
   
138.06   Illegal cultivation of marihuana
   
138.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants
   
138.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples
   
138.09   Federal prosecution bar to municipal prosecution
   
138.10   Nitrous oxide: improper dispensing or distribution; possession in a
motor vehicle
   
138.11   Laboratory report required
   
138.12   Counterfeit controlled substances
   
138.13   Use, possession, or sale of drug paraphernalia
   
138.14   Controlled substance or prescription labels
   
138.15   Possession, sale, and disposal of hypodermics
   
138.16   Controlled substance schedules
   
138.17   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates
   
138.18   Sale of pseudoephedrine
   
138.19   Medical marijuana
   
138.20   Sale of pure caffeine product
   
138.21   Sale of dextromethorphan
Statutory reference:
   Controlled substances, regulation of pharmacists and other professionals,
see R.C.Chs. 3719 and 4729
   Conviction of professionally licensed persons to be reported to licensing
board, see R.C. § 2925.38
   Criminal and civil forfeiture of property for felony drug abuse offenses,
see R.C. Ch. 2981
   Destruction of chemicals used to produce methamphetamine; preservation of
samples, see R.C. § 2925.52
   Driver’s license suspension after certain drug convictions, see R.C. §
4510.07
   Tampering with drugs, felony offense, see R.C. § 2925.24
§ 138.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum
opium;
         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of
a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of phencyclidine;
         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in
a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal
drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or contains any
amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic
substance;
         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse
control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized committee of
the Ohio  State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of the
state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V, Section 6 of the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of
a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender
knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the
juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A
RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is "committed in the vicinity of a substance
addiction services provider or a recovering addict" if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider's facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider's
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider's
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of
Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to
any section listed in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating,
harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping,
transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing,
dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using,
or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3)
of this definition.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States.
   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1- (alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N- propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N- [1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1- (2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
N- phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3- methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3-methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3- methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3- methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-– phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4- fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1- (2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         (a)   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         (b)   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         (c)   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         (d)   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means
any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         (b)   Any aerosol propellant.
         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         (a)   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         (b)   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it does
not include hashish.
   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing
meth- amphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may not
be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership
or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found.
   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER'S FACILITY. Means the
parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider's
facility is situated.
   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL BE
IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term is
a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)
(1) through (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a barber's license, barber
instructor's license, assistant barber instructor's license, or independent
contractor's license under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist's license, hair
designer's license, manicurist's license, esthetician's license, natural hair
stylist's license, advanced license to practice cosmetology, advanced license
to practice hair design, advanced license to practice manicuring, advanced
license to practice esthetics, advanced license to practice natural hair
styling, cosmetology instructor's license, hair design instructor's license,
manicurist instructor's license, esthetics instructor's license, natural hair
style instructor's license, independent contractor's license, or tanning
facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license, or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 3776;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules;
      (38)   A person who has been issued a license to practice as a certified
mental health assistant under R.C. Chapter 4772.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other
place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to
health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at
one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
   SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V. Have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or
not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the
school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C.§ 2925.01) (2000 Code, § 138.01)
§ 138.02 ADULT USE CANNABIS CONTROL; LIMITATIONS ON CONDUCT BY INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780 and notwithstanding
any conflicting provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an adult use
consumer, may do the following:
      (1)   Use adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Possess, transfer without remuneration to another adult consumer,
or transport adult use cannabis, subject to division (B) of this section; and
      (3)   Purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary per day in
amounts that do not exceed the possession limits set forth in division (B)(1)
of this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796:
      (1)   The amount of cannabis that may be possessed by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (2)   The amount of cannabis that may be transferred by an adult use
consumer without remuneration and not advertised or promoted to the public
shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (3)   The amount of cannabis that may be transported by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer shall not be subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, or civil penalty
for engaging in any of the activities authorized under R.C. Chapter 3780,
including:
      (1)   Obtaining, using, possessing, or transporting adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Performing conduct authorized under R.C. § 3780.29;
      (3)   Acquiring, possessing, using, purchasing, manufacturing, selling,
or transporting paraphernalia; and
      (4)   Assisting another adult use consumer, or allowing property to be
used, in any of the acts authorized by R.C. Chapter 3780.
   (D)   (1)   An individual is prohibited from operating a vehicle, motor
vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft while
using adult use cannabis or while under the influence of adult use cannabis and
is subject to R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for any violation of this division.
      (2)   An individual is prohibited from smoking, vaporizing, or using any
other combustible adult use cannabis product while in a vehicle, motor vehicle,
streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft and is subject to
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for any
violation of this division.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, no individual under
21 years of age shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the
individual's name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing
adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter
3780.
   (F)   Nothing in R.C. Chapter 3780 is intended to permit the transfer or
sale of adult use cannabis, with or without remuneration, to an individual
under 21 years of age, or to allow an individual under 21 years of age to
purchase, possess, use, process, transport, or cultivate cannabis except where
authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used by an invitee of the
parent's child or the guardian's ward, if the invitee is under 21 years of age,
in a manner that constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter 3780.
      (1)   A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used in violation of R.C.
Chapter 3780 if they knowingly authorize or permit consumption of cannabis by
underage invitees.
      (2)   Where the residence or other property has an owner and a tenant or
lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence or other property is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(R.C. § 3780.36)
   (H)   Penalties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796, R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall apply when an adult use
consumer possesses an amount of cannabis greater than the limits set forth in
division (B)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer who uses adult use cannabis in public areas, or who violates division
(D)(2) of this section as a passenger, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   (a)   An individual under 21 years of age who knowingly shows or
gives false information concerning the individual's name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining adult use
cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first
violation, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
         (b)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the
offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780
a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license issued
by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000,
and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). The court, in lieu of suspending
the offender's temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's license, or
driver's license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
         (c)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a
false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also
may impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension
or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court, in lieu of suspending the offender's temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver's license, or driver's license, instead may order the
offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with
the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the
community service the offender shall perform.
      (4)   An individual who is under 21 years of age and who solicits another
individual to purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 is guilty of:
         (a)   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
         (b)   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (5)   An employee or agent of an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C.
Chapter 3780 who knowingly sells cannabis to an individual under 21 years of
age is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.10(A), or R.C. § 3780.29
(F), is guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03 and the
illegal manufacture of drugs under R.C. § 2925.04.
      (7)   Any individual who violates division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this
section guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03.
      (8)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.20(B) is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples under R.C. § 2925.36 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (9)   (a)   An individual who violates division (G) of this section is
guilty of:
            1.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the third degree; and
            2.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         (b)   If a violation of division (G) of this section directly or
indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any individual, the
individual violating division (G) is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 3780.99)
§ 138.03 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, and 4772.
         (b)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         (c)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         (d)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (B)(1)(d), “deception” and “theft offense”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   (a)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section:
            COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5119.01.
            COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2929.01
            HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2919.16.
            MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. A violation of this section or R.C.
§ 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            POST-RELEASE CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2967.28.
            PUBLIC AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. A person who is acting in good faith who
seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a
drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.
            SEEK OR OBTAIN MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. Includes, but is not limited to
making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an on-duty peace
officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care facility.
         (b)   Subject to division (B)(2)(e) of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense or a violation of
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog, drug abuse instruments, or
drug paraphernalia that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a
result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or
experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (B)(2)(b)2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         (c)   If a person who is serving a community control sanction or is
under a sanction on post-release control acts pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of
this section, then R.C. § 2929.141(B), R.C. § 2929.15(B)(2), R.C. § 2929.25(D)
(3), or R.C. § 2967.28(F)(3) applies to the person with respect to any
violation of the sanction or post-release control sanction based on a minor
drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, or a violation of R.C. §
2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141.
         (d)   Nothing in division (B)(2)(b) of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (B)(2)(b) of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense or a violation
of R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of this
section;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         (e)   Division (B)(2)(b) of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b) of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b)
of this section more than two times.
         (f)   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the "Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996", 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) above is guilty of one of the following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4)(b) or (C)(4)(c)
of this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams
of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a
liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of
hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (C)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall
not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl- related compound, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(6)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (C)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (C)(6)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (E)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or required by
division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24,
and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in
addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, if applicable, the court
shall also do the following:
      (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
   (F)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (F) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.11) (2000 Code, § 138.03)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)
§ 138.04 POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for
the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12) (2000 Code, § 138.04)
§ 138.05 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) below, permitting drug abuse
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (A) or (B) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (D)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender's license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
   (F)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (B) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13) (2000 Code, § 138.05)
§ 138.06 ILLEGAL CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. § 2925.03(B)
(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
the extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (C)   Whoever commits a violation of division (A) above is guilty of illegal
cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)) (2000 Code, § 138.06)
Statutory reference:
   Illegal manufacturing of controlled substances, felony, see R.C. § 2925.04
   Sale or use of drugs not approved by Food and Drug Administration, felony,
see R.C. § 2925.09
§ 138.07 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (C)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31) (2000 Code, § 138.07)
§ 138.08 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (b)   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (D)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender's license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (D), (F)) (2000 Code, § 138.08)
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 138.09 FEDERAL PROSECUTION BAR TO MUNICIPAL PROSECUTION.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19) (2000 Code, § 138.09)
§ 138.10 NITROUS OXIDE: IMPROPER DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTION; POSSESSION IN A
MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Improper dispensing or distribution.
      (1)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
         (a)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (A)
(3) below.
         (b)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (A)(4) below.
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) above is guilty
of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (3)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes
nitrous oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or
distribution of the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require
the purchaser to sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The
person dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the
card. The person shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year
from the date of the transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the
person’s business address and make them available during normal business hours
for inspection and copying by officers or employees of the State Board of
Pharmacy or of other law enforcement agencies that are authorized to
investigate violations of this code, R.C. Chs. 2925, 3719, or 4729, or federal
drug abuse control laws. The cards used to record each transaction shall inform
the purchaser of the following:
         (a)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes
of preparing food;
         (b)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health
effects; and
         (c)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
      (4)   (a)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in
this municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
         (b)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more
cartridges of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the
cartridges with a label or other device that identifies the person who
dispensed or distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
   (B)   Possession in a motor vehicle.
      (1)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      (2)   Unless authorized by this code or by state law, no person shall
possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on
a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
         (b)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of possessing nitrous
oxide in a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (4)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(R.C. § 2925.33)
(2000 Code, § 138.10)
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, see R.C. § 2925.32
§ 138.11 LABORATORY REPORT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chs. 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another law
enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority of an
institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state and that
is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North Central
Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the purpose of
providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed by the
person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the basis of
the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as
to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and that it contains any
amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of unit
dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight or the
existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this chapter,
R.C. Ch. 2925 or R.C. Ch. 3719 that is based on the possession of chemicals
sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included
in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, a laboratory report from the Bureau or from
any laboratory that is operated or established as described in this division
that is signed by the person performing the analysis, stating that the
substances that are the basis of the alleged offense have been weighed and
analyzed and stating the findings as to the content, weight, and identity of
each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and
weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training, and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (B)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (C)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the
person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney,
within seven days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the
report. The time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (D)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (E)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chs.
2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. Such portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial. If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (F)   In addition to the rights provided under division (E) above, any
person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chs. 2925 or 3719
that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any multiple thereof,
or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor violation, that
involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice, or, if the
accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the court,
present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis of the
alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further written
request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the
measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at
conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number of
unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
   (G)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled
the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was the
basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511)
(2000 Code, § 138.11)
§ 138.12 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) above shall be guilty of possession of
counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G)) (2000 Code, § 138.12)
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking and other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H) through (M)
§ 138.13 USE, POSSESSION, OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment,
product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. The term
includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment, products, or
materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender for use, or
designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (D)(4) of this section.
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or
carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe;
carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or
chiller.
   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product, or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Ch. 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product, or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product, or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Ch. 2925. A
finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product, or
material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter or
R.C. Ch. 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product, or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product, or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product, or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product, or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product, or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product, or
material.
   (C)   (1)   Subject to divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), and (D)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product, or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) above does not apply to a person’s use, or
possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (C)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person's use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. Ch. 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was used,
possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall be seized,
after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon forfeiture
shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) above is guilty of illegal use
or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(3) below, whoever violates
division (C)(2) above is guilty of dealing in drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) above by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (C)(3) above is guilty of illegal
advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (G)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
   (H)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the same
meaning as in division (A) above.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (B) above.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (H) does not apply to any person identified in
division (D)(1) above, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the possession
or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
      (5)   (a)   Division (E) above applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of division (H) of this
section.
         (b)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this division (H) when a person seeks or obtains medical
assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person
experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or
a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for that overdose.
      (6)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(3) above is guilty of illegal
use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   Arrest or conviction for a violation of division (H)(3) of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's
criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person's appearance as a witness.
      (7)   (a)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender
for a violation of division (H) of this section, the court shall do the
following, if applicable:
            1.   If the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender's driver's
or commercial driver's license or permit for not more than five years.
            2.   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         (b)   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (H)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set ofcircumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (H) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (H)(7)(b) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.141)
(2000 Code, § 138.13)
§ 138.14 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (A)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, “repackager” and “outsourcing
facility” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (B)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
this section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a
violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   If the violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of
a Schedule I or II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and
if the offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then
R.C. § 3719.99(D) applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
(2000 Code, § 138.14)
§ 138.15 POSSESSION, SALE, AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (A)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (B)   (1)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale.
      (2)   No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division
(A) above shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to prevent any
hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by any
unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) above is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (B) above, R.C. § 3719.05, 3719.06, 3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31,
or a drug abuse offense, a violation of division (B) above is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
(2000 Code, § 138.15)
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C) and (D)
§ 138.16 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in R.C.
§ 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
§ 138.17 UNLAWFUL FURNISHING OF PRESCRIPTION TO ENABLE PERSONS TO BE ISSUED
HANDICAPPED PARKING PLACARDS OR LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   No physician or chiropractor shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Furnish a person with a prescription in order to enable the person
to be issued a standard removable windshield placard, temporary removable
windshield placard, permanent removable windshield placard, or license plates
under R.C. § 4503.44, knowing that the person does not meet any of the criteria
contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   Furnish a person with a prescription described in division (A)(1)
above and knowingly misstate on the prescription the length of time the
physician or chiropractor expects the person to have the disability that limits
or impairs the person’s ability to walk in order to enable the person to retain
a placard issued under R.C. § 4503.44 for a period of time longer than that
which would be estimated by a similar practitioner under the same or similar
circumstances.
(R.C. §§ 4731.481, 4734.161)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. §§ 4731.99(F), 4734.99(B))
(2000 Code, § 138.17)
Cross-reference:
   Parking privileges for persons with disabilities, see §
76.05
§ 138.18 SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE.
   (A)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in this division (A and divisions (B), (C), and (D) below:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREP-ARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   (a)   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772:
               a.   Three and six-tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)
(a)1.b. above apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or base
ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, respectively.
The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (B)(1) below for an individual
to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in divisions (A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. above
if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   (a)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
         (b)   Division (A)(3)(a) above does not apply to an individual under
18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) above is guilty of unlawful
purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) above is guilty of underage
purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a delinquent act
that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be committed by an
adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) above is guilty of using false
information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) above is guilty of improper
purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (B)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   (a)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(1)(b) below, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell, offer
to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six-tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1.a. and
(B)(1)(a)1.b. above apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or base
ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, respectively.
The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   1.   Division (B)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a) above for a
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either to
provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. above
under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) below, no retailer
or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell, hold for
sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         (b)   Division (B)(2)(a) above does not apply to any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) above is guilty of unlawfully
selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) above is guilty of unlawfully
selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) above is guilty of improper sale
of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(4) above is guilty of failing to
submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a misdemeanor for
which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (C)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (D) below:
         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent, or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         SELLER. Means a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (C)(2)(a) above fails to match the information printed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information so
printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee of
the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (C)(2)(a) above does not preclude a seller or an agent
or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise
distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the person
presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check the
validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (C) and division (D) below.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) above except for purposes of
division (D) below, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) above.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (D) below or any
other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this divisions (C) or division (D) below relieves a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to comply with
any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the sale, giving
away, or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates divisions (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) above is guilty of
engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product transaction
scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of up to
$1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each collected
civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (D)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (B) above in which the age of the
purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an element of the
alleged violation if the seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an
affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a
pseudoephedrine product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away, or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) above, the trier
of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (B) above shall
consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and implemented and
that is intended to prevent violations of division (B) above. For purposes of
division (D)(1)(c) above, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable
reliance upon the identification presented and the completed transaction scan
may require a seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable
diligence to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not
excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable
diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (D)(1) above is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy
registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 through
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (E)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in this division (E) and division (F) below:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic system for tracking
sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on a national basis
that is administered by the National Association of Drug Diversion
Investigators or a successor organization.
         PHARMACIST. A person licensed under R.C. Ch. 4729 to engage in the
practice of pharmacy.
         PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license, a
military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor log
exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs indicating
that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or federal law.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
         WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         (a)   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         (b)   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.    Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.    Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i.
and (E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. above apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         (d)   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Ch. 4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (F)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers,
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         (a)   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         (b)   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) above, a retailer, terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall send
a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
(2000 Code, § 138.18)
§ 138.19 MEDICAL MARIJUANA.
   (A)   Definitions.
      MARIJUANA, MEDICAL MARIJUANA, CULTIVATORS, PROCESSORS AND RETAIL
DISPENSARIES as used in this section shall have the same meanings as defined or
described in R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (B)   Prohibition. Cultivators, processors and retail dispensaries of
medical marijuana, including all cultivation, processing and retail dispensing
of medical marijuana, whether licensed under R.C. Chapter 3796 or not, are
prohibited "within the corporate limits of the Village of Mariemont, Ohio.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. Each day
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. O-18-17, passed 10-9-2017)
§ 138.20 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:
      (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         (a)   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         (b)   Any energy product.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (C) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         (a)   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         (b)   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         (c)   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         (d)   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         (e)   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (D)(2)(a) to (D)(2)(d) of
this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34)
§ 138.21 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DEXTROMETHORPHAN. Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Means a document issued by the federal
government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a subdivision or
agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver's or commercial driver's
license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52, a
military identification card, or any other form of identification that bears
the name, date of birth, description, and picture of the person identified.
      RETAILER. Means a place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (B)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser's
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser's
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (B) of this section.
   (D)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   ZONING CODE
      
152.   RENTAL DWELLINGS AND UNITS
      
153.   STREET OPENINGS
      
154.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   International Property Maintenance Code
Building Code Adoption, Fees, And The Like
   
150.15   Building Code adopted by reference
   
150.16   Building permit schedule of fees
   
150.17   Hours of construction work or home improvement
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
   (A)   The 2021 Version of the International Property Maintenance Code is
hereby adopted in its entirety and incorporated into this code of ordinances
with the additions as set forth in division (B) below.
   (B)   The following shall apply to the Historic District only.
      (1)   Screens shall be fitted to all operable windows in units that are
not equipped with air conditioning between April and October of each year.
      (2)   Windows and doors shall be maintained in an air- and water-tight
condition. Replacement windows shall closely match the color and configuration
of the existing windows in all historic districts.
      (3)   All new and replacement fencing and privacy walls shall be tan,
dark brown, or black and constructed of wood, steel, or aluminum and shall be
only installed after a permit is obtained.
      (4)   All exterior building components shall be in conformance with
approved colors in historic districts.
   (C)   The following shall apply to the entire village.
      (1)   Mold and mildew shall be promptly removed and affected surface
areas treated with an approved mildewcide.
      (2)   Basement walls shall be maintained in a water-tight condition to
prevent leakage and water penetration.
      (3)   Walkways and sidewalks shall be properly maintained to eliminate
potholes and tripping hazards.
      (4)   Animal feces shall be promptly removed and legally disposed.
      (5)   Shrubs and vegetation shall be limited in height to 36 inches at
roadway intersections.
      (6)   Graffiti shall be promptly removed.
      (7)   Chain link fencing is not allowed for new and/or replacement
fencing except to repairs to existing fences less than ten feet in length.
      (8)   Vegetation and vines shall not be permitted to grown on walls.
      (9)   Waste containers shall be properly stored in an inconspicuous
location. Containers shall be equipped with tight-fitting lids.
      (10)   The owner shall furnish to the office of the Building Department
the names of all tenants within seven days of the date of occupancy of the
dwelling or dwelling unit. Failure to do so will result in the revocation of
the rental permit or conditional rental permit and a fine of $60. The existing
rental permit for the unit will remain valid for the effective dates of the
permit with the change of tenants.
(Ord. O-14-13, passed 6-10-2013; Ord. O-10-22, passed 3-28-2022; Ord. O-3-23,
passed 3-13-2023)
BUILDING CODE ADOPTION, FEES, AND THE LIKE
§ 150.15 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The revised comprehensive Building Code ordinance, copies of which are on
file in the office of the Village Fiscal Officer, is adopted by reference and
is incorporated herein as part of this code of ordinances as if set out in its
entirety herein.
(2000 Code, § 150.01) (Ord. O-7-87; passed - -; Ord. O-19-81, passed 10-12-
1981; Ord. O-2-82, passed 1-11-1982; Ord. O-3-82, passed 1-25-1982; Ord. O-4-
82, passed 2-22-1982; Ord. O-9-82, passed 4-12-1982; Ord. O-35-1982, passed 11-
8-1982; Ord. O-5-86, passed 3-24-1986; Ord. O-9-1986, passed 5-27-1986; Ord. O-
12-88, passed 8-8-1988; Ord. O-2-90, passed 1-22-1990; Ord. O-9-90, passed 4-
23-1990; Ord. O-30-92, passed 9-14-1992; Ord. O-3-02, passed 3-1-2002; Ord. O-
6-03, passed 5-12-2003)
Cross-reference:
   Building Commissioner, see §
31.077
§ 150.16 BUILDING PERMIT SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   Said fee schedule, which is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this
code of ordinances as fully as set forth herein, shall be as may be determined
from time to time by Council for the Village of Mariemont.
(2000 Code, § 150.02) (Ord. O-30-87, passed 12-28-1987; Ord. O-7-91, passed 4-
8-1991; Ord. O-14-02, passed 9-23-2002; Ord. O-3-11, passed 2-14-2011; Ord. O-
32-21, passed 12-20-2021; Ord. O-11-23, passed 4-24-2023)
§ 150.17 HOURS OF CONSTRUCTION WORK OR HOME IMPROVEMENT.
   For any construction work and/or home improvement work within the village,
the hours for said work shall be as follows: 7:30 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday; 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. on Saturday; and 10:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
on Sunday.
(Ord. O-16-11, passed 7-11-2011)
CHAPTER 151: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Short title
   
151.002   Interpretation and purpose
   
151.003   Compliance
   
151.004   Permits issued before effective date
   
151.005   Definitions
   
151.006   Districts and maps
Administration
   
151.020   Enforcement
   
151.021   Permits, certificates, and fees
   
151.022   Remedies
   
151.023   Validity
   
151.024   Powers and duties of the Planning Commission
   
151.025   Powers and duties of the Architectural Review Board
   
151.026   Basic data package
Zoning Code and Map Amendments
   
151.040   Building zone map and chapter amendments
   
151.041   Subdivision of land in the village
Use Regulations
   
151.050   Conditional use
   
151.051   Nonconforming use
Zoning Districts
   
151.060   Residence A District regulations
   
151.061   Residence B District regulations
   
151.062   Residence C District regulations
   
151.063   Business A District regulations
   
151.064   Industrial A District regulations
   
151.065   Residence D District regulations
Overlay Zoning Districts
   
151.075   Historic District
   
151.076   Park District
   
151.077   Planned unit developments
   
151.078   Special provisions for row houses and other multi-family dwellings
existing as of March 1, 2003
Court, Yard, and Height Regulations
   
151.085   Building height, yard, and court regulations
   
151.086   Tabulation and formulae
   
151.087   Permitted obstructions in required yards
   
151.088   Awning and canopy requirements
   
151.089   Off-street parking
   
151.090   Parking and storage of oversized vehicles and boats
   
151.091   Temporary portable storage containers
   
151.0911 Temporary portable toilets
   
151.092   Tree preservation
   
151.093   Utilities
   
151.094   Synthetic grass
Fences and Walls
   
151.100   Definitions
   
151.101   Fence or wall in front yard
   
151.102   Fence or wall on corner lot
   
151.103   Fence or wall in side and rear yard
   
151.104   Construction
   
151.105   Special fences
   
151.106   Maintenance
Solar Energy Systems
   
151.115   Purpose
   
151.116   Definitions
   
151.117   Applicability
   
151.118   Contents of application
   
151.119   Design and performance standards
   
151.120   Fees
   
151.121   Abandonment
Sign Regulations
   
151.124   Purpose
   
151.125   Definitions
   
151.126   Signs within residential districts
   
151.127   Signs within Business A District
   
151.128   Signs within Industrial A District
   
151.129   Signs within Historic District
   
151.130   General construction for signs
   
151.131   Temporary signs
   
151.132   Nonconforming sign
   
151.133   Sign procedures
Geothermal Systems
   
151.140   Purpose
   
151.141   Definitions
   
151.142   Applicability
   
151.143   Contents of application
   
151.144   Design and performance standards
   
151.145   Fees
   
151.146   Maintenance and abandonment
 
   
151.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Building Zone Map
   
Appendix B:   Commercial Front Awning Shapes
   
Appendix C:   Architectural Features
   
Appendix D:   Signage Lettering
   
Appendix E:   Petition and Appeal Process
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the Zoning Code.
(2000 Code, § 151.001) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.002 INTERPRETATION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to maintain a high standard of
community development and the principles of town planning, to protect and
preserve property, to promote the stability of property values, and to protect
real estate and natural features and other distinctive characteristics of the
site from impairment or destruction of value for the general community welfare.
   (B)   This chapter is adopted by the village to not only provide the minimum
requirements as stated above, but also for the following purposes:
      (1)   To ensure adequate light, air, and privacy for the health, safety,
and general welfare;
      (2)   To regulate lot sizes in residential districts, required front,
side, and rear setbacks in all districts, and maximum allowable building
heights;
      (3)   To regulate the uses permitted in the various districts established
by and shown on the building zone map as approved by the Planning Commission;
      (4)   To regulate use of space within required yards;
      (5)   To regulate requirements for the establishment of planned unit
development areas;
      (6)   To conserve, protect, and enhance the historic resources of the
village;
      (7)   To conserve, protect, and maximize the conservation of the natural
features and distinctive characteristics of the land;
      (8)   To regulate required off-street parking of motor vehicles,
trailers, and boats;
      (9)   To regulate signage so that it is compatible with the surrounding
urban environment;
      (10)   To set standards by which a nonconforming use may continue to
function and to provide for the adaptive reuse of nonconforming buildings;
      (11)   To define the powers and duties of the Park Board, the
Architectural Review Board, and the Planning Commission;
      (12)   To provide penalties for violations of the provisions of this
chapter; and
      (13)   To combat urban blight caused by neglect of buildings and
properties.
(2000 Code, § 151.002) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.003 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or
structurally altered, nor shall the occupancy or use of a premises change, nor
shall any structure or land be used which does not comply with all the
regulations established within this chapter for the district in which the
structure or land is located.
(2000 Code, § 151.003) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.004 PERMITS ISSUED BEFORE EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   The effective date of this chapter is March 25, 1996. This Code shall
supersede this chapter first established on April 23, 1942 and all amendments
thereof, including February 27, 1967.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in plans,
construction, size, or designated use of a structure for which a valid permit
has been issued or lawful approval given before the effective date of this
chapter (March 25, 1996); however, construction under such permit or approval
shall have been started within six months after the effective date of this
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 151.004) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.005 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any word
not herein described shall be as defined under a specific regulation of this
chapter, or if not so defined, in the State Building Code or in any recognized
standard English dictionary.
   ACCESSORY USES shall be located on the same lot as the principal use unless
otherwise specified. An ACCESSORY STRUCTURE shall be considered part of the
principal building and  subject to all restrictions applying to the principal
building when it has a common wall with the principal building or is attached
to the principal building by a permanent structure or when any part is located
ten feet or less from the nearest part of the principal building. An accessory
structure shall be considered and regulated as a separate structure when it is
more than ten feet from the principal building (see §
151.060(A)(7)(b)2. and §
151.085(B)(1)(c)).
   ADJOINING LOT. Contiguous or adjacent lots under different ownership. Where
a public street or alley, railroad right-of-way, or public space intervenes
between lots of different ownership, the nearest lot line beyond shall be
considered the ADJOINING LOT-LINE.
   ADULT DAY CARE FACILITY. A place, as recognized in R.C. Ch. 5119.70 et seq.,
in which day care is provided for five or more adults.
   ALLEY. Any public or private way for vehicular use, less than 24 feet in
width.
   ALTER or ALTERATION. Any act or process that changes one or more of the
exterior architectural features of any premises or results in any change to an
archaeological feature of the premises, including a change or rearrangement in
the structural parts or an enlargement, whether by extending a side or by
increasing height. ALTERATION shall also include a change in design, material,
or exterior architectural feature, but shall not include ordinary maintenance
to correct any deterioration or damage to a structure or to restore the
structure to its condition prior to such deterioration or damage; provided,
such work does not involve a change in design, material, or exterior
architectural feature.
   ANTENNA. A device used to receive a remote television, radio, or other
signal.
   APARTMENT BUILDING. A building containing two or more suites of rooms
(apartments) for rent or lease and building owned by a single company or
private owner. An apartment is not a condominium.
   AWNING. A roof-like structure usually made of canvas or other woven fabric
with support framing wholly attached to a building and intended for protection
against sun and precipitation.
   BED AND BREAKFAST HOME. An owner- or operator-occupied dwelling, providing
lodging for compensation for up to five persons. Breakfast shall be offered to
lodgers. No kitchen facilities may be provided for use by lodgers. The maximum
length of stay by any lodger shall be four consecutive weeks.
   BUILDING. Any construction built or used for the shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, or property excluding any structure designed and used as a
house trailer or other type trailer.
   CANOPY. A roof-like structure usually made of canvas or other woven fabric
with support framing extending over a space for shelter from the weather.
   CARPORT. A structure intended for use by persons residing on the premises
for housing or care of motorized vehicles used primarily for transportation.
   CEMETERY. Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the human dead
and dedicated for cemetery purposes.
   CHILD DAY CARE CENTER. A place, as recognized in R.C. § 5104.01, in which
day care is provided for five or more infants, preschool children, or school-
age children outside of the schoolhouse.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use allowed in a zoning district after a permit is
granted according to provisions of §
151.050.
   CONDOMINIUM. Real property, portions of which are designated for separate
unit ownership by the unit owners and the remainder of which is designated for
common ownership by the unit owners association.
   COURT. An open space other than a yard on the same lot with a building.
      (1)   INNER COURT. A court bounded by building walls.
      (2)   OUTER COURT. A court with one or more sides open to a yard.
   DECK. An open area serving as an outdoor living area commonly constructed of
wood either on grade or above grade.
   DWELLING. A building occupied or designed to be occupied exclusively by one
or more dwelling units, each of which is used or designed to be used as a
permanent place of abode (see DWELLING UNIT).
      (1)   DWELLING, FOUR-FAMILY. A dwelling containing four single-family
dwelling units.
      (2)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A dwelling containing five or more single-
family dwelling units.
      (3)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. A building used as a dwelling
containing a group of single-family dwelling units which are attached to each
other, and each of which has independent access to the outside of the building
to ground level and which has no less than two exterior walls fully exposed and
not in common with the exterior walls of any other unit. An attached dwelling
unit is considered to be one “structure”.
      (4)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A dwelling standing by itself and
containing only one single-family dwelling unit, separated from other dwellings
by open space.
      (5)   DWELLING, SUPPORTIVE LIVING. A detached single-family dwelling,
occupied as a home that provides room and board, personal care, habilitation
services, and supervision in a family setting for not more than four persons
who have developmental disabilities or who are elderly. This dwelling shall be
inhabited by no other persons except house parents and employees caring for the
persons residing therein and be licensed and regulated by the State Department
of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities or the State Department of
Aging.
      (6)   DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing three single-family
dwelling units.
      (7)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwell ing containing two single-family
dwelling units.
      (8)   DWELLING UNIT. One room, or a suite of two or more rooms in a
building designed for or used by one family for living and sleeping purposes
and having only one kitchen or kitchenette.
   ESTABLISHED GRADE. The elevation of a street or alley grade as established
by village authority. With reference to walls and excavations, the ESTABLISHED
GRADE shall be taken as the elevation of that point of the recorded grade of
the street or alley whereon the lot abuts, which is opposite the street or
alley lot line and nearest to the point of the structure.
   FAMILY. An individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or
adoption, living together as a housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit, or a group
of not more than four persons, who need not be related, living together as a
single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
   FENCE. A structure intended to prevent straying from within, physical
intrusion, or sight intrusion (see STRUCTURE).
   FIRST-STORY. See STORY.
   GARAGE. A building or portion thereof primarily intended for housing or care
of motorized vehicles. A GARAGE with one or more open sides is a CARPORT.
      (1)   PRIVATE GARAGE. A garage intended for use by persons residing on
the premises for the storage of noncommercial motor vehicles except as
otherwise provided for herein. A PRIVATE GARAGE is an accessory building.
      (2)   PUBLIC GARAGE. A garage other than a storage garage, where
motorized vehicles are repaired and serviced.
      (3)   STORAGE GARAGE. Any garage other than those defined herein as a
private or public garage, used exclusively for the storage of motorized
vehicles.
   HABITABLE SPACE. Space within a building or structure that is used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating.
   HEREAFTER. After the time that this chapter, or any amendments thereto,
becomes effective.
   HERETOFORE. Before the time that this chapter becomes effective.
   HISTORIC BUILDING. A building or structure, designated as historic by an
ordinance, either as an individual structure or as a structure which is within
the adopted Village Historic District.
   HOME: NURSING, REST, or CONVA LESCENT. See NURSING, REST, or CONVA LESCENT
HOME.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An activity as permitted by this chapter which may be
conducted within a dwelling by a member or members of the family residing
within the dwelling, where the occupation is accessory to the use of the
dwelling for living purposes and the residential character of the dwelling is
maintained.
   HOSPITAL. An institution classified as a hospital under R.C. § 3701.07 in
which diagnostic, medical, surgical, obstetrical, psychiatric, or
rehabilitation care are provided to in-patients for a continuous period longer
than 24 hours.
   HOT TUB OR SPA. An artificial container of water designed with a mechanical
air injection system and/or recirculating device. These devices may filter and/
or disinfect the water for reuse and are not intended to be drained between
uses.
   HOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for
compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from rooms is made through
an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours, and
which is open to transient guests, in contradistinction to a boarding house,
lodging house, or motel.
   INSTITUTION. A building or area occupied by a nonprofit corporation or a
nonprofit establishment for public use.
   LANE. See ALLEY.
   LODGE. A building or portion thereof, or premises owned or operated by a
corporation, association, person, or persons for a social, educational, or
recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which
is customarily carried out as a business.
   LOT. A piece or parcel of land, abutting on a street whose area, in addition
to the parts thereof occupied by a building and buildings necessary thereto, is
sufficient to furnish the yards and courts required for a compliance with this
chapter.
      (1)   CORNER LOT. Any lot abutting on two intersecting streets at their
intersection or on two parts of the same street, and in either case forming an
interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
      (2)   LOT DEPTH. The distance measured in the mean direction of the side
lines of the lot from the midpoint of the street lot line to the opposite main
rear line of the lot. In the case of any irregular or triangular lot, the rear
line shall be deemed to be, for the purpose of this chapter, a line not less
than ten feet long, parallel with the street line, and distant as far as
possible therefrom while entirely within the lot.
   LOT LINE. A line bounding a lot.
      (1)   ALONG THE LOT LINE. Parallel to the property line and set back not
more than 18 inches from the property line.
      (2)   FRONT LOT LINE. The line dividing a lot from a street. On a corner
lot only one street line shall be considered as a front line; provided, that
where the length of a shorter street line is less than 90% of the length of the
longer street line, the shorter street line shall be considered the FRONT LOT
LINE.
      (3)   REAR LOT LINE. The lot line opposite the front lot line. In case of
an irregular, triangular, or gore shaped lot, it shall mean a line within the
lot, at least ten feet long, parallel to and at the maximum distance from the
front lot line.
      (4)   SIDE LOT LINE. Any lot line not a front lot line or a rear lot
line.
   LOT, WIDTH OF. The width measured at right angles to its depth.
   MARQUEE. Any fixed hood (other than a canopy or awning), projecting over the
entrance to a building and which is supported solely by the building to which
it is attached, consisting of metal or other incombustible material, and which
includes a sign or advertising announcement. The location of MARQUEES shall be
restricted to the main entrance of a theater.
   MOTEL and TOURIST CABINS. A building or group of buildings, usually with
blocks of rooms opening onto a parking area, containing sleeping accommodations
which are available for temporary occupancy by automobile transients.
   NONCONFORMING. A building, structure, or premises that does not conform with
the provisions of this chapter.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A building, struct ure, or premises occupied by a use
that does not conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is
situated.
   NURSING, REST, OR CONVALESCENT HOME. An institution, residence, or facility,
as recognized in R.C. Ch. 3721, that provides, for a period of more than 24
hours, accommodations to three or more unrelated individuals who are dependent
upon the services of others, and who, by reason of age, illness, or physical or
mental impairment, require skilled nursing care and/or personal assistance.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or premises, or any portion
thereof, is owned, leased, rented, or otherwise occupied, is used or intended
to be used.
   OCCUPANT. A person(s) or an organization who has certain legal rights to, or
control over, the premises he or she occupies: a tenant or owner.
   PARAPET. The extension of a false front or wall above a roof line.
   PARKING LOT. Any surface lot which provides off-street parking for motorized
vehicles.
   PARKING SPACE. An area of not less than 162 square feet, exclusive of drives
and aisles giving access thereto, accessible from streets or alleys, or from
private driveways or aisles leading to streets or alleys and usable for the
storage or parking of one self-propelled passenger automobile.
   PATIO. A paved terrace (see TERRACE, PAVED).
   PAVED SPORTS AREA. A hard surfaced area for use as a court for volleyball,
badminton, hockey, paddle tennis, lawn tennis, basketball, handball, or similar
activities.
   PLAY STRUCTURE. A fixed structure, subordinate to the principal use of the
land and erected as freestanding or part of the principal building or accessory
structure, for the sole purpose of children’s play activities.
   PUBLIC BUILDING or SEMIPUBLIC BUILDING. Any structure used and intended or
designed for use as a church, Sunday school, public, or parochial primary or
secondary school (including the uses defined and authorized in R.C. §§ 3313.75
through 3313.78), recreation and community center, public library, public
museum, public art gallery, or municipal administration building; provided,
that none of those structures contain dwelling accommodations other than a
single-dwelling unit for use by one caretaker and his or her immediate family.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. A general term denoting land, property, or interest
therein, usually in a strip, acquired for or devoted to a street for vehicular
traffic, sidewalks, utilities, and other public uses.
   REQUIRED. Demanded by some provisions of this chapter.
   REQUIRED YARD SETBACKS. Required front, side, and rear yards as established
in this chapter by required setbacks for structures within the various
districts (see YARD).
   RETIREMENT COMMUNITY. Housing for the elderly that includes congregate or
shared living facilities, and may include independent living facilities.
   ROW HOUSE. A building containing a group of single-family attached dwelling
units placed side by side, in which each single-family unit has living
accommodations on the first story or each subsequent story above, with a common
wall between the family units and each family unit having a separate entrance.
A ROW HOUSE is considered a single structure (see also DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY
ATTACHED).
   SCHOOL, PRIVATE. An institution offering education of a character similar to
that offered in public primary and secondary schools. This does not include
nursery schools, play schools, secretarial schools, or similar limited-purpose
institutions.
   SCHOOL, PUBLIC. An institution offering primary and secondary education.
   SETBACK. The minimum distance from a property line to the face of any
structure. Yard dimensions are determined as the perpendicular distance from a
property line to the wall element nearest the property line regardless of which
floor the wall occupies. Roof overhangs, gutters, cornices, and other similar
architectural elements are allowed to extend 18 inches beyond the wall line
(see REQUIRED YARD SETBACKS).
   SHED. A one-story covered structure with one or more of its sides unenclosed
(see ACCESSORY BUILDING).
   SIDEWALK SPACE. A part of a public street or alley between the curb and
property lines.
   SPECIMEN TREES. Trees such as oak, and other slow growing hardwood species
and very large, full-headed pine trees.
   STORY. A part of the building included between the surface of any floor and
the surface of the floor
next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the
floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STORY, FIRST. The lowest level or story of a building, the floor of which is
not more than three feet six inches below the average adjoining grade.
   STREET. Any publicly- or privately-owned strip of land between property
lines, 24 feet or more in width, whose primary function is to furnish the chief
means of access to the properties abutting it.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in one or more of the structural members
of a building such as walls, columns, beams, girders, and the like.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, the use of which requires permanent
location in or on the ground or is attached to something having a permanent
location on the ground.
   TERRACE, PAVED. An open area, constructed at grade, serving as an outdoor
living area constructed of stone, brick, tile, concrete, asphalt concrete, so
as to make a firm level surface.
   TERRACE, UNPAVED. An open area serving as an outdoor living area constructed
of gravel, sand, or turf.
   THEATER. A building, or part of a building, in which persons congregate to
witness dramatic, operatic, motion picture, or other performances or displays.
   TOWNHOUSE. See DWELLING and various types thereunder.
   TREEHOUSE. A fixed structure, which shall be securely attached and entirely
supported by the structure of the tree, and which is subordinate to the
principal use of the land, and erected for the sole purpose of children’s play
activities.
   UTILITY SERVICES. Includes the following services: gas; electric; water;
sewer; and telephone. Also included for §
151.093 are public
media and communication services, such as radio, television, and information
system (see also Ch. 52).
   WALL. A structure of stone, brick, block masonry, or concrete, raised to
some height and intended to prevent straying from within, physical intrusion,
sight intrusion, or to retain earth where yard level is at different planes
(see STRUCTURE).
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a building.
      (1)   FRONT YARD. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
measured between the front lot line and the nearest point of the building.
      (2)   REAR YARD. A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
measured between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the building.
      (3)   REQUIRED YARD SETBACKS. Front, back, and side yard setbacks from
property lines required and regulated by this chapter (see SETBACK. Also see §§
151.085 and
151.086 for specific requirements).
      (4)   SIDE YARD. A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard
and measured between the side lot line and the nearest point of the building.
(2000 Code, § 151.005) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-11-98, passed 1-
12-1998; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-26-2006; Ord. O-27-22, passed 11-14-2022; Ord.
O-1-25, passed 1-13-2025)
§ 151.006 DISTRICTS AND MAPS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter the village is divided into six
classes of districts and four overlay districts as follows:
      (1)   Six districts.
         (a)   Residence A;
         (b)   Residence B;
         (c)   Residence C;
         (d)   Residence D;
         (e)   Business A; and
         (f)   Industrial A.
      (2)   Four overlay districts.
         (a)   Historic;
         (b)   Park;
         (c)   Planned unit development; and
         (d)   Zero lot lines.
   (B)   The boundaries of these districts are established as shown on a map
entitled "The Building Zone Map of the Village of Mariemont" dated January 10,
1942, and as amended on March 25, 1996 signed by the Chairperson and Secretary
of the Village Planning Commission, and signed by and filed with the Clerk of
Village of Council and on all revisions subsequently duly authorized, in
particular the Zoning Map attached hereto as Exhibit "A" (See
Appendix A).
   (C)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single
ownership and of record April 23, 1942, the use authorized on, and the district
requirements of, the least restricted portion of such lot shall be construed as
extending to the entire lot; provided, that such extension shall not include
any part of the lot which is more than 25 feet from the district boundary line.
   (D)   Where an overlay zoning district exists within one of the six main
zoning districts, the regulations of the overlay district as set forth in this
chapter shall control and supersede, whenever inconsistent, all existing
provisions and regulations of the underlying zone district. Otherwise all
existing provisions of this chapter shall govern.
   (E)   Questions concerning the exact location of district boundary lines
shall be determined by the Planning Commission according to the rules and
regulations adopted by it, in addition to those herein provided:
      (1)   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally
altered for any use, nor shall any building or premises be used other than as
permitted in the district in which that building or premises is located;
      (2)   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally
altered to exceed the height limits herein established for the district in
which that building is located; and/or
      (3)   Every building hereafter erected shall be erected on a lot as
defined herein.
(2000 Code, § 151.006) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-8-03, passed 5-
12-2003; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-26-2006; Ord. O-20-13, passed 10-14-2013; Ord.
O-19-16, passed 10-10-2016)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.020 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner to enforce this
chapter, the Village Building Code, and the State Building Code, where
applicable, by the grant and refusal of building permits and certificates of
occupancy. The Building Commissioner shall review and forward applications for
conditional use permits to the Planning Commission. The Building Commissioner
shall forward requests for certificate of appropriateness to the Architectural
Review Board. No building permit, certificate of occupancy, or conditional use
permit shall be issued for any building, use, or occupancy which in its
construction, location, or proposed use would violate or fail to comply with
the provisions of the above mentioned Codes.
   (B)   In the event of the refusal of the Building Commissioner to issue any
building permit or certificate of occupancy, such refusal shall be stated in
writing stating reasons for such refusal, and a copy thereof mailed or
delivered to the applicant for the permit and dated as of the date of that
mailing or delivery.
   (C)   Enforcement of all zoning regulations shall be charged to the Building
Commissioner. The Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit for excavating
or construction unless the plans, specifications, and intended use conform to
the provisions of this chapter. Final certification thereof shall be made by
endorsement on the application in writing by a member of the Planning
Commission designated by the Planning Commission as authorized to endorse
application for building permits. The Building Commissioner shall examine all
plans of all types of buildings and all plans for use as to compliance with
this chapter and shall furnish executive services for the Planning Commission,
handle correspondence, issue notices, compile all data and information
necessary to an intelligent consideration of the appeal cases, and perform all
services which require technical understanding and intimate knowledge of this
chapter.
(2000 Code, § 151.020) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.021 PERMITS, CERTIFICATES, AND FEES.
   (A)   Generally. Building permits, certificates of occupancy, and/or
conditional use permits are required for all structure installations,
modifications, demolitions, all change in uses, and all conditional uses where
specified and regulated by the Building Code and this chapter, except for “play
structures” and “tree houses” as defined herein and which meet the requirements
set forth in §
151.087(J) and (K). The property owner, and not the village, is responsible for
the safe construction and use of play structures and tree houses. Certificate
of appropriateness are required for all historic structures or structures
located within a historic district and for all modifications to landmark sites.
Fees for permits and certificates shall be as set forth in the Building Code.
   (B)   Building permits. All applications for building permits shall be
accompanied by plans and specifications in triplicate as provided by the
Building Code, and a plan drawn to scale in triplicate showing the actual shape
and dimensions of the lot to be built on, the size and location of all trees
larger than six inches in diameter, when measured at a height of five feet from
the ground, the exact size and location on the lot of the buildings and
accessory buildings existing, and the lines within which the proposed building
shall be erected or altered, the existing and intended use of each building or
part of a building, the number of families or housekeeping units the building
is designed to accommodate, and such other information with regard to the lot,
and neighboring lots within 200 feet, such as fencing, walls, driveways, decks,
patios, or accessory structures, as may be necessary for the enforcement of
this chapter. One copy of these plans shall be returned to the owner when the
plans shall have been approved by the Building Commissioner. All dimensions
shown on these plans relating to the location and size of the lot to be built
upon shall be based on an actual survey by a duly licensed land surveyor. The
lot and location of the building thereon shall be staked out on the ground
before construction is started. A record of applications and plats shall be
kept in the office of the Building Commissioner.
      (1)   No building permit shall be issued unless the plans and
specifications required by this section demonstrate that the exterior design
and architectural character of the proposed structure will not be at such
variance with existing structures in the immediate vicinity as to cause
substantial depreciation in the property values of such existing structures.
This determination will be done by the Building Department. Any proposed
demolition of an architectural feature on an existing residence must be noted
on the plans and is subject to approval from the Building Department. If the
residence is a contributing property to the NHL application, is an historic
site, structure, or landmark, or is located within the historic district, no
permit shall issue unless the proposed changes are first approved by the
Architectural Review Board as prescribed by division (E) below in accordance
with §§
151.025 and
151.075(H).
   (C)   Certificate of occupancy.
      (1)   No building shall be used or occupied, in whole or in part, which
does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. No change in the use of
land, nor any change of use in an existing building, shall be made, nor shall
any new building be occupied for any purpose until a certificate of occupancy
has been issued by the Building Commissioner. Every certificate of occupancy
shall state that the new use complies with all provisions of the Building Code
and this chapter (see also Building Code § 1260, Housing Code).
      (2)   In order to obtain a certificate of occupancy, the applicant shall
file an application with the Building Commissioner, indicating intended use and
occupancy for a building or premises, accompanied by a basic data package (§
151.026) where applicable. Where necessary in the opinion of the Building
Commissioner, two sets of detailed plans may be required. In all cases a
general inspection is required. Existing buildings and changing use shall meet
the requirements as specified in the Village Building Code and this chapter.
When on examination and inspection it is found that the use and building
conform substantially to the provisions of the Building Code and this chapter
for such occupancy, the Building Commissioner shall issue a certificate of
occupancy. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file in
the office of the Building Commissioner.
      (3)   A temporary certificate of occupancy for a part of a building or
premises may be issued by the Building Commissioner under such conditions as
may be prescribed by the Planning Commission.
   (D)   Conditional use permits. Conditional use permits, exceptions to the
use requirements of this chapter, are required for all conditional uses and for
the enlargement, alteration, or extension of existing conditional uses.
      (1)   In order to obtain a conditional use permit, the applicant shall
file an application with the Building Commissioner accompanied by a basic data
package (see §
151.026, “basic data package”).
      (2)   The Building Commissioner shall refer the application to the
Planning Commission which shall have 30 days to review the application with
respect to the criteria stated in §
151.024(H)(4). The Planning Commission may approve, disapprove, or approve with
conditions, an application (see §
151.050, “conditional use regulations”).
      (3)   When a conditional use that is heretofore not listed in this
chapter (§§
151.060 through
151.065) is approved by the Commission, it shall forward the application and
its recommendations to the Village Council. The Council shall have 30 days to
review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
      (4)   If approved, the Village Council shall follow the procedure stated
in this code of ordinances for enacting amendments to this chapter (see also §
151.040).
   (E)   Certificate of appropriateness.
      (1)   Generally. A request for a certificate of appropriateness shall be
filed with the Building Commissioner who shall forward it to the Architectural
Review Board prior to modification of any landmark, a historic site, a landmark
structure, or a structure located within a historic district whenever a
building permit is required and in the following circumstances:
         (a)   Whenever any modification of a historic site is proposed, or a
landmark structure, or a structure located within a historic district, whether
public or private, is proposed to undergo alteration, reconstruction,
enlargement, remodeling, painting, or staining, involving the exterior design,
material, or orientation of the structure;
         (b)   When the owner of a landmark structure intends to construct,
reconstruct, alter, or demolish any exterior portion of such structure,
including signage, or an accessory building exceeding 300 square feet in floor
area, or when the owner of a landmark structure intends to subdivide the lot
containing the landmark structure;
         (c)   When the owner of a premises within a historic district which is
not designated as a landmark structure intends to construct, reconstruct,
alter, or demolish any exterior portion of a principal building an accessory
building exceeding 100 square feet in floor area, or its signage; and
         (d)   When the owner or occupant of a premises intends to install,
construct, reconstruct, alter, or demolish any sign or awning for a landmark
structure or any structure within the Historic District, he or she shall first
apply for and secure a building permit from the Building Commissioner and a
certificate of appropriateness from the Architectural Review Board. The
Architectural Review Board shall follow the requirements concerning signs and
awnings in all sections of this chapter, including §§
151.125 through
151.133. A building permit is not required for signs permitted under §
151.126(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(4), (A)(5), and (A)(6).
   (2)   Procedure for certificate of appropriateness.
         (a)   Procedures for landmark structures and structures in historic
districts, except signs:,
            1.   If a building permit from the Building Commissioner is
required, the application for all structures, except signs, shall be
accompanied by a line-drawing, indicating at a minimum the lot dimensions,
size, shape, and dimensions of the structure; the location and orientation of
the structure, on the lot, and the actual or proposed building setback lines.
In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a detailed, narrative
description of the proposed design or change of design, use of materials, and
orientation of the structure, including any exterior plumbing, mechanical, and
electrical appendages. Except in single-family residential zoning districts,
applications for structures to be constructed or remodeled, which remodeling
would increase or decrease the total gross building area by 50% or more, shall
be accompanied by a colored elevation showing at a minimum the design, use of
materials, and orientation of buildings. In addition, the Architectural Review
Board may require the submission of colored perspectives or architectural
renderings.
            2.   The application with materials indicated shall be received by
the Building Commissioner no less than 14 days prior to the next regularly
scheduled Architectural Review Board meeting. The Village Fiscal Officer shall
cause to be posted in the prescribed locations in the village a public notice
of the scheduled hearing date of the application together with a general
description of the nature of the application. The applicant shall be notified
by mail of the date of the hearing. Notice shall be mailed to all property
owners abutting the subject property. A 24-inch by 30-inch sign shall be placed
in the front yard of subject property four days in advance of the hearing by a
Building Department representative conspicuously advertising to the passing
public the time and date of the hearing. The sign shall be only removed by a
representative of the Building Department the day following the hearing. The
Board will determine by a vote of its members whether the application for a
certificate of appropriateness will be issued, provided all other requirements
for a building permit, if applicable, are met. If a decision of the Building
Commissioner regarding requirements of this chapter, other than §
151.075, is to be appealed to the Planning Commission, a certificate of
appropriateness must first be requested from the Architectural Review Board. If
a certificate of appropriateness is not approved, the Board shall return the
application and appended material to the applicant with a notice that the
certificate of appropriateness shall not be issued and listing in writing all
reasons why the applicant did not meet the criteria and standards set forth
herein. Such notice shall also be sent to the Planning Commission. The Board
shall decide all applications for certificate of appropriateness not later than
30 days after the first hearing thereon, unless all parties agree to a
continuance (see
Appendix E).
         (b)   Historic site and landmark procedures.
            1.   The application for all historic sites and designated
landmarks shall be accompanied by a line-drawing, indicating at a minimum the
lot dimensions, with the size, shape, dimensions, and nature of the
modifications in the historic site to be made. In addition, the application
shall be accompanied by a detailed, narrative description of the proposed
design or change and the proposed method of modification.
            2.   The application with materials indicated in division (E)(2)
(b)1. above shall proceed as per division (D)(2) above.
         (c)   Signage procedures.
            1.   If a building permit from the Building Commissioner is
required, the application shall be accompanied by a color sketch of each
proposed sign or awning as it would appear on the facade or surface to which it
is to be attached, and color photographs of the existing facade and immediately
adjacent facades (see also §
151.133).
            2.   The application with material indicated shall be reviewed by
the Building Commissioner and the Chairperson of the Architectural Review
Board. They shall approve or deny a certificate of appropriateness based on
compliance with §
151.075(H)(2), “standards for review”.
            3.   If a certificate of appropriateness is denied by the Building
Commissioner and the Chairperson of the Architectural Review Board, the
application shall proceed to the Architectural Review Board as per division (E)
(2)(a)2. above (see
Appendix E).
(2000 Code, § 151.021) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-4-98, passed 1-
12-1998; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-26-2006; Ord. O-14-16, passed 7-18-2016; Ord.
O-23-22, passed 11-14-2022)
§ 151.022 REMEDIES.
   (A)   In case any building or structure is or is intended to be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any
building, structure, or land is or is intended to be used in violation of this
chapter, the Village Solicitor, in addition to the remedies herein provided
for, is authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in law or
equity to prevent any unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance, or use, or to restrain, correct,
or abate such violation.
   (B)   The Solicitor in cases of violations of the regulations for historic
properties is also empowered to bring such civil action, whether equitable or
legal, as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of §§
151.025 and
151.075, including, but not limited to, an order to restore a structure to its
appearance as the Architectural Review Board may approve. This civil remedy
shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the criminal penalty herein
provided.
(2000 Code, § 151.022) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.023 VALIDITY.
   The omission of any notice other than the notice required by general law
(R.C. § 713.12) shall not affect the validity of this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 151.023) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.024 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION.
   (A)   The Planning Commission (see §
37.01) shall exercise the powers and perform the duties of a Planning
Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 713. All meetings shall be public in
conformance with requirements of R.C. § 121.22. In exercising its jurisdiction,
the Planning Commission shall adopt from time to time such general rules and
regulations relating to its procedure as it may deem necessary and shall
designate the member or members of the Planning Commission who shall be
authorized by the Planning Commission to endorse applications for building
permits in accordance with the Building Code. The Planning Commission will meet
in January each year to vote on who will be the Chair, Vice-Chair, and
Secretary for the upcoming year.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall also act as a Zoning Board of Appeals
and is delegated power to hear and determine appeals from any decision,
including the grant or refusal by the Building Commissioner of building or
other permits, where such decision, grant, or refusal is based on the
requirements of this chapter, and power to permit exceptions and variations
from the district regulations in the classes of cases and situations
hereinafter set forth, including the granting of subdivision of existing
parcels or a planned unit development, and conditional use permits. If approval
of a conditional use heretofore not permitted, the recommendation must be
approved by Council (see Appendix E). No member of the Planning Commission
shall participate in the review of any work of which he, she, or any partner or
professional associate is the author, or in which he, she, or they may have any
direct or indirect financial interest.
   (C)   Appeals, requests for conditional use variances, and requests for
subdivision of existing parcels may be taken to the Planning Commission by any
person or by any officer, board, or commission of the village, seeking a
conditional use variance, a division of parcel, or affected by the grant or
refusal of a building permit, certificate of occupancy, or by any other
decision of the Building Commissioner where such decision is based on the
requirement of this chapter. An appeal shall be filed with the Planning
Commission within 30 days from the date of the grant, refusal, or other
decision of the Building Commissioner. Historic structures or structures
located within a historic district shall apply for a certificate of
appropriateness from the Architectural Review Board prior to bringing an appeal
to the Planning Commission (see §
151.021(E) and
Appendix E). Appeals from a Building Commissioner decision regarding the
Building Code may be taken to the Building Appeal Board (see Building Code,
1260: PM-106). The entity filing an appeal of a refusal by the Building
Commissioner to issue a permit shall furnish to the Building Department by the
first Wednesday of the month the following materials:
      (1)   Written narrative that addresses the criteria for granting a
property variance, drawings, and other descriptive data to clearly define the
nature and extent of the proposed property variance; and
      (2)   The names and address of all abutting property owners.
   (D)   Hearings of the Planning Commission shall be public in conformance
with requirements of R.C. § 121.22. Notice of hearing of each appeal or request
shall be given by the Commission by publication one time in a newspaper or
other publication distributed generally to residents of the village or posting
in five conspicuous places designated by the Council as places for posting
ordinances, resolutions, and notices. Such publication or posting shall be
effective not less than six days in advance of the date of the hearing. Notice
shall be mailed to all property owners abutting the property under appeal. A
24-inch by 30- inch sign shall be placed in the front yard of the subject
property six days in advance of the hearing by a Building Department
representative conspicuously advertising to the passing public the time and
date of appeal. The sign shall only be removed by a Building Department
representative the day following the hearing. The cost of the sign shall be
included in the appeal fee.
   (E)   Hearings shall be held within a reasonable time after the filing of
the appeal or request and the giving of notice thereof. The Commission may go
into executive session as per R.C. § 121.22. The Commission, in conformity with
its interpretation of the provisions of this chapter, or under its powers to
permit exceptions and variations hereinafter set forth, may affirm or reverse
in whole or in part or may modify the ruling or decision of the Building
Commissioner appealed from.
   (F)   The Commission shall decide all requests for a conditional use, the
subdivision of an existing parcel, and all appeals by resolution. The votes of
a majority of the members of the Commission in favor of any resolution shall be
required for its adoption. Concise minutes and records shall be kept in the
village office as to all official acts of the Board with respect to any
decisions and appeals. A copy shall be provided to Council.
   (G)   The Planning Commission shall, on the adoption of any resolution, date
and record it, and forthwith mail or deliver a copy of that decision to the
appellant or party making the request. Within ten days from that date, the
appellant or party making the request may file an appeal with the Council of
the village. No decision of the Planning Commission shall be reversed or
modified by the Council unless at least two-thirds of the members of the full
membership of Council shall concur. The granting of a conditional use permit by
the Planning Commission shall be approved by the Council with two-thirds of the
full membership concurring.
   (H)   In considering zoning appeals and requests, the Commission shall have
the power to grant a conditional use variance, to grant a subdivision of land,
or reverse or modify a ruling or decision of the Building Commissioner, in the
following respects:
      (1)   Subdivision of land. Subdivision of land may be granted according
to provisions in §
151.041 and §
151.075(H)(2)(n); provided, that the proposed subdivision will be consistent
with the intent and purpose of this chapter and will not be materially
injurious to properties in the immediate vicinity.
      (2)   Signage variances. The Commission shall have the power to overturn
a decision of the Building Commissioner regarding signage requirements as set
forth in §§
151.125 through
151.133 under the circumstances found in either divisions (H)(2)(a) or (H)(2)
(b) below, and all the circumstances found in divisions (H)(2)(c) and (H)(2)(d)
below:
         (a)   When there is reasonable doubt as to any provision of this
chapter as applied to such property; or
         (b)   Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions apply
to the subject property that do not apply generally to other properties in the
village; and
         (c)   The authorization of such variance will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity in
which the property is located; and
         (d)   The following design requirements are met.
            1.   For buildings which are parts of complexes involving several
buildings designed by the same architect to form a consistent, harmonious
entity, exterior paint or stain colors for all parts of the complex, including
signage, irrespective of diversity of ownership, shall be chosen which reflect
the character, style, and materials of the buildings.
            2.   Signage shall take into consideration exterior detail and
relationships, compatibility and appropriateness of design and details,
including all projecting and receding elements of the exterior, including, but
not limited to, porches, overhangs, and the horizontal or vertical expression
which is conveyed by these elements.
            3.   Any sign shall be of material and style harmonious to the
overall theme of the area.
      (3)   Property variances.
         (a)   The Commission shall have the power to grant a variation in the
property provisions and requirements of this chapter which will not be contrary
to the public interest or intent and purpose of this chapter, so that the
public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare
will be conserved and substantial justice done, but only where, owing to
special conditions pertaining to a specific piece of property, the strict
application of the provisions or requirements of this chapter would cause a
clearly demonstrable hardship.
         (b)   Variances may be granted under the following circumstances:
            1.   When there is reasonable doubt as to any provision of this
chapter or the building zone map as applied to such property; or
            2.   When the following facts and conditions exist:
               a.   An exceptional narrow, shallow, or irregular lot,
exceptional topographical conditions existing and of record June 27, 1941; or
               b.   Large "specimen" trees are in jeopardy; or
               c.    Where, by reason of extraordinary or exceptional
circumstances or conditions, the literal enforcement of the requirements of
this chapter would involve practical difficulty or would cause unnecessary
hardship, or would not carry out the spirit and purpose of this chapter; and
               d.   Such variance is necessary for the use and enjoyment of the
property in a manner similar to that which other property in the village is
used; and
               e.   The authorization of such variance will not be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity in
which the property is located; and
               f.   That the condition or situation of the subject property, or
the intended use of the property, for which variance is sought, is not so
general or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practical the formulation
of general regulations for such conditions or situation.
         (c)   In exercising any of the foregoing powers, the Commission may
impose such special conditions or requirements as it shall deem necessary or
desirable under the circumstances to reduce any adverse effect of any
permission or grant, on the character and development of the district in which
the specific property is located.
      (4)   Conditional use. The Commission shall have the power to hear,
decide, grant or deny applications for conditional uses in accordance with the
provisions found in §§
151.021(O) and
151.050.
         (a)   The granting of such application shall be made only if such
conditional use, exception, or modification:
            1.   Will not be materially detrimental or injurious to property in
the village;
            2.   Will be consistent with the predominant or prevailing district
land use, building and structure patterns, and the intent and purpose of this
chapter.
         (b)   The Commission may impose, in addition to the minimum
requirements and conditions specifically set forth for the conditional use,
exception, or modification in question such special conditions or requirements
as it shall deem necessary or desirable under the circumstances to reduce any
adverse effect on property in the vicinity, or on the character and development
of the district in which the specific property is located including:
            1.   Limitations on signs;
            2.   Limitations on building materials; or
            3.   Requirements for open spaces, screening, landscaping,
construction offenses and other barriers, shielding of floodlights, erection of
safety devices, location of vehicular entrances and exits, and surfacing of
roads and driveways.
         (c)   Such other requirements and conditions as may be necessary to:
            1.   Safeguard the public health, safety, convenience, and general
welfare;
            2.   Minimize the adverse impact of adjoining properties in the
district or vicinity; and
            3.   Protect and preserve the character, attractions and orderly
development of the district or vicinity.
(2000 Code, § 151.025) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-16-03, passed 11-
24-2003; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-26-2006; Ord. O-7-20, passed 2-24-2020)
§ 151.025 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   Architectural Review Board.
      (1)   (a)   The Architectural Review Board shall consist of seven
members, the Mayor of the village and one Council member only, and five members
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by Village Council. All appointments -
shall be for a period of two years each. Vacancies shall be filled within 60
days for the remainder of unexpired terms in the same manner as original
appointments and confirmations. The Mayor may serve as chairperson of the
Architectural Review Board subject to review and approval by Village Council.
Moreover, neither the Mayor nor the Council member shall be allowed to vote on
any appeal that may be brought to a decision of the Architectural Review Board.
Therefore, the Mayor will not be the tiebreaker for any issues that may come
before Council on an appeal of a decision of the ARB. The Board shall include
at least one registered architect and others with interest or special expertise
in the historic preservation disciplines. At least one member shall be the
owner of property within the Historic District. All members shall be residents
of the village. Members shall be encouraged to attend an educational session
relating to historic issues at least once a year. Any member of the Board shall
be subject to removal for cause in the manner provided by the statutes of the
state. In the case of temporary absence or disability of any member, a member
may be appointed and confirmed in the manner above provided to serve during the
temporary absence or disability. No member of the Board shall participate in
the review of any work of which he or she, any partner or professional
associate is the author, or in which he, she, or they may have any direct or
indirect financial interest.
         (b)   This division (A)(1) shall go into effect at the earliest date
allowed by law.
      (2)   There shall be at least four meetings a year. All meetings shall be
public in conformance with requirements of R.C. § 121.22. The Village Fiscal
Officer shall cause notice to be posted in five conspicuous places designated
by the Council as places for posting ordinances, resolutions, and notices, (see
§ 151.021(E)(2)(a)2.).
      (3)   In exercising its duties, the Architectural Review Board shall
adopt such general rules and regulations relating to its procedure as it may
deem necessary, including holding a meeting in January to determine who will be
the Chair and the Vice Chair, and a Secretary who shall prepare the certificate
of appropriateness, the meeting minutes, and the annual report.
      (4)   Concise minutes and records shall be kept as to all official acts
of the Board. A copy shall be kept in the village office and a copy provided to
Council. A written annual report of the Board's activities, cases, decisions,
and qualifications of members shall be kept on file at the village office and
available for public inspection.
   (B)   Board as the Historic Preservation Committee. The Architectural Review
Board shall be the Historic Preservation Commission of the municipality and
shall have the following powers and duties, in addition to these set forth in §
151.025(B)(1) through (B)(8).
      (1)   In conjunction with the Village Preservation Foundation and the
State Historic Preservation Office, to conduct a continuing survey of cultural
resources in the community. To make recommendations for designation of local
historic districts, landmarks, and historic sites to the Village Council
according to §
151.075(I);
      (2)   In conjunction with the Village Preservation Foundation, to advise
Village Council regarding the protection of the village's cultural resources;
      (3)   In conjunction with the Village Preservation Foundation and other
historic and archaeological experts, to review and facilitate all proposed
National Register nominations for properties within the village;
      (4)   In conjunction with the Village Preservation Foundation, to work
toward the continuing education of village citizens regarding historic
preservation issues;
      (5)   To establish and use "standards for review" (see §
151.075(H)) for the conservation of designated local historic districts,
landmarks, and historic sites in decisions on requests for permits for
alterations, demolitions, or additions to listed landmarks and historic sites
within historic district(s), whether ownership is private or public;
      (6)   To maintain a detailed map of the Historic District(s) and a
detailed list of all historic sites and landmarks structures in the village at
the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building and make it available for public
inspection;
      (7)   To review and approve or deny applications for all landmark
structures, historic sites and districts, including signage, for certificate of
appropriateness based on the regulations of §§
151.021(E) and
151.075 for landmark structures or structures within a historic district within
the village. In considering a request for a certificate of appropriateness, the
Architectural Review Board shall follow the design requirements in §
151.075(H) and ensure compliance with the district requirements in §§
151.060 through
151.065 and any other guidelines adopted by the Village Council. The
Architectural Review Board shall recommend to Village Council all landmark
structure, historic site, and historic district applications by resolution
(except initial signage approval, see §
151.021(E)(2)(c)). The Board shall, on the adoption of any resolution by
Village Council, date and record it, and forthwith mail or deliver a copy of
that decision to the applicant. A denial of a certificate of appropriateness
application may be appealed to the Village Council (see division (C) below, and
also §
151.021(B)(2)); and
      (8)   (a)   To review and approve or deny applications sent from the
Building Commissioner and the Architectural Review Board Chairperson for all
signage for landmark structures, historic sites, and historic districts for
certificate of appropriateness based on the regulations of §§
151.021(E) and
151.075 for landmark structures or structures within a historic district within
the village.
         (b)   In considering a signage request for a certificate of
appropriateness, the Architectural Review Board shall follow the design
requirements in §
151.075(H) and ensure compliance with the district requirements in §§
151.060 through
151.065 and any other guidelines adopted by the Village Council. The
Architectural Review Board shall decide all signage applications by resolution.
The Board shall, on the adoption of any resolution, date and record it, and
forthwith mail or deliver a copy of that decision to the applicant. A denial of
a certificate of appropriateness signage application may be appealed to the
Village Council (see division (C) below and §
151.021(E)(2) and
Appendix E)).
      (9)   To review and approve any Building Application forwarded by the
Building Department where there is concern whether the architectural character
is at variance with existing structures in the immediate vicinity as to cause
substantial depreciation in the property values of such existing structures or
the residence is listed as a contributing property to the NHL application. This
includes both the primary residence and any accessory structure. No permit
shall be issued unless the proposed changes are first approved by ARB as
prescribed by this section in accordance with §
151.075(H).
   (C)   Appeal procedures.
      (1)   Any person, firm, or corporation or any officer, department, board,
or agency of the village who has been aggrieved by any decision of the
Architectural Review Board involving an application for a certificate of
appropriateness may appeal such decision to Council by filing notice of intent
to appeal with the Village Fiscal Officer within ten days from the date of
receipt of the decision, setting forth the facts of the case. No decision of
the Architectural Review Board shall be reversed or modified by Council unless
at least two-thirds of the full membership of the Council shall concur.
      (2)   An appeal regarding any section of this chapter other than §
151.075 shall be brought to the Planning Commission after the decision from the
Architectural Review Board. Thereafter, appeals regarding the same property
from the Planning Commission and the Architectural Review Board are to be taken
simultaneously to the Village Council (see §
151.021(E) and
Appendix E).
(2000 Code, § 151.026) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-5-98, passed 1-
12-1998; Ord. O-11-14, passed 3-24-2014; Ord. O-14-16, passed 7-18-2016; Ord.
O-23-17, passed 10-23-2017; Ord. O-6-20, passed 2-24-2020; Ord. O-2-21, passed
1-25-2021; Ord. O-26-22, passed 11-14-2022; Ord. O-1-25, passed 1-13-2025)
§ 151.026 BASIC DATA PACKAGE.
   For the purpose of changing a building’s use according to the State Basic
Building Code and as set forth in §§
151.060 through
151.065), or obtaining a conditional use permit, a basic data package is
required which includes:
   (A)   A site plan to scale showing the location, size, and use of buildings,
parking areas, landscape planting, proposed grading, walks, drives, and other
improvements and existing trees to be removed, and including the following:
      (1)   Existing side yard conditions including property lines, contours
with intervals of one foot or sufficient spot elevations, existing buildings
and trees with a caliper of six inches or more, and similar data on adjacent
property;
      (2)   Height, use, and gross floor area of all buildings;
      (3)   Number of parking spaces; and
      (4)   Elevations of proposed buildings.
   (B)   A written description of the proposal and the reasons therefor; and
   (C)   Any written agreements or restrictions to accompany the proposal.
   (D)   Any whole or part of a building that is planned to be demolished needs
to be noted in the base package.
(2000 Code, § 151.027) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-25-22, passed 11-
14-2022)
ZONING CODE AND MAP AMENDMENTS
§ 151.040 BUILDING ZONE MAP AND CHAPTER AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Amendments to the use, height, yard, and court regulations affecting
either the building zone map and/or this chapter shall be adopted as provided
in R.C. §§ 713.07, 713.08, and 713.10 and any amendments or supplements
thereto.
   (B)   A petition for amendment of the building zone map for additions and
modifications of existing district designations and/or boundaries of existing
district(s) or adding new district(s), shall include the following:
      (1)   A copy of the County Auditor’s village plat (527) page (or pages)
necessary to show the area to be amended and a map showing present zoning
district boundaries. The map shall show at least two streets in each direction
beyond proposed zoning district boundaries;
      (2)   A list of the owners and their addresses of all properties in and
within 300 feet of the nearest property line of amended area; and
      (3)   A proposed ordinance to amend the building zone map.
   (C)   The procedure for both building zone map and this chapter’s amendments
is as follows.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall transmit to Council the ordinance and
documents with its approval or disapproval.
      (2)   The Planning and Zoning Committee of Council shall consider the
proposal and report its recommendation to the full Council, and also may report
a resolution fixing the time (not more than 30 days) for a public hearing
before Council.
      (3)   Council shall cause notice of such public hearing to be published,
as required by law, and in the case of a building zone map amendment, shall
mail or send by certified mail at the prepaid cost of the proponents of the
ordinance, a notice of the proposed change to owners of property in the area of
such proposed change, and within 300 feet of the nearest property line of the
amended area.
      (4)   After the public hearing, the final ordinance with documents shall
be presented by the Planning and Zoning Committee of Council with its
recommendation to the full Council.
(2000 Code, § 151.040) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
Cross-reference:
   Building zone map, see
Appendix A
§ 151.041 SUBDIVISION OF LAND IN THE VILLAGE.
   (A)   Generally. The Rules and Regulations Governing Subdivision of Land in
Mariemont adopted by the Planning Commission on February 9, 1944, and revised
in January, 1984, are adopted by reference and are incorporated herein in their
entirety as if fully rewritten herein.
   (B)   Subdivision of an existing parcel of land.
      (1)   Any subdivision of an existing parcel of land or transfer of a part
of a recorded parcel of land to an adjacent recorded parcel of land must be
approved by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   (a)   The owner of the parcel to be subdivided must submit a letter
requesting subdivision to the Planning Commission and five copies of a site
plan prepared by a surveyor licensed in the state.
         (b)   Site plan must show the following:
            1.   All property lines of parcel to be subdivided with dimension
and compass directions;
            2.   All structures thereon and their setbacks from all property
lines;
            3.   Proposed new property lines with dimensions and directions,
changes in dimensions of existing property lines, and revised setbacks of
structures from proposed new property lines. Scale of drawing, compass points,
abutting street right-of- ways, and areas of existing and proposed parcels; and
            4.   Name and address of owner of parcel to be subdivided and the
County Auditor’s book, plat, and parcel number(s) of property.
      (3)   Compliance with other regulations of the Rules and Regulations
Governing Subdivision of Land in Mariemont need not be complied with except as
necessary to comply with the Building Code and this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 151.041) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
USE REGULATIONS
§ 151.050 CONDITIONAL USE.
   Conditional use permits, exceptions in the use requirements of this chapter,
are required for all conditional uses and for the enlargement, alteration, or
extension of existing conditional uses (see §
151.021(D)). Heretofore, existing uses of a type requiring a conditional use
permit shall not be nonconforming uses but shall be deemed to have a
conditional use permit for the existing use; however, a conditional use permit
shall be required for any enlargement, alteration, or extension. Conditional
use permits are not transferable when there is a change in occupancy, either of
owner or tenant. An application for a conditional use permit shall include a
basic data package (see §
151.026) and be submitted to the Building Commissioner and reviewed by the
Planning Commission according to provisions in §
151.024(F).
(2000 Code, § 151.050) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.051 NONCONFORMING USE.
   (A)   Any nonconforming use existing prior to the time that such use has
been prohibited by ordinance may be continued.
   (B)   No structure or land where a nonconforming use has been abandoned, or
has been changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located,
shall again be devoted to a nonconforming use. Lack of such nonconforming use
for a period of one year shall be prima facie evidence of abandonment. If no
alterations or extensions to the exterior of any building situated on those
premises are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to a use
more nearly conforming to the uses permitted, as specified by this chapter for
the district in which located, with respect to number of employees, noise,
illumination, odors, hours of operation, hazards to health and safety, and
similar considerations, providing the Council grants authority to the Building
Commissioner to issue a certificate of occupancy or a conditional use permit.
   (C)   Any nonconforming building or structure or one or more of a group of
nonconforming buildings or structures related to one use and under one
ownership damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, or other act of God, or
vandalism, may be reconstructed and used as before such calamity; provided,
that the restoration and resumption shall take place within one year of the
time of such damage or destruction. If it is damaged to the extent of 65% or
more of the assessed valuation for tax purposes, the reconstruction must be in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared
unsafe by the Building Commissioner, or prevent compliance with the lawful
requirements of the Building Commissioner.
   (E)   Whenever a district shall be changed hereafter, any then existing
lawful use may be continued.
   (F)   No existing building or premises devoted to a use not permitted by
this chapter for the district in which such building or premises is located,
except when required to do so by law or ordinance, shall be enlarged, extended,
reconstructed, or structurally altered, unless such use is changed to a use
permitted in the district in which such building or premises is located.
   (G)   Any nonconforming or conditional use of a building or premises shall
not be changed unless such use is changed to a use permitted in the district in
which such building or premises is located.
   (H)   The Building Commissioner shall maintain a record of all nonconforming
uses, both prior to and after the effective date of this chapter (March 25,
1996), indicating the date, ownership, use, and any additional information that
is deemed relevant.
(2000 Code, § 151.051) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 151.060 RESIDENCE A DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The permitted uses of the Residence A District shall
be limited to those set forth in this division (A).
      (1)   Permitted residential uses.
         (a)   Detached single-family dwellings; or
         (b)   Designated historic single-family attached dwelling as per §
151.075(F)(10), (F)(11), and (F)(12).
      (2)   Permitted institutional uses.
         (a)   Public primary and secondary schools including uses defined and
authorized in R.C. §§ 3313.75 through 3313.78;
         (b)   Churches and other places of worship, parish center and Sunday
school buildings, public museums, public art galleries; or
         (c)   Public administration buildings, including fire and police
stations.
      (3)   Permitted recreational uses.
         (a)   Parks, play fields, playgrounds, and recreational structures,
tennis courts, and community center buildings, publicly owned and operated,
including such structures and concessions as are necessary for their operation
(see Park District, §
151.076); or
         (b)   Privately-owned tennis courts, swimming pools, and paved sports
areas are permitted subject to the following limitations: in any residential
district, tennis courts, swimming pools, and paved sports areas shall be
located no closer than 30 feet from any property line and shall not occupy more
than the equivalent of 25% of the required rear yard, with the following
exception: if such uses are clearly a subordinate use, such as a basketball
pole on a driveway, they shall be subject to the minimum sideyard setbacks for
that property as specified in this chapter for the primary structure.
      (4)   Permitted office uses: None.
      (5)   Permitted commercial uses: None.
      (6)   Permitted industrial uses: None.
      (7)   Permitted accessory uses.
         (a)   Professional office occupations conducted as home occupations
subject to the following limitations:
            1.   Such office occupation shall be limited to remunerative
personal service which is of value primarily for the knowledge, talent, or
skill which can be communicated in oral, written, fine-arts, or graphic-arts
form;
            2.   Such office occupation shall be conducted entirely within a
dwelling;
            3.   No special outside entrance shall be provided or used in
connection with the office occupation;
            4.   No person other than a resident member of the family residing
on the premises shall be directly or indirectly employed in such office
occupation either on or off the premises;
            5.   The total floor area devoted to such use shall not exceed 25%
of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit, and not more than 50% of the
gross floor area of any story shall be devoted to such use;
            6.   There shall be no production, storage, or sale of merchandise
or stock in trade except the written, fine-arts, or graphic- arts materials
customarily incidental to office occupations as limited in division (A)(7)(a)1.
above;
            7.   There shall be no instruction on the premises for more than
two students or trainees at any one time;
            8.   No display of goods or services pertaining to such office
occupations shall be visible from outside the building;
            9.   No mechanical or electrical equipment, other than that
customarily used for household purposes, shall be permitted which has a
capacity over one horsepower or requires electrical service over 30 amperes;
and
            10.   Each office home occupation shall be limited to one sign as
specified under §
151.126(A)(8).
         (b)   Accessory structures, erected as part of the principal building
or as separate from this division (A)(7)(b): when erected as a separate
structure, the accessory structure shall be located in the rear yard. Accessory
buildings or structures shall be located on the same lot as the principal
building, shall not involve the conducting of any business, shall not be used
as a habitable space, nor shall there be more than one separate accessory
building on any lot.
            1.   Accessory buildings are permitted for one or a combination of
one or more of the following uses:
               a.   A private garage or carport;
               b.   A building for the storage of tools, equipment, or supplies
used for the maintenance of the buildings and land of the lot on which the
accessory building is located;
               c.   A building for the storage of tools, equipment, and
supplies used for the growing of vegetation, vegetables, fruits, shrubs, and
trees on the lot on which the building is located.
               d.   A building or structure for use primarily as a recreational
space, not limited to gazebos, screened porches, greenhouses, picnic shelters,
swimming pools, tennis or sports courts.
            2.   An accessory structure erected as a separate building shall
not exceed 15 feet in total height measured from the grade at front of the
structure to the highest point of roof and when located at least three feet
from all lot lines of the abutting lots. The maximum height of 18 feet is
allowable if six feet or greater away from all lot lines. Maximum height will
be interpolated when the distance to the nearest lot line is between three and
six feet. Structures must be single story only with allowable attic storage.
FRONT OF BUILDING shall mean that side facing the front property line. Such
accessory buildings shall adhere to the following size requirements when
located in a REQUIRED REAR YARD, defined as an area across the rear of the
property 30 feet in depth multiplied by the average width of this area:
               a.   All accessory buildings or structures erected in the rear
yard shall not occupy more than 30% of required rear yard regardless of use.
               b.   For lot widths 50 feet or less, the maximum footprint is
576 square feet. For lot widths greater than 50 feet, the maximum footprint is
864 square feet. This maximum size is regardless of the percentage of required
rear yard calculation.
               c.   At all times, the accessory building must be a smaller
footprint than the primary residence.
               d.   When power or water are provided to the accessory
structure, it must have a single electric and water service fed from the
primary residence.
               e.   Roof eaves can extend into the accessory setback up to 12
inches.
               f.   For street-to-street lots, the accessory structure must
adhere to the setback requirements for the primary residence, including
permitted obstructions in the required yard per §
151.087. Street-to-street lots have two front yards.
               g.   For corner lots, the accessory structure must adhere to the
primary residence setback requirements for the side facing the public street.
               h.   For new buildings over 200 square feet where there is doubt
on whether the architectural style is at a variance with the existing primary
structure, the ARB will need to approve when the application is forwarded from
the Building Department.
               i.    Additional screening, fencing, or landscape elements may
also be required based on impact to neighboring properties as determined by the
Building Department.
               j.    Spacing of the accessory buildings must be a minimum of
ten feet from the nearest edge of the primary residence, and without any direct
attachment that interconnects the structures. There will be no overhanging roof
lines or elements between the two structures.
      (8)   Permitted other uses. Historic cemetery (see §
151.075(F)(17)).
      (9)   Permitted planned unit development uses. The uses within a planned
unit development approved pursuant to the regulations as set forth in §
151.077 and on sites of a minimum size as herein indicated are as follows:
         (a)   Detached or attached single-family dwellings on sites one acre
or more in size;
         (b)   Historic buildings used for two- family and multi-family
dwellings with no minimum site size required, but subject to §
151.075; and
         (c)   All permitted and conditional uses set forth in this section may
be permitted in a planned unit development.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The conditional uses of the Residence A District
shall be limited to those set forth in this division (B), when authorized by
the Building Commissioner after a finding that they meet the requirements and
conditions specified hereinafter; provided further, that any conditional use
shall meet the requirements and conditions specified in §
151.050.
      (1)   Conditional residential uses: None.
      (2)   Conditional institutional uses: Child care centers and preschools
accessory to permitted or conditional institutional uses as in division (A)(2)
above; provided, that no outdoor play area or play equipment shall be located
or installed in any front yard.
      (3)   Conditional recreational uses: None.
      (4)   Conditional office uses.
         (a)   Business and professional offices where knowledge, talent, or
skill is communicated in oral, written, fine-arts, or graphic-arts form;
         (b)   Other offices (including licensed medical practices) that are
deemed to be compatible with the residential neighborhoods in which they may be
located; and
         (c)   Parking for conditional office uses shall be provided as
stipulated in §
151.089.
      (5)   Conditional commercial uses: None.
      (6)   Conditional industrial uses: None.
      (7)   Conditional other uses: None.
      (8)   Conditional planned unit development uses: None.
      (9)   Conditional accessory uses. None.
   (C)   Requirements. Uses of the Residence A District shall be subject to the
requirements specified in §§
151.085 through
151.087, and shall include the following requirements:
      (1)   Parking and loading as per §
151.089;
      (2)   Signs as per §
151.126;
      (3)   Fences as per §§
151.100 through
151.106;
      (4)   Dish-type satellite antennas and receiving systems:
         (a)   Dish-type antennas satellite and receiving system: A dish-type
antennas satellite, plus its receiver used for receiving television signals;
and
         (b)   The character of the village is directly linked to the economic,
social, historical, and cultural health and well-being of the community. This
division (C)(4)(b) therefor establishes dish-type antennas satellite and
receiving system regulations to maintain the historic character of the village
and to preserve the distinctive historical and architectural character of this
community which has been influenced by the architecture of an earlier period.
Consistent with overall village aesthetic regulations, dish-type antennas
satellite signal and receiving systems, subject to the following regulations,
may be located within the village.
            1.   Dish-type antennas satellite signal and receiving systems
shall be located only in the rear yard, either behind the principal dwelling or
structure located on the lot, or attached to the rear of the principal building
or structure, and subject to divisions (C)(4)(b)2. through (C)(4)(b)4. below,
except in the event that the optimal satellite signal cannot be obtained at
this location, the property owner shall furnish, as a condition of the granting
of the required building permit, a duly notarized affidavit from the supplier
of the dish-type antennas stating that all appropriate measures were undertaken
whichprecluded placing the antenna in any location other than the rear of the
structure. In the event that the optimal satellite signal cannot be obtained at
this location by the installer, the property owner must notify the Building
Department to have the signal strength verified by village inspector. No
deviation on the placement of the dish antenna is permitted without prior
approval from the Building Department.
            2.   The maximum size of any dish antenna shall not exceed 18
inches by 20 inches parabolic dimensions. The dish-type antennas satellite
signal and receiving system shall be located so that however turned or
otherwise used, no part of the system or its mounting structure will project
into a side yard at the rear corner of the principal building or structure and
if mounted in the rear yard, shall be set back from the rear lot line no less
than 15 feet. If mounted on the principal building or structure, no part of the
system or its mounting structure shall extend above any part of the highest
part of the roof of the principal building or structure; however, it may be
mounted on the rear side of a chimney; provided, that no part of the structure
may extend more than two feet above the top of the chimney. If ground mounted
in the rear yard, no part of the system including the mounting apparatus may
extend more than five feet above the ground.
            3.   No installation or erection of a dish-type satellite signal
and receiving system shall commence before a permit is obtained in accordance
with this chapter.
            4.   All other dish-type antennas satellite signal and receiving
systems are prohibited.
       (5)   Cellular or wireless communications towers and facilities for the
provision of personal wireless services shall be prohibited in any residential
or business district (see §
151.093);
      (6)   In any residential district, one rod or wire antenna for the
receiving of television or radio signals may be mounted on the principal
building at a height of not more than five feet above the highest point of the
structure;
      (7)   Animals: the keeping of wild animals, livestock, game, fowl, and
the operation of a licensed kennel are prohibited. Domestic animals shall be
kept in a manner that does not create a “nuisance” as defined in this code of
ordinances;
      (8)   Construction support equipment and structures for projects on
private property shall be located entirely on the building lot affected and not
on the public thoroughfare. No temporary toilet, construction trailer, or trash
disposal device shall be located nearer to the property line than 15 feet.
Trash disposal devices shall be emptied promptly and as necessary to avoid
clutter to the ground and surrounding properties. Temporary toilets shall be
serviced regularly to avoid odor. All such devices shall be removed promptly at
the end of construction. Projects located on public property shall not impinge
on private property including access thereto; and
      (9)   No stormwater drainage shall be allowed to flow from a property
onto a neighboring property on new construction completed after January 1,
2007. All stormwater shall be conducted to a storm sewer, street gutter line,
or drainage swale located in the public right-of-way.
(2000 Code, § 151.060) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-2-98, passed 1-
12-1998; Ord. O-16-03, passed 11-24-2003; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-26-2006; Ord.
O-6-18, passed 2-12-2018; Ord. O-1-25, passed 1-13-2025)
§ 151.061 RESIDENCE B DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The permitted uses of the Residence B District shall
be limited to those set forth in this division (A).
      (1)   Permitted residential uses.
         (a)   Detached single-family dwellings; or
         (b)   Two-, three-, or four-family dwellings containing not more than
four single-family dwelling units.
      (2)   Permitted institutional uses.
         (a)   All uses permitted under §
151.060(A)(2);
         (b)   Hospitals, nursing, rest or convalescent homes, retirement
communities and group care centers, and accessory uses located within the
principal structure subordinate to the principal use in area, extent, and
purpose, which shall include medical clinics and medical offices. A facility or
facilities for uses permitted under this section shall be located on a parcel
or parcels under common ownership with a minimum area of five acres and
further; provided, that substance abuse treatment or rehabilitation facilities
and facilities for the treatment or housing of mentally ill persons shall not
be permitted uses within this district;
         (c)   Multi-service centers providing community-wide support and
services to persons who are elderly; or
         (d)   Public library.
      (3)   Permitted recreational uses: All uses permitted as per §
151.060(A)(3).
      (4)   Permitted office uses: None.
      (5)   Permitted commercial uses: None.
      (6)   Permitted industrial uses: None.
      (7)   Permitted accessory uses.
         (a)   Office occupations as a home occupation as per §
151.060(A)(7)(a)1. through (A)(7)(a)10.
         (b)   Accessory buildings as per §
151.060(A)(7)(b)1. and (A)(7)(b)2.
      (8)   Permitted other uses: None.
      (9)   Permitted planned unit development uses. The uses within a planned
unit development
approved pursuant to the regulations as set forth in §
151.077 and on sites of a minimum size as herein indicated are as follows:
         (a)   Detached or attached single-family dwellings on sites one acre
or more in size;
         (b)   Historic buildings used for two- family and multi-family
dwellings with no minimum site size required, but subject to §
151.075; and
         (c)   All permitted and conditional uses set forth in this section may
be permitted in a planned unit development.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The conditional uses of the Residence B District
shall be limited to those set forth in this division (B), when authorized by
the Building Commissioner after a finding that they meet the requirements and
conditions specified hereinafter; provided further, that any conditional use
shall meet the requirements and conditions specified in §
151.050.
      (1)   Conditional residential uses: None.
      (2)   Conditional institutional uses: Child care centers and preschools
as per §
151.060(B)(2).
      (3)   Conditional recreational uses: None.
      (4)   Conditional office uses: None.
      (5)   Conditional commercial uses: None.
      (6)   Conditional industrial uses: None.
      (7)   Conditional other uses: None.
      (8)   Conditional planned unit development uses: None.
      (9)   Conditional accessory uses: None.
   (C)   Requirements. Uses of the Residence B District shall be subject to the
requirements specified in §§
151.085 through
151.087, and shall include the following requirements:
      (1)   Parking and loading as per §
151.089;
      (2)   Signs as per §
151.126;
      (3)   Fences as per §§
151.100 through
151.106;
      (4)   Dish-type satellite and receiving systems as per §
151.060(C)(4);
      (5)   Free standing antennas as per §
151.060(C)(6); and
      (6)   Animals as per §
151.060(C)(7).
(2000 Code, § 151.061) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-6-98, passed 1-
12-1998)
§ 151.062 RESIDENCE C DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The permitted uses of the Residence C District shall
be limited to those set forth in this division (A).
      (1)   Permitted residential uses.
         (a)   Detached single-family dwellings;
         (b)   Two-, three-, or four-family dwellings containing not more than
four single-family dwelling units; or
         (c)   Multiple dwellings containing not more than 22 dwelling units in
any one structure.
      (2)   Permitted institutional uses: All uses permitted as per §
151.060(A)(2).
      (3)   Permitted recreational uses: All uses permitted as per §
151.060(A)(3).
      (4)   Permitted office uses: None.
      (5)   Permitted commercial uses: None.
      (6)   Permitted industrial uses: None.
      (7)   Permitted accessory uses:
         (a)   Office occupations as a home occupation as per §
151.060(A)(7)(a)1. through (A)(7)(a)10; or
         (b)   Accessory buildings as per §
151.060(A)(7)(b)1. and (A)(7)(b)2.
      (8)   Permitted other uses: None.
      (9)   Permitted planned unit development uses. The uses within a planned
unit development approved pursuant to the regulations as set forth in §
151.077 and on sites of a minimum size as herein indicated are as follows:
         (a)   Detached or attached single-family dwellings on sites one acre
or more in size;
         (b)   Historic buildings used for two- family and multi-family
dwellings with no minimum site size required, but subject to §
151.075; or
         (c)   All permitted and conditional uses set forth in this section may
be permitted in a planned unit development.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The conditional uses of the Residence C District
shall be limited to those set forth in this division (B), when authorized by
the Building Commissioner after a finding that they meet the requirements and
conditions specified hereinafter; provided further, that any conditional use
shall meet the requirements and conditions specified in §
151.050.
      (1)   Conditional residential uses: None.
      (2)   Conditional institutional uses: Child care centers and preschools
as per §
151.060(B)(2).
      (3)   Conditional recreational uses: None.
      (4)   Conditional office uses: None.
      (5)   Conditional commercial uses: None.
      (6)   Conditional industrial uses: None.
      (7)   Conditional other uses: None.
      (8)   Conditional planned unit development uses: None.
      (9)   Conditional accessory uses: None.
   (C)   Requirements. Uses of the Residence C District shall be subject to the
requirements specified in §§
151.085 through
151.087, and shall include the following requirements:
      (1)   Parking and loading as per §
151.089;
      (2)   Signs as per §
151.126;
      (3)   Fences as per §§
151.100 through
151.106;
      (4)   Dish-type satellite and receiving systems as per 151.060(C)(4);
      (5)   Freestanding antennas as per §
151.060(C)(6); or
      (6)   Animals as per §
151.060(C)(7).
(2000 Code, § 151.062) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.063 BUSINESS A DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The permitted uses of the business district shall be
limited to those set forth in this division (A).
      (1)   Permitted residential uses: Historically designated combination
multiple dwelling above business (see §
151.075(F)).
      (2)   Permitted institutional uses.
         (a)   All uses permitted as per §
151.060(A)(2); or
         (b)   Lodge or hall for organization meetings (see §
151.005, definition of LODGE).
      (3)   Permitted recreational uses: All uses permitted as per §
151.060(A)(3).
      (4)   Permitted office uses.
         (a)   Business and professional offices where knowledge, talent, or
skill is communicated in oral, written, fine-arts, or graphic-arts form; or
         (b)   Offices for the practice of medicine, dentistry, or optometry by
persons licensed in accordance with R.C. Chs. 4731, 4715, and 4725,
respectively.
      (5)   Permitted commercial uses.
         (a)   Retail sales as follows:
            1.   Grocery stores, meat-fruit, vegetable markets, supermarkets,
candy or confectionery stores, drug stores, delicatessens, florist shops, and
similar uses;
            2.   Retail stores: art or antique; artists supply; auto supply
(except automobile filling stations and the installation of auto parts and
accessories); bicycle sales; books; cabinetry; clothing; dry goods; electrical
appliances; eyeware; furniture; floor covering; gifts; handicraft; hardware;
jewelry; leather goods and luggage; millinery; notions; paint; picture frames;
radio and television; shoes; sporting goods; stamps and coins; stationery;
toys; watches; and clocks;
            3.   Bakeries employing not more than four persons in production;
            4.   Restaurants, provided:
               a.   Restaurants shall not permit the consumption of food or
beverage in automobiles parked upon the premises;
               b.   Drive-through establish ments are not permitted; and
               c.   Where such uses include the presentation of entertainment,
there shall be no openings in side walls, rear walls, or roofs within 50 feet
of a residence district unless such openings are stationary windows or required
means of egress.
         (b)   Business and personal services as follows:
            1.   Banks, building and loan companies, savings and loans
companies, and similar institutions;
            2.   Barber shops, beauty parlors, shoe and hat repair shops,
tailoring, dressmaking, and similar uses;
            3.   Dry cleaning and laundry pick- up stations, except 24-hour
self-service laundry establishments which are prohibited;
            4.   Theaters; provided, that there shall be no openings in side
walls, rear walls, or roofs within 50 feet of a residential district unless
such openings are stationary windows which are required means of egress;
            5.   Commercial art studios, photograph studios, dance studios;
            6.   Business appliance and repair shops, photocopying,
mimeographing, and printing shops;
            7.   Post offices; or
            8.   Hotels.
      (6)   Permitted industrial uses: None.
      (7)   Permitted accessory uses:
         (a)   Historic registry. The core of the village as founded by Mary
Emery and designed by John Nolan was placed on the National Historic Register
on July 24, 1979. This National Historic Register section is bound by
Indianview Avenue on the east, Murray Avenue on the north, Beech Street
properties on the west, to Wooster Pike and the corporation line running
between the village and Fairfax; the south boundary is the village corporate
line. In order to safeguard the historical integrity of the village, all
accessory uses and structures, including kiosks, vending machines, and
including temporary apparatus, such as tables and hanging racks, for the
display of merchandise outside a commercial establishment, are expressly
prohibited in Business A District that lies within the National Historic
Registry area of the village with two exceptions: racks or boxes for
distribution of news publications; provided, that such racks or boxes conform
to the requirements in division (A)(7)(b) below, and outdoor dining connected
with an established restaurant, subject to the regulations in division (A)(7)
(c) below.
         (b)   Racks or boxes for distribution of news publications. In order
to protect the historic integrity of the village and preserve the safe flow of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic, news publications boxes are permitted only as
follows:
            1.   General rules; exceptions. Racks or boxes for the distribution
of news publications are expressly prohibited in all residential districts of
the village and in the entire area designated by National Historic Register.
There shall be two exceptions: one “designated” area in the business district
located on Wooster Pike (see division (A)(7)(b)2. below), and in the entire
industrial district (see division (A)(7)(b)3. below);
            2.   Maintenance. In the village business district, which lies
within the National Historic Register District, boxes for the distribution of
news publications shall be provided, installed, and maintained by the
publication vendor specifically as follows:
               a.   Each newsrack box in the business district shall be Sherwin
Williams Rookwood Dark Brown, or SHO-RACK Bronze Brown in color, or an approved
equal (color chip is available at Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building);
               b.   Each unit in the business district shall be a TK49-16 or
K49-16 with enclosed sheet metal base for a total height of no more than 39
inches as per SHO-RACK by Kasper Wire Works, Inc., or an approved equal (specs
available in Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building);
               c.   In the Business A District the name of the publication may
be displayed and an advertising rack card may be placed on the sidewalk face of
the newsrack. All other newsrack advertising is prohibited;
               d.   Installation for each unit shall be by the publication
distributor with all boxes being ground mounted to stabilize and prevent
drifting;
               e.   Units may be placed in the “designated area” only which
shall be in front of the Mariemont Inn along the westbound side of Wooster Pike
and west of Madisonville Road;
               f.   The boxes placed in the “designated area”, as per division
(A)(7)(b)2.e. above, on Wooster Pike shall run parallel to the curb at a
minimum distance of 18 inches from the outside edge of the curb; or
               g.   Permits for all news-racks, without fee, are required (see
division (A)(7)(b)6. below).
            3.   Boxes in industrial districts. Boxes of any design are allowed
in the industrial district with the issuance of a permit (see division (A)(7)
(b)6. below). All boxes for distribution of news publications in the Industrial
A District shall be provided by and maintained as per divisions (A)(7)(b)4.
through (A)(7)(b)6.below by the publications;
            4.   Boxes in Business A District and Industrial A District. All
permitted boxes for the distribution of news publications in Business A
District and Industrial A District shall be located so as to not obstruct the
reasonable use of the following: bus stops: in particular boxes may not be
placed where they are likely to block the front or rear doors of a bus when
stopped; front doors of buildings, offices, or stores; crosswalks; fire
hydrants; utility boxes for water, sewer, gas, electric, or telephone;
handicapped ramps; and any other location likely to present danger to the
health, safety, and welfare of the public;
            5.   Maintenance and condition of newsrack boxes.
               a.   Every rack or box for the distribution of news publications
placed in accordance with this section shall be maintained by the publication
in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. The Village
Maintenance Supervisor shall report all maintenance and/or condition problems
(as per this division and division (A)(7)(5)b. below) to the Col. Donald L.
Shanks Municipal Building in writing.
               b.   All clear plastic or glass parts, if any, through which
publications are viewed, must be maintained by the publication in an unbroken
condition and free of cracks, dents, blemishes, and discoloration. All
structural parts shall be maintained in an unbroken or not unduly misshapen
condition.
               c.   Upon written notice from the Col. Donald L. Shanks
Municipal Building, racks for distribution of publications shall be removed
from any designated location for a period up to 60 days in order for
maintenance or construction work to be done in the vicinity. The Building
Commissioner shall provide such notice not less than 15 days prior to the date
for removal, unless an emergency exists, in which event notice shall be
provided without undue delay.
               d.   Upon report from the Village Maintenance Supervisor of any
violations of this division (A)(7)(b), the village may request removal of any
box not complying with this chapter. Failure to remove within ten days will
result in village removal at the expense of the publication.
            6.   Permit and appeal.
               a.   No person, firm, corporation, or other entity shall use any
rack or box for distribution of news publications without first applying to the
Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building for a permit on application forms
provided by the village. The permits shall be renewed annually by July 1, to
begin the first year after the effective date of this chapter. There shall be
no permit fee (see also division (A)(7)(b)2.g. above).
               b.   The application form shall disclose the identity of the
party utilizing the newsrack box and all locations at which usage is proposed.
               c.   Within 14 working days following receipt of each
application, the village shall notify the applicant of approval or disapproval.
               d.   An applicant may appeal any denial of a permit or removal
order for noncompliance by filing a written appeal to the Planning Commission
within ten days following such denial. Upon appeal, the Planning Commission and
the Architectural Review Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of
the village; provided, that the purpose and intent of the standards provided in
this chapter are adhered to by the Planning Commission.
         (c)   Outdoor dining. Outdoor dining connected with an established
restaurant shall be permitted as an accessory use only if the following
criteria and regulations have been met.
            1.   The following definitions shall apply to outdoor dining.
               a.   OUTDOOR DINING shall mean an area not enclosed in a
building and which is intended as an accessory area to a restaurant which
provides food and/or drink to customers for consumption on the premises.
Specifically not regulated by this section are village parks, residential
districts, village authorized special events, and activities on property
primarily used for institutional purposes, such as schools, churches, community
centers, and similar establishments.
               b.   PREMISES means the real estate owned, leased, or rented by
the licensed indoor dining establishment.
            2.   Outdoor dining shall be permitted as an accessory use only if
all of the criteria in this division (A)(7)(c)2. and divisions (A)(7)(c)4. and
(A)(7)(c)5. below are met.
               a.   The primary activity of the business offering the outdoor
dining is the sale of prepared food and/or drink for consumption by purchasers
on the premises.
               b.   There shall be no encroachments of permanent improvements
into the setbacks required by this code of ordinances.
               c.   The outdoor dining plan of the premises shall be consistent
with any other development plans, conditions, variances, or other special
restrictions that apply to the property.
               d.   Signage in the outdoor dining areas shall be in compliance
with this chapter. Signs on umbrellas and other items in any outdoor dining
area located within the public right-of-way are not permitted unless they are
in compliance with this chapter.
               e.   Noise, music, or sounds emanating from the outdoor dining
area shall be in accordance with regulations prohibiting excessive noise in the
village. Outdoor music shall not be significantly audible off premises.
               f.   The outdoor dining area shall meet all applicable laws and
regulations including Board of Health regulations, Department of Liquor Control
regulations, and building regulations of the village, and this chapter.
               g.   The outdoor dining area shall not be open before 6:00 a.m.
on any day, nor after 1:30 a.m. on any day.
               h.   The arrangement of the outdoor dining area shall facilitate
pedestrian traffic patterns and not unreasonably impede the exit from the
principal building or access to nearby businesses or residences. The Building
Commissioner shall not approve any plan that will cause any public sidewalk to
be narrower than five feet. Any permit which approves the use of public right-
of-way (including sidewalks) shall be revocable by the village upon at least 30
days advance notice to the permit holder. Low fences, walls, and plants in
containers may be required. Where appropriate to define the outdoor area,
fences, walls, and barriers must have sufficient weight or utilize ground pins
so as to prevent straying into the public right-of-way.
               i.   The outdoor dining area shall not be unreasonably
distracting to vehicular traffic. Lighting, proximity to roadways, color
schemes, and desirability of screening or fencing the outdoor area shall be
considered. Outdoor dining equipment must be constructed of nonreflective
materials. No lighting of the outdoor dining area that is distracting or
unnecessarily impacts on adjoining properties or roadways shall be approved.
               j.   Maintenance of the outdoor dining area shall be as follows.
                  i.   The outdoor dining area shall be located on a surface
which can be readily cleaned or hosed down.
                  ii.   All outdoor dining equipment, including tables, chairs,
and umbrellas must be stored indoors or in a secure area or otherwise
adequately secured when the outdoor dining area is closed.
                  iii.   The outdoor dining facilities area must be kept clear
of litter and maintained in a safe, sanitary, and well-maintained condition,
including tables, chairs, umbrellas, and any screening.
            3.   A permit is required for outdoor dining.
               a.   Application for a permit shall be made to the Building
Commissioner with the proposed outdoor dining plan.
               b.   No outdoor dining area shall be allowed without a permit,
or as otherwise approved by a variance.
               c.   If the outdoor dining is to be located within a public
right-of-way, the applicant must provide comprehensive and general liability
insurance in the amount not less than $2,000,000 holding the village harmless.
Further, the applicant must provide for indemnification naming the village as
an additional named insured and providing indemnification and coverage with
respect to any liability arising from the use or operation of said facility.
Such insurance is to be satisfactory to the village. The applicant shall
provide a certificate of insurance to the village.
               d.   A permit shall be issued only if the application complies
with this section and the required fee has been paid.
               e.   A new permit shall be required if the permit holder
materially alters the outdoor dining from that depicted on the outdoor dining
plan submitted pursuant to division (A)(7)(c)4. below.
               f.   The initial fee for an outdoor dining permit is $25.
            4.   An outdoor dining plan must be submitted as part of the
application for the permit approval. The outdoor dining plan shall be in
accordance with the requirements stated on the permit application and the
standards and criteria stated in this chapter. The plan shall include the
following items:
               a.   A sketch to scale of the premises clearly defining the area
proposed for outdoor dining including any encroachment into a public right-of-
way, and/or sidewalks. The sketch must depict the proposed location of each
item to be placed within the area, such as chairs, tables, and umbrellas;
               b.   Pictures or other adequate description of chairs, tables,
umbrellas, waste receptacles, fencing, screening, plantings, or other changes
proposed for the area;
               c.   Description of proposed lighting, traffic patterns and
signage;
               d.   Description of service to be provided in the outdoor dining
area including the proposed hours of operation;
               e.   Explanation of any proposed changes to traffic patterns
(pedestrian or vehicular);
               f.   Upon submission of all items required on the application,
the outdoor dining permit must be approved in writing by the Building
Commissioner and acceptance shall be countersigned by the applicants;
               g.   If application for permit for an outdoor dining area is
denied by the Building Commissioner, the applicant may appeal to the Planning
Commission. If denied by the Planning Commission, the applicant may appeal the
decision to the Village Council within ten days from the denial. Said appeal(s)
shall be filed in writing with the Building Commissioner; and
               h.   If the outdoor dining area violates the regulations of this
section or the terms and criteria approved by the Building Commissioner, notice
of said violation will be served on the permit holder. The permit holder will
have ten days to correct the specified violations unless there is determined to
be a public hazard which will require the immediate removal or correction of
the violation. Failure to correct the violation shall cause the permit to be
revoked.
      (8)   Permitted other uses: None.
      (9)   Permitted planned unit development uses: None.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The conditional uses of the Business A District
shall be limited to those set forth in this division (B), when authorized by
the Building Commissioner after a finding that they meet the requirements and
conditions specified hereinafter; provided further, that any conditional use
shall meet the requirements and conditions specified in §
151.050:
      (1)   Conditional residential uses: None.
      (2)   Conditional institutional uses: None.
      (3)   Conditional recreational uses: None.
      (4)   Conditional office uses: None.
      (5)   Conditional commercial uses: Any other retail, business, or
personal service determined by the Building Commissioner to be of the same
general character as those permitted in divisions (A)(4) and (A)(5) above.
      (6)   Conditional industrial uses: None.
      (7)   Conditional other uses: None.
      (8)   Conditional planned unit development uses: None.
      (9)   Conditional accessory uses: None.
   (C)   Requirements. Uses of the Business A District shall be subject to the
requirements specified in §§
151.085 through
151.087, and shall include the requirements set forth in division (B) above:
      (1)   Parking and loading as per §
151.089;
      (2)   Signs as per §
151.127;
      (3)   Fences as per §§
151.100 through
151.106;
      (4)   Dish-type satellite and receiving systems as per §
151.060(C)(4), except that dish-type satellites may be located on the rear roof
of the principal structure; provided, that no portion of the satellite or its
mounting apparatus may extend beyond the sides of the principal structure or
the top of the roof line;
      (5)   Freestanding antennas as per §
151.060(C)(6); or
      (6)   Animals as per §
151.060(C)(7).
(2000 Code, § 151.063) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-23-98, passed 6-
22-1998)
§ 151.064 INDUSTRIAL A DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The permitted uses of the Industrial A District shall
be limited to those set forth in this division (A). No processes and equipment
shall be employed or goods used, made, or sold which are hazardous, obnoxious,
or offensive, by reason of the emission of odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas
fumes, liquid, water-carried waste, refuse matter, noise, or vibration.
      (1)   Permitted residential uses: None.
      (2)   Permitted agricultural uses.
         (a)   The growing of vegetables, fruits, flowers, shrubs, and trees;
or
         (b)   Commercial greenhouses and nurseries; provided, that no solid
fuel shall be used for heating purposes when the smokestacks or chimneys are
located within 100 feet of an abutting property in a residential district.
      (3)   Permitted institutional uses: All uses permitted as per §
151.063(A)(2).
      (4)   Permitted recreational uses: All uses permitted as per §
151.060(A)(3).
      (5)   Permitted office uses: Offices as permitted in Business A District
per §
151.063(A)(4).
      (6)   Permitted commercial uses:
         (a)   All uses permitted under §
151.063(A)(5);
         (b)   Laundry and dry cleaning establishments; or
         (c)   Wholesale establishments for manufacturers’ agents and
distributors of completely manufactured agents, including retail sale of such
products off the premises.
      (7)   Permitted industrial uses.
         (a)   The manufacturing, including assembling, altering, converting,
fabricating, finishing, processing, treatment, packaging, and repackaging, of
the following products:
            1.   Products from the following previously manufactured materials:
cellophane; cloth; cork; glass; leather; paper; plastics; precious or
semiprecious metals or stones; textiles; and wood;
            2.   Metal products, foundry, and similar products;
            3.   Appliances, including electrical and electronic appliances,
instruments and devices, television sets, radios and phonographs, electric and
neon signs;
            4.   Musical instruments;
            5.   Novelties, including toys;
            6.   Pottery and figurines, using previously pulverized clay and
kilns fired only with gas or electricity;
            7.   Medical, dental, and drafting instruments, including optical
and similar precision instruments;
            8.   Orthopedic or medical appliances; or
            9.   Watches or clocks, including mechanisms for clockwork operated
devices, and clock and watch parts.
         (b)   The manufacturing, processing, packaging, or distributing of the
following food products: candy; nuts; chewing gum; cakes; cookies; and other
confections and related products.
      (8)   Permitted accessory uses: Accessory structures are permitted
provided they adhere to all Industrial A District regulations for principal
structures.
      (9)   Permitted other uses: Railroad train sidings and yards when located
100 feet or more from a residence district boundary line.
      (10)   Permitted planned unit development uses: None.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The conditional uses of the Industrial A District
shall be limited to those set forth in this division (B), when authorized by
the Building Commissioner after a finding that they meet the requirements and
conditions specified hereinafter; provided further, that any conditional use
shall meet the requirements and conditions specified in §
151.050.
      (1)   Conditional residential uses: None.
      (2)   Conditional institutional uses: None.
      (3)   Conditional recreational uses: None.
      (4)   Conditional office uses: None.
      (5)   Conditional commercial uses. Commercial uses permitted under
division (B)(6) below and when located within 100 feet of any residential
boundary line; provided, that such use, in the opinion of the Building
Commissioner, is not hazardous, offensive, or objectionable due to odor, dust,
smoke, cinders, gas fumes, noise, vibration, radiation, refuse matter, or
water-carried waste.
      (6)   Conditional industrial uses.
         (a)   Industrial uses permitted under division (A)(7) above and when
located within 100 feet of any residential boundary line; provided, that such
use, in the opinion of the Building Commissioner, is not hazardous, offensive,
or objectionable due to odor, dust, smoke, cinders, gas fumes, noise,
vibration, radiation, refuse matter or water-carried waste.
         (b)   Bulk storage for liquid fuels, petroleum products, petroleum,
and volatile oils; provided, that all tanks shall adhere to the following
regulations:
            1.   Contain products used in the normal production processes of
that industry;
            2.   If above ground, be registered with the prior written approval
of the Village Fire Department;
            3.   If below ground be registered with the State Fire Marshals
Office, Bureau of Underground Storage Tanks; and
            4.   If existing as of the date of this chapter shall have
installed adequate dikes, acid neutralizers, and other protective safety
devices.
      (7)   Conditional other uses. Storage areas, accessory, incidental and
subordinate to the principal use, may be located outside an enclosed building;
provided, that such storage be limited to a height of six feet and be enclosed
by a screen fence at least six feet in height and; provided further, that such
storage area shall not exceed in all 25% of the floor area of the principal
building located on the lot and shall not be located between the building and
the street line. The limitation of 25% shall not apply to the space used for
the parking of vehicles.
      (8)   Conditional planned unit development uses: None.
      (9)   Conditional accessory uses: None.
   (C)   Requirements. Uses of the Industrial A District shall be subject to
the requirements specified in §§
151.085 through
151.087, and shall include the requirements set forth in division (B)(1)
through (B)(6) above:
      (1)   Parking and loading as per §
151.089;
      (2)   Signs as per §
151.128;
      (3)   Fences as per §§
151.100 through
151.106;
      (4)   Dish-type satellite and receiving systems are permitted with the
issuance of a building permit;
      (5)   Freestanding antennas as per §
151.060 (C)(6); or
      (6)   Animals. The keeping of wild animals, livestock, game, fowl, and
the operation of a licensed kennel are prohibited.
   (D)   Additional Industrial A District use regulations. 
      (1)   The following regulations qualify or supplement the Industrial A
District use regulations in division (A) above.
      (2)   The only industrial uses permitted are those listed in divisions
(A) and (B) above. Notwithstanding the following uses are expressly prohibited
within any zoning district:
         (a)   Stock yard, abattoirs, and slaughter house, including fat
rendering;
         (b)   Manufacture of explosive or flammable materials;
         (c)   Manufacture of poisonous or noxious materials;
         (d)   Storage, baling, or treatment of junk, iron, rags, bottles, or
scrap paper; or
         (e)   Sewage disposal plants.
(2000 Code, § 151.064) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.065 RESIDENCE D DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The permitted uses of the Residence D District shall
be limited to those set forth in this division (A).
      (1)   Permitted residential uses. Multiple- dwellings containing more
than four single-family dwelling units.
      (2)   Permitted institutional uses. Multi-service centers providing
community-wide support services to persons who are elderly.
      (3)    Permitted recreational uses: None.
      (4)   Permitted office uses: None.
      (5)   Permitted commercial uses: None.
      (6)   Permitted industrial uses: None.
      (7)   Permitted accessory uses.
         (a)   Office occupations as a home occupation as per §
151.060(A)(7)(a)1. through (A)(7)(a)10; or
         (b)   Accessory buildings when intended to be used for recreational
use by persons residing on the premises on which the principal building is
located and erected as a separate structure. Such accessory buildings shall be
located in the rear yard only and shall not exceed 15 feet in total height as
measured from the grade at the front of the structure to the highest point of
roof and shall be at least three feet from all lot lines of the abutting lots.
All such accessory buildings shall not exceed in area more than 25% of said
required rear yard.
      (8)   Permitted other uses: None.
      (9)   Permitted planned unit development uses: None.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The permitted conditional uses of the Residence D
District shall be limited to those set forth in this division (B).
      (1)   Conditional residential uses: None.
      (2)   Conditional institutional uses: None.
      (3)   Conditional recreational uses: None.
      (4)   Conditional office uses: None.
      (5)   Conditional industrial uses: None.
      (6)   Conditional other uses: None.
      (7)   Conditional planned unit development uses: None.
      (8)   Conditional accessory uses: None.
   (C)   Requirements. Uses of the Residence D District shall be subject to the
requirements specified in §§
151.085 through
151.087, and shall include the requirements set forth in this division (C).
      (1)   Parking and loading as per §
151.089, subject to limitations as per division (D) below and the following:
         (a)   The number of resident parking spaces that shall be required
shall be one parking space for each one-bedroom dwelling unit and two parking
spaces for each dwelling unit with two or more bedrooms;
         (b)   Guest and service parking shall be required at the rate of one-
fourth of one space for each dwelling unit, regardless of the number of
bedrooms;
         (c)   No less than 60% of the required resident parking spaces shall
be located in a parking facility that is located beneath a principal
residential structure and shall be constructed so that at least 50% of the
height of the parking structure shall be located below the average grade of the
front yard; and
         (d)   All surface parking lots in the Residence D District shall be
adequately screened through the use of either/or shrubs and trees or a solid
screen wall (pursuant to division (C)(3)(b) below).
      (2)   Signs as per §§
151.126 and
151.127, subject to limitations as per division (D) below;
      (3)   Fences as per §§
151.100 through
151.106 subject to the following:
         (a)   Limitations as per division (D) below, and
         (b)   A solid screen wall which will serve to meet the requirement for
screening of a surface parking lot per division (C)(1)(d) above would be
permitted up to a height of four feet.
      (4)   Dish-type satellite and receiving systems as per §
151.060(C)(4), except that dish-type satellites may be located on the rear roof
of the principal structure; provided, that no portion of the satellite or its
mounting apparatus may extend beyond the sides of the principal structure or
the top of the roof line;
      (5)   Freestanding antennas as per §
151.060(C)(6); and
      (6) Animals as per §
151.060(C)(7).
   (D)   Additional Residence D District development regulations. The following
regulations qualify or supplement the Residence D District use regulations in
divisions (A) and (B) above.
      (1)   Site plan review and approval. All new construction and additions
to all structures and parking lots shall require review and approval by the
Planning Commission and the Architectural Review Board in accordance with the
following procedures.
         (a)   An application shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner
for review and approval as outlined below prior to the issuance of a permit.
Completed applications shall include five copies of a site plan and an
accompanying letter describing the development. The site plan shall include at
a minimum the following: elevation contours; existing and proposed easements
and right-of-way on the site, existing and proposed structures; significant
existing and proposed landscaping and paving; existing and proposed signage;
elevations; and additional information deemed necessary by the Building
Commissioner for adequate review by the Planning Commission and Architectural
Review Board. The Building Commissioner shall transmit a copy of the
application to the Architectural Review Board within 14 days from receipt of
all required information.
         (b)   The Architectural Review Board will formally meet within 30 days
of receipt of the required information from the Building Commissioner to review
and to either approve or deny the application, as provided for in §
151.025. Upon approval of the application, the Architectural Review Board shall
issue a certificate of appropriateness. In issuing a certificate of
appropriateness, the Architectural Review Board shall consider provisions for
architectural styles appropriate in the location proposed, facade, and roofline
changes that would prevent the appearance of one large structure, building
materials, and signage consistent with the standards of the village.
         (c)   1.   The Planning Commission shall also review the application,
either simultaneous with but no later than 30 days of issuance of the
certificate of appropriateness by the Architectural Review Board. Approval or
denial of the application shall be reflected in the minutes of the Planning
Commission meeting.
            2.   In reviewing the application, the Planning Commission shall
consider the following provisions for compliance with the requirements of this
district:
               a.   To protect the value, appearance, and use of property on
which buildings are constructed;
               b.   To maintain a high character of community development, and
to ensure the compatibility of new development;
               c.   To protect the public peace, health, safety, convenience,
and welfare;
               d.   To protect real estate within the village from impairment
or destruction of value; and
               e.   To regulate the design, use of materials, finish grade
lines, dimensions, orientation and location of all main and accessory buildings
to be erected.
         (d)   Applications approved by the Planning Commission may proceed to
construction after obtaining the necessary permits from the Building
Commissioner.
         (e)   Building permits issued by the Building Commissioner as a result
of favorable approvals granted pursuant to this division (D) shall be void one
year after the date upon which approval was granted unless any of the following
criteria is met:
            1.   In the case of new construction, work upon the structure shall
have begun above the foundation walls;
            2.    In the case of reconstruction or modifications to a
structure, a certificate of occupancy has been granted; or
            3.   If the time period is extended by a majority vote of the
Planning Commission.
      (2)   Permitted density. The maximum permitted density for uses within
the Residence D District shall be no more than 39 units per acre.
      (3)   Building height requirements. The maximum building height within
the Residence D District shall be 30 feet when built at the 20-foot minimum
side-yard setback line. The 30-foot maximum height may be increase one foot for
each additional foot of side-yard setback up to a maximum building height of 45
feet. Building height for the Residence D District shall be defined as the
vertical distance from the average lot grade at the front of the structure to
the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the peak of a gambrel,
gable, mansard, or hip roof.
      (4)   Front yard setback. The minimum front-yard setback shall be ten
feet.
      (5)    Rear yard setback. The minimum rear yard setback shall be 20 feet
for buildings less than 18 feet in height, 25 feet for buildings between 18 and
30 feet in height, and 30 feet for buildings greater than 30 feet in height.
      (6)   Side yard setback. The minimum side yard setback shall be ten feet
from all business, and multi-family property uses and 20 feet from all single
and two-family uses.
      (7)   Parking setback, access, and buffering. In addition to the
requirements of §
151.089, parking lots for five or more vehicles shall provide a minimum setback
of ten feet from all right-of-way and residential property lines. Permitted
access to such parking lots shall be determined through the site plan review
and A\approval process outlined in division (D)(1) above. A minimum of four
trees and 20 shrubs per 100 linear feet shall be planted within ten feet of all
parking lot boundaries and exposed parking structures adjacent to a public
street or residential property line. Landscape plans shall be submitted for
site plan review and shall be approved upon the finding that landscaping plans
are adequate to properly screen all off-street parking areas from neighboring
properties so as to reduce nuisances from lights and noise.
   (E)   Effective date. This section shall take effect at the earliest date
allowed by law.
(Ord. O-06-09, passed 7-13-2009)
OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 151.075 HISTORIC DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to maintain a high standard of
community development and the principles of town planning, to protect and
preserve property, to promote the stability of property values, and to protect
real estate from impairment or destruction of value for the general community
welfare by regulating the exterior architectural characteristics of structures
throughout the hereinafter defined Historic District. The village was
designated as an Historic Village in the National Register of Historic Places
on July 24, 1979, identifying landmarks (see divisions (F) and (G) below and
district zoning map). The regulations of this section are imposed in addition
to those of the other zoning districts in which the structures reside.
   (B)   Objectives. The character of the village is directly linked to the
economic, social, historical, and cultural health and well-being of the
community. This section, therefor, establishes procedures to maintain the
historic character of the village and obtain the following objectives:
      (1)   To recognize and preserve the distinctive historical and
architectural character of this community which has been influenced by the
architecture of an earlier period;
      (2)   To regulate the exterior design, use of materials, and orientation
of all structures hereafter altered, constructed, reconstructed, erected,
enlarged, or remodeled in the hereinafter defined Historic District;
      (3)   To safeguard the village by preserving areas, places, sites,
buildings, structures, including signs, objects, and works of art which reflect
elements of the village’s cultural, social, economic, political, or
architectural heritage;
      (4)   To seek alternatives to demolition or incompatible alterations
within the Historic District and to landmarks before such acts are performed;
and
      (5)   It is the further intent of this section to discourage the
construction of new structures, including signs, on lots containing landmark
structures and the subdivision of lots containing landmark structures for the
construction of new structures in close proximity to any landmark structures.
   (C)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section of
the this chapter and are in addition to the definitions found in §
151.005.
      CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. A document issued by the Village
Architectural Review Board, as prescribed by division (H) below, signifying
that the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration, or demolition of a
structure subject to the provisions of this section and within a historic
district or the subdivision of a lot containing a landmark structure has been
reviewed and found to be in compliance with these regulations.
      CHANGE. Any alteration, demolition, removal, construction, or
reconstruction involving any property subject to the provisions of this
section.
      DEMOLISH or DEMOLITION. Any act or process that razes or destroys, in
whole or in part, any building subject to the provisions of this section.
      EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE. A functional or decorative element of a
building including, but not limited to, cornices, chimneys, latticework, walls,
roads, eaves, or porches, and including gutters, down spouts, stair rails,
lighting fixtures, and similar features.
      HISTORIC DISTRICT. An area so delineated on the village zoning district
map which contains one or more landmark structures.
      HISTORIC SITE. A premises that contains something of archaeological or
historical significance, may or may not include a landmark structure or be
wholly within a historic district, and has been designated a historic site by
the Architectural Review Board.
      LANDMARK. Any building structure, site, or object which has special
character or special historical or aesthetic value as part of the development,
heritage, or cultural characteristics of the village, state, or the United
States and which has been designated as a landmark by the Architectural Review
Board; provided, however, that the term LANDMARK may also include the premises,
or part thereof, on which the landmark structure is situated.
      MAINTENANCE. Ordinary repairs and refurbishing, including cleaning and
painting, to correct any deterioration or damage to a structure or to restore
the structure to its condition prior to such deterioration or damage; provided,
such work does not involve a change in design, material, or exterior
architectural feature.
      MANSARD. A sloped roof or roof like facade, architecturally comparable to
a building wall.
      PRESERVE or PRESERVATION. The process, including maintenance, of treating
an existing building to arrest or slow further deterioration, stabilize the
landmark and provide structural safety without changing or adversely affecting
the character or appearance of the landmark.
      RECONSTRUCTION. The reproducing by new construction of the exact form and
detail of a vanished structure, or a part thereof, as it appeared at a specific
period of time, as detailed in the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Guidelines.
      REPAIR. The renewal or replacement of any existing part of a building or
structure for maintenance purposes only in keeping with its existing type of
construction and occupancy.
      RESTORATION. The process of accurately recovering the form and details of
a property as it appeared at a particular period of time by means of the
removal of later work or by the replacement of missing earlier work.
      TRUNCATED BUILDING. A structure located on a corner lot and so designed
that the exterior walls which are approximately parallel to the intersecting
streets do not meet at a common point, the exterior walls being connected by a
wall herein called a diagonal wall, which is not in the same plane as either of
the exterior walls.
   (D)   Historic designations. Any area, building, structure, premises, and
the like, that is designated as a historic district, landmark, or historic site
shall be numbered and placed on the appropriate list:
      (1)   Historic districts;
      (2)   Landmarks; or
      (3)   Historic sites.
   (E)   Historic districts. Village squares and buildings, including all
landmark structures at the intersection of Oak and Chestnut Streets, north
side, and intersection of Wooster Pike, Miami Road, Madisonville Road, north
side, to Lanes K and L, including parking area behind buildings.
   (F)   Landmarks.
      (1)   Clinton MacKenzie Buildings, 3902-3946 Beech Street, north of
Chestnut, east side; 6611-6639 Murray Avenue, south side between Beech and Oak
Streets;
      (2)   E.B. Gilchrist Buildings, 6643-6651 and 6701-6763 Murray Avenue and
3947-3949 Oak Street and 3923-3939 Plainville, westside between Murray and the
Ferris House;
      (3)   Kruckmeyer and Strong Buildings, 6713-6769 Maple Street, north and
south sides between Plainville and Oak Street;
      (4)   R.H. Dana, Jr. Buildings, 6712-6786 Chestnut Street, north side
between Oak and Plainville, 3901-3907 Plainville Road, and original Transformer
Building, 3919 Plainville Road;
      (5)   Ripley Buildings, 6650-6708 Chestnut and 3900-3911 Oak Streets,
northwest and northeast sides of old square;
      (6)   Ripley and LeBoutellier Buildings, 6612-6646 Chestnut Street, north
and south sides between Beech and Oak Streets, and Carl A. Ziegler Buildings,
6615-6635 Chestnut Street;
      (7)   Charles W. Short Houses, 3855-3895 Oak Street and 6655 Chestnut
Street, west side between Chestnut and Wooster Pike;
      (8)   Charles Cellarius Buildings, 3865-3947 Beech Street, west side
between Murray and the alley just north of Linden Place;
      (9)   Elzner and Anderson Buildings, 1-4 Linden Place, including garage
area, 3845 and 3855 Beech Street, and 6576-6596 west of Beech Street on the
north side of Wooster Pike;
      (10)   Lois L. Howe and Manning Buildings and park, 1-14 Denny Place
between Fieldhouse Way and Pleasant Street;
      (11)   Robert R. McGoodwin buildings and parks, 1-10 Albert Place and
3825 and 3845 Miami Road, east side at West Street;
      (12)   Grosvenor Atterbury Buildings and parks, 1-8 Sheldon Close and
6925 and 6945 Crystal Springs Road, south of Wooster Pike;
      (13)   Mariemont Inn, 6880 Wooster Pike, corner Madisonville Road and
Wooster Pike, Zettel and Rapp architects;
      (14)   Resthaven, 6980 Cambridge Avenue, Maintenance Buildings,
“Resthaven Demonstration Farm”, Hubert E. Reeves architect;
      (15)   Recreation Hall, 3908 Plainville Road, now Mariemont Community
Church Parish Center, Plainville Road, George de Gersdorf architect;
      (16)   Dale Park School, 6743 Chestnut Street, original building,
Fechmeimer, Ihorst, and McCoy architects;
      (17)   Mariemont Community Church, Cemetery, and Lich Gate, Cherry Lane,
north of Wooster Pike, Louis E. Jallade architect;
      (18)   Ferris House, 3915 Plainville Road between Murray Avenue and
Chestnut Street, west side, built 1804-1812;
      (19)   Dale Park Fire Station, 3914 Oak Street, east side between Murray
and Chestnut Street, Charles Cellarius architect;
      (20)   Mariemont Central Heating Station Building, east end of Mt. Vernon
Avenue, Fay, Spofford and Thorndike engineers;
      (21)   Original lamp post and street lights, all original cast-iron type
street lamp posts throughout the village, as originally installed by the
Mariemont Company or reproductions of same throughout village, and identified
in Cincinnati Gas and Electric Company circuit maps 5802B and 5803B;
      (22)   Village Squares at the confluence of Miami Road, Wooster Pike,
Crystal Springs, and Madisonville Roads, and at the confluence of Chestnut
Street and Oak Street;
      (23)   Original granite curbing; and
      (24)   Park areas and structures:
         (a)   Albert Place Median;
         (b)   Allotment Gardens: north of Wooster Pike between Oak and Beech
Streets;
         (c)   Ann Buntin Becker Park;
         (d)   Median on Hiawatha and Rembold Avenues;
         (e)   Median on Center Street;
         (f)   Concourse and Pergola, Miami Bluff Drive at Center Street,
Philip W. Foster designer;
         (g)   Dale Park with statuary, northwest corner of Plainville Road and
Wooster Pike;
         (h)   Denny Place Median;
         (i)   Dogwood Park, Mary M. Emery Memorial Carillon and Boathouse,
Pleasant Street, south of Wooster Pike;
         (j)   Park at Murray and Madisonville Avenues;
         (k)   Park at Murray Avenue and Miami Road;
         (l)   Old Town Park, southeast side of Oak and Chestnut Streets;
         (m)   Wooster Pike median strip and parks from intersection of Wooster
Pike and Indianview Avenue to the west boundary of the village, including E.
Boyd Jordan Park;
         (n)   Park at Midden and Pleasant Streets;
         (o)   Park at intersection of Mariemont, Miami Road, and Mt. Vernon
Avenue;
         (p)   Park at Crystal Springs and Mt. Vernon Avenue; and
         (q)   Park area the length of Miami Bluff.
   (G)   Historic sites.
      (1)   Indian Mounds, specifically the area known as the Madisonville Site
adjacent to the western end of Mariemont Avenue and south of the village
swimming pool.
      (2)   The area on Plainville Road immediately east of the Ferris House
where Mary M. Emery broke ground for the Mariemont project, April 23, 1923.
   (H)   Regulations governing site modifications, new structures, alterations,
and demolitions.
      (1)   Limitations on issuance of building and demolition permits. No
construction, reconstruction, alteration demolition, or removal of any
structure or significant exterior architectural feature, including painting and
staining, and including signage, thereof to any listed landmark structure or
any other building within a historic district shall be undertaken prior to
obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the Architectural Review Board
(see §§
151.021(E) and
151.025) and a permit from the Building Commissioner, if appropriate.
      (2)   Standards for review: design requirements for certificate of
appropriateness. The Architectural Review Board, in deciding whether to issue a
certificate of appropriateness, shall determine that the application under
consideration promotes, preserves, and enhances the distinctive historical
integrity of the landmark structure as set forth in division (F) above, as well
as the historical village character of the community and would not be at
variance with existing structures within that portion of the district in which
the structure is or is proposed to be located. In conducting its review the
Board shall make examination and give consideration to the elements of the
application including, but not necessarily limited to:
         (a)   Overall building height to width ratios, chimney construction,
roof pitch and other pertinent data, as deemed important to the overall
building appearance, to assure reasonable adherence to the adjacent landmark
structure shall be considered in the design of any new or replacement
structures;
         (b)   Existing buildings that are remodeled entirely within the
existing building’s walls shall not be remodeled in such a manner as to change
the front facade in any respect or change the side or back facade by more than
10% of its surface area;
         (c)   Existing buildings that are enlarged, extended, or decreased in
size shall have the same architectural style, same window and door proportions,
and same or similar exterior material for the enlargement, extension, or
diminution as found on the existing building;
         (d)   Consideration shall be given to the method of removal or
alteration of any original materials, hardware, signage, or architectural
features and the method of construction or repair, so as to avoid damage to
original materials, hardware, design, and architectural features;
         (e)   Consideration shall be given to the use of the property, so as
to maintain as nearly as possible the use of the property as originally
intended;
         (f)   For buildings identified in division (F)(1) through (F)(12)
above which are parts of complexes involving several buildings designed by the
same architect to form a consistent, harmonious entity, exterior paint, or
stain colors for all parts of the complex by the same architect irrespective of
diversity of ownership shall be chosen with the approval of the Architectural
Review Board, which reflect the character, style, and materials of the
buildings;
         (g)   Window treatment shall take into consideration the size, shape,
and materials of the individual window units, and the overall harmonious
relationship of window openings. Windows shall be similar to those of adjacent
landmark structures;
         (h)   Buildings shall have exterior material of painted wood, material
that simulates painted wood, brick, stucco, stones, or stone masonry and take
into consideration texture, color, and compatibility among various elements of
the structure. The exterior color of all landmark structures shall be guided by
the Village Historic Color Guidelines;
         (i)   Exterior detail and relationships shall take into consideration
compatibility and appropriateness of design and details, including all
projecting and receding elements of the exterior, including, but not limited
to, porches, overhangs, and the horizontal or vertical expression which is
conveyed by these elements. Signage shall also consider the above;
         (j)   Accessory buildings exceeding 100 square feet of floor area
shall be of the same architectural style and same exterior material as the main
building or a reasonable reconstructed facsimile of the original historic
structure that previously existed on the lot; however, all garage replacements
and improvements shall conform to the following:
            1.   Garages and their doors for each specific landmark structure
shall be guided by the color requirements of the Architectural Review Board
available in the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building.
         (k)   Any sign, in addition to fulfilling applicable elements of this
section, shall fulfill the requirements of §§
151.125 through
151.133, and be of material and style harmonious to the overall theme of the
area. All such signs shall be presented to the Architectural Review Board for
certificate of appropriateness approval prior to construction, alteration,
restoration, or erection;
         (l)   Historical integrity of the landmark structure, including
commercial signage, shall be maintained according to the original architects
design, town plan, concepts, and philosophy of Mary M. Emery, John Nolan, and
the Mariemont Company;
         (m)   Subdivision of lots containing landmark structures. The
subdivision of any lot containing a landmark structure falls under the
jurisdiction of the Planning Commission and shall adhere to the provisions in §
151.041, as well as the following.
            1.   The subdivision of any lot containing a landmark structure
shall be accomplished in such way that both the new lot and reduced lot conform
to the minimum lot size in the zoning district and shall provide sufficient
space so that a minimum 30-foot distance is maintained between any landmark
structure and any structure proposed on the new lot.
            2.   No new lot created from the subdivision of a lot containing a
landmark structure shall be less than one-half the size of the remaining
portion of the lot containing the landmark structure.
         (n)   Design requirements for other buildings in historic districts.
            1.   New buildings shall be similar in size, scale, mass, and
architectural style to the surrounding landmark structures.
            2.   New buildings shall have exterior material of painted wood,
material that simulates painted wood, brick, stucco, or stone masonry. Windows
shall be similar to those of adjacent landmark structures.
            3.   Overall building height-to-width ratios, chimney construction,
roof pitch, and other pertinent data, as deemed important to the overall
building appearance, to assure reasonable adherence to the landmark structures
adjacent shall be considered in the design of any new or replacement structure.
            4.   To maintain the stature of landmark structures, the footprint
of any building erected on a lot that was created by the subdivision of a lot
containing a landmark structure shall not exceed 100% of the area covered by
the foot print of the landmark structure.
         (o)   Historical integrity of all landmark and historic sites shall be
maintained according to the original architects design, town plan, concepts,
and philosophy of Mary M. Emery, John Nolan, and the Mariemont Company. Any act
or process that results in any change to an archaeological feature shall
require a certificate of appropriateness.
      (3)   Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent
any ordinary repair or maintenance or temporary emergency repair of any
exterior architectural feature or any ordinary planting and landscaping now in
the district. This exception shall not apply to repair and maintenance of
structures where the repair or maintenance involves those considerations in
“standards for review”, division (H)(2) above.
   (I)   Designation of historic districts, landmarks, and historic sites.
      (1)   Designation of landmarks. The Village Council may designate
specific properties as landmarks, historic sites, or as portions of historic
districts. Upon designation by the Village Council of any historic district,
landmark, historic site, or background structure, it shall be numbered and
listed in this section. Such designations shall occur after receiving
recommendations from the Architectural Review Board and shall follow the
procedures of division (I)(2) below.
      (2)   Applications.
         (a)   An application to designate a portion of the village as a
historic district shall be initiated by 51% of the property owners of the
proposed district or by the Village Council.
         (b)   An application to designate a property as a landmark shall be
initiated by the owners of the property or by the Village Council.
      (3)   Review of applications. Any application to designate a portion of
the village as a historic district shall be referred to the Architectural
Review Board for review and recommendation. Its recommendation shall then be
submitted to the Village Council. Any application to designate a landmark,
historic site, or historic district shall be referred to the Architectural
Review Board for review and recommendation. After the receipt of the
Architectural Review Board’s recommendation, the Village Council shall schedule
a public hearing and shall notify property owners of the proposed landmark,
historic site, or historic district at least 30 days prior to holding the
public hearing to consider such designation. Moreover, notification of such
hearing shall be published at least 15 days in advance of such hearing, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the village.
      (4)   Decision of Council. Within 30 days following such hearing, the
Village Council shall take action on the designation by approving,
disapproving, or remanding the application back to the Architectural Review
Board for further review. Remanding the application back to the Architectural
Review Board would then require a new public hearing in conformance with the
requirements of division (I)(3) above.
      (5)   Criteria. In acting on such designation, the Village Council shall
consider the recommendations of the Architectural Review Board, the public
hearing and the following criteria of the property:
         (a)   Its character, interest, or value as part of the development,
heritage, or cultural characteristics of the village, the state, or the United
States;
         (b)   A significant historic event occurred at a certain location;
         (c)   Its identification with a person or persons who significantly
contributed to the culture and development of the village;
         (d)   Its exemplification of the cultural, economic, social, or
historic heritage of the village;
         (e)   Its portrayal of the environment of a group of people in an era
of history characterized by a distinctive architectural style;
         (f)   Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an
architectural type or specimen;
         (g)   Its identification as the work of an architect or master builder
whose individual work has influenced the development of the village;
         (h)   Its embodiment of elements of architectural design, detail,
materials, or craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural
innovation;
         (i)   Its relationship to other distinctive areas which are eligible
for preservation according to a plan based on a historic, cultural, or
architectural motif;
         (j)   Its unique location or singular physical characteristic
representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood or
the village; or
         (k)   It has yielded or is likely to yield information important to
historic understanding.
      (6)   Zoning district map. Upon the designation of a historic district,
landmark, or historic site by ordinance, the zoning district map of the village
shall be revised to indicate by an appropriate symbol or device that the parcel
so marked is subject to the listed designation, and the Fiscal Officer of the
Council shall send a certified copy of the ordinance by registered mail to the
owner of record.
(2000 Code, § 151.075) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-3-97, passed 2-
10-1997; Ord. O-12-98, passed 1-12-1998; Ord. O-3-23, passed 3-13-2023; Ord O-
4-23, passed 3-13-2023)
§ 151.076 PARK DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The Park District is to protect and enhance the scenic,
recreational, geologic, cultural, and historic value. All recreation and
enjoyment of the district by the public shall have no adverse effect on the
existing wildlife habitation and shall conserve significant natural vegetation
and tree cover. See §
37.03(A) for information on the Parks Advisory Board.
   (B)   Parks. All parks shall be designated Residential District A. The Park
District encompasses public parks, plazas, squares, fountains, and statuary
described on building zone map and including the following:
      (1)   Albert Place Median;
      (2)   Allotment Gardens (behind Wooster Pike Oak Street - Beech Street);
      (3)   Ann Buntin Becker Park;
      (4)   Hiawatha-Rembold Avenues strip;
      (5)   Center Street median;
      (6)   Concourse: Miami Bluff Drive at Center Street;
      (7)   Dale Park (Family statue park);
      (8)   Denny Place Median;
      (9)   Dogwood Park;
      (10)   Isabella Hopkins Park;
      (11)   Lower Gardens (South 80 acres);
      (12)   Mary Emery Park and tennis courts;
      (13)   Murray Avenue and Madisonville Road triangular lot;
      (14)   Murray Avenue from Settle Street to Grove Street;
      (15)   Old Town Park (southeast side of Oak and Chestnut Streets);
      (16)   Wooster Pike median strip and parks from intersection of Wooster
Pike and Indianview Avenue to the west boundary of the village, including E.
Boyd Jordan Park;
      (17)   Park at Midden and Pleasant Streets;
      (18)   Park at intersection of Mariemont, Miami Road, and Mt. Vernon
Avenue;
      (19)   Park at Crystal Springs and Mt. Vernon Avenue; and
      (20)   Park area the length of Miami Bluff.
(2000 Code, § 151.076) (Ord. O-6-94, passed 3-14-1994; Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-
25-1996; Ord. O-11-96, passed 6-24-1996; Ord. O-7-98, passed 1-12-1998; Ord. O-
9-20, passed 2-24-2020)
§ 151.077 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the planned unit development regulations is to
provide for orderly improvement of a specific property in order to accomplish
the following:
      (1)   To permit the creation of areas within the village that can be
developed or redeveloped with maximum flexibility in design;
      (2)   To promote the efficient use of land and facilitate an economic
arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, land use, and utilities;
      (3)   To encourage the most skillful planning in the arrangement of
buildings, the preservation of open space, existing topography, geological,
historical, and other site features;
      (4)   To obtain creative and coordinated designs, harmonious and
compatible with uses of the presiding district; and
      (5)   In order to carry out these purposes, procedures supplemental to
those applicable in other use districts are established in this section
particularly designed to meet these objectives may be prepared and submitted
for approval.
   (B)   Authority and applicability.
      (1)   Authority. The Planning Commission shall authorize the
establishment of a planned unit development area. Nothing contained in this
subchapter shall preclude the Planning Commission or the Village Council from
modifying any regulations, standards, or criteria prescribed by this chapter if
the Planning Commission determines the regulations, standards, or criterion are
inapplicable because of the unusual conditions of the development area.
      (2)   Applicability. It is the purpose of this section to establish
regulations and procedures supplementary to those applicable in the standard
zoning districts created by this chapter, under which a developer may prepare
development plans particularly designed to meet the objectives for a planned
unit development. Procedures are also established for professional review of
these development plans, action thereon by the village, and the implementation
thereof.
   (C)   PUD regulations.
      (1)   Ownership. At the time of application, a PUD site shall be under
single or joint ownership acting as a unit. The site may have more than one lot
or be further subdivided; however, every lot shall be contiguous. The
development shall be considered as one parcel, regardless of the extent to
which the parcel is subdivided by interior streets.
      (2)   Compliance. All PUD developments shall comply with the regulations
of the State Basic Building Code, the Village Fire Code, all other applicable
codes, and this chapter specifically as follows.
         (a)   PUD uses and requirements. The uses and requirements within a
PUD shall be limited to the uses and requirements as specified by the district
use and requirements applicable to the district in which the development is
located (see §§ 151.060 through 151.065).
         (b)   Yard and building height requirements.
            1.   The maximum building height requirements are the same as those
set forth by the district in which the development is located.
            2.   Buildings erected on a planned unit development site shall not
be required to comply with the requirement specified in §
151.086(A) that specifies minimum areas for lots (see division (D below), “land
planning criteria”).
            3.   Planned unit developments are not required to adhere to the
yard specifications set forth in §
151.086(B) and (C) (see division (D) below, “land planning criteria”).
         (c)   Relation to regulations for historic structures, sites, and
districts. Whenever a PUD application is filed for a property wholly or
partially located within a historic site or district involving a historic
structure, the Architectural Review Board shall submit its recommendation to
the Planning Commission. In such cases, the provisions of this chapter where
not inconsistent with the provisions of §
151.075 shall apply.
      (3)   Relation to subdivision rules. It is intended that the provisions
of this section be in substantial agreement with Rules and Regulations
Governing the Subdivision of Land in Mariemont, Ohio; however, in the event of
any conflict, the provisions of this subchapter shall govern.
   (D)   Land planning criteria. The following planning criteria are
established to guide and to control the planning, development, and use of land
in the PUD.
      (1)   Building and use arrangements. The design and development criteria
set forth in this section are intended to provide considerable latitude and
freedom in order to encourage variety in the arrangement of uses and of the
location, bulk, and shape of buildings, open space, and landscape features.
Buildings and uses shall be arranged, designed, and located in order to screen
and preserve residential uses within or nearby the PUD from adverse effects of
nonresidential uses within or nearby the PUD. The buildings and uses may be
arranged in various groups, courts, sequences, or clusters, with open spaces
organized and related to the buildings in order to provide privacy, to form a
unified composition of buildings and space, and to maximize the peace and
tranquillity of the residential occupants of the PUD and the nearby area. The
following design standards shall be met in planned unit developments:
         (a)   Adjoining property in the village shall be protected from loss
of light, air, and view due to the proximity of the bulk or shape of buildings
in the PUD;
         (b)   Through skillful design, the usability and accessibility of open
spaces on adjoining lots shall be obtained, while privacy assured within
adjoining dwellings;
         (c)   Required yards and setbacks shall not be excessive so as to
prevent the reasonable development of open land for landscape features,
recreation, or other private uses; and
         (d)   Latitude in design shall apply to the planning of landscape
features such as walls, fences, hedges, and other features to create a variety
of common open spaces and private areas.
      (2)   Local circulation system. The vehicular circulation system and
parking facilities shall be designed to fully accommodate vehicular traffic
with safety and efficiency without allowing it to dominate and destroy the form
of the area. Driveways for group developments and local streets shall be
connected to major arterial and collector streets at locations where the
traffic can be controlled and operated effectively with the minimum
interference with the capacity of the major arterial and collector streets. The
amount of traffic generated by commercial uses passing through residential
areas shall be minimized.
      (3)   Topography and site appearance. It is a requirement that these
developments shall be designed to take advantage of the topography of the land
in order to utilize the natural contours, to economize on the construction of
utilities, to reduce the amount of grading, and to maximize the conservation of
trees and topsoil. The natural features and other distinctive characteristics
of the site shall be integrated into the plan to create functional variations
in the arrangements of buildings, open spaces, and site features.
      (4)   Utility services. Utility services in a development area shall be
entirely underground.
      (5)   Private land. In the planning of residential developments in a
variety of groups or clusters, undeveloped land, to the extent possible, may be
provided adjacent to the units for the outdoor use of the occupants.
      (6)   Common land. The common land shall be readily accessible to the
residential units and shall be usable as open space. The integrity of the
common land shall be guaranteed from further division or other changes through
deed restrictions or declarations of covenants by explicit prohibition of other
than the intended uses; these deed restrictions and covenants shall be exempt
from further amendment except upon prior approval by the Planning Commission.
      (7)   Unified boundary. The design at the development area boundary shall
be unified with the adjoining developments in the village. Within the
development area, parking areas, service areas, commercial areas, and other
features likely to have adverse effect on surrounding property shall be
screened against viewing from first-story residences in the village outside the
PUD.
      (8)   Development area. The minimum area to qualify as a PUD shall be not
less than five contiguous acres. A parcel or parcels of land with less acreage
may be considered for planned development when it is demonstrated that the
smaller area has a unique feature of geography, topography, or other
development aspect which is determined by the Planning Commission to be
appropriate for the district designation; however, contiguous property of less
than five acres may be added to a previously established PUD without any
demonstrated basis.
      (9)   Development area density. The overall density of a development area
shall conform to the basic overall density requirements of the standard
districts.
      (10)   Peripheral setbacks. Along the boundary of any PUD within the
village, each nonresidential building shall be set back at least 30 feet from
adjoining private property outside the PUD. Each residential building shall be
set back from adjoining residential buildings outside the PUD in the village in
accordance with the requirements for that district.
      (11)   Required open spaces. In any PUD, the total public or common space
shall be not less than 20% of the gross acreage of the PUD District. Common
open space shall be protected by recorded covenants and restrictions to assure
that such open space will be permanently preserved and maintained.
   (E)   Development procedure and regulations.
      (1)   Preliminary development plan. Subject to the requirements of this
subchapter, a developer shall submit to the Planning Commission a preliminary
plan of a development area by filing five copies with accompanying letter to
the Planning Commission. Plans may only be submitted on behalf of a single
owner of the parcel or a group of owners of the land included therein who are
acting jointly. The preliminary plan of the development area shall conform to
the specifications set forth in Division V of Rules and Regulations Governing
the subdivision of Land in Mariemont, Ohio, as revised January, Ord. O-1984,
the contents of which are incorporated by reference as part of this code of
ordinances as fully as if set out at length herein.
      (2)   Referral for review and reports.
         (a)   Upon receipt of a preliminary plan of a development area, the
Planning Commission shall transmit one copy each of the preliminary plan to the
Building Commissioner and Village Engineer for review, report, and
recommendation. The Planning Commission shall also transmit a copy of all
covenants, restrictions, and easements to be recorded and covenants for
maintenance to the Solicitor for his or her review, report, and recommendation.
The Planning Commission shall further transmit one copy of the preliminary plan
to the Metropolitan Sewer District and one copy to the Cincinnati Water Works,
and may transmit one copy to the Regional Planning Commission for review and
comments. The Building Commissioner, Village Engineer, and Solicitor shall each
within 30 days from receiving a preliminary plan of the development area,
unless otherwise extended with consent of the developer, provide and furnish to
the Planning Commission a report upon their respective jurisdictions with four
copies. Three copies of each report shall be filed with the Planning
Commission, and one copy filed with the Fiscal Officer of Council who shall
maintain such copy for public inspection.
         (b)   Within 60 days after a preliminary plan has been filed with the
Planning Commission, unless otherwise extended with consent of the developer,
the Planning Commission shall evaluate the plan and shall inform the developer
either that the preliminary plan complies with the regulations, standards, and
criteria prescribed by this chapter for planned unit development areas
applicable to the proposal, or a finding of any failure of such compliance, and
a recommendation that the preliminary plan be approved, disapproved, or
modified. If in any evaluation the Planning Commission finds that any
regulations, standards, or criteria prescribed by this chapter are inapplicable
because of unusual conditions of the development area, or the nature and
quality of the proposed design, it may recommend that an adjustment in such
regulations, standards, or criteria be made, and that special conditions be
required for the development, provided the adjustment or conditions will not be
in conflict with the promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare of residents of the village. The adjustments and conditions shall
constitute a part of the proposed preliminary plan.
         (c)   If approved, the Planning Commission shall request seven copies
of the preliminary plan from the developer, shall stamp them as tentatively
approved, and distribute one copy each, with letter certifying action, to the
regional Planning Commission, the Building Commissioner, Village Engineer,
Metropolitan Sewer District, Cincinnati Water Works, Planning Commission file,
and the developer.
         (d)   Following approval by the Planning Commission, the Planning
Commission shall notify the developer of such action by registered or certified
mail and authorize it to proceed with the preparation of the final development
plan, which shall be in accordance with the specifications set forth in
Division VI of Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in
Mariemont, Ohio, as revised January, 1984, the contents of which are
incorporated by reference. Within 15 days after mailing notice, unless the time
is extended, the developer shall deposit with the Village Fiscal Officer a cash
amount to be credited to the General Fund of the village, for the exclusive use
of covering expenses incurred by the village in reviewing the plan. These
expenses may include items such as the cost of professional services in
connection with reviewing the plan’s on-site inspection, the preparation of
reports, publication and mailing of public notice, if any, and any other
reasonable expenses directly attributable thereto. The cash amount shall be
determined by the Village Council according to statements rendered by the
professional rendering the service.
      (3)   Final development plan.
         (a)   The developer of any parcel or parcels of land for which a
preliminary plan has been approved by the Planning Commission, and who has
posted the inspection fee required in division (E)(2)(d) above, may submit a
final development plan. The final plan shall be filed with the Building
Commissioner who shall, upon payment of any appropriate fees which may be
required, submit the final plan to the Planning Commission within 15 days.
         (b)   If the Planning Commission finds that a proposed final plan of a
development area is in substantial compliance with and represents a detailed
expansion of the previously approved preliminary plan; that the final plan
complies with all of the conditions and adjustments which may have been imposed
in the approval of the preliminary plan; that the final plan is in accordance
with the design criteria and provisions which apply particularly to any plan of
a planned unit development; that all agreements, contracts, covenants, deed
restrictions, dedications, easements, declarations of ownership, and other
required documents are in acceptable form and have been executed; that
development, pursuant to the previously approved preliminary plan, is in
accordance with that plan; that all fee payments have been made and that the
provisions of the subdivision regulations have been met; the Commission shall
then approve and sign such final plan of a PUD.
         (c)   The Planning Commission shall instruct the developer to furnish
six copies of the approved final plan and shall transmit one copy each to the
Building Commissioner, Village Engineer, Metropolitan Sewer District, and
Cincinnati Water Works. One copy shall be retained for the Planning Commission
file, and one copy shall be added to the village base maps.
         (d)   Following the approval of a final plan of a development area,
the Building Commissioner shall be notified and zoning certificates and other
permits shall be issued immediately upon payment of the required fees.    
      (4)   Progressive development.
         (a)   A developer, having obtained Planning Commission approval of any
final plan of a development area, may accomplish the development in progressive
stages which are consistent with any conditions pertaining to progressive
stages of development contained in the final plan as approved.
         (b)   When the final plan of development area provides for partial
development of the total area for which a preliminary plan has been approved,
the Planning Commission may require inspections of the improvements then made,
or detailed plans for all improvements in the development area to permit
evaluation of the progress and conformance of development of the entire parcel
to the preliminary plan or a previously approved final plan before further or
partial development may be approved.
      (5)   Amendments to plan.
         (a)   At any time after the approval of a preliminary plan or a final
plan of a development area, the owner or owners, or developer representing the
owner or owners, may request an amendment of development plans; the request for
the amendment shall be filed with the Planning Commission.
         (b)   If the amendment, as determined by the Planning Commission,
represents a major departure from the intent or the substance of the
preliminary plan, the amendment shall then be subject to the same procedures
and conditions of approval as the original application. For purposes of this
section, a “major departure from the intent and substance of the preliminary
plan” shall include, but not be limited to, an increase in or relocation of
areas planned for a particular use, or the addition of a use not included in
the approved preliminary plan.
   (F)   Transfer of land from standard zoning to PUD unit.
      (1)   The Planning Commission, by its Chairperson, shall, within seven
days of receipt of a preliminary plan requiring modification of existing zoning
in the area of the planned unit development, notify the Fiscal Officer of
Council that a public hearing by Council is required pursuant to R.C. § 713.12.
      (2)   Land in an area being planned for transfer to a planned unit
development site shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this chapter
for that area until a notation is made to the village zone map reflecting the
area to be in a planned unit development in accordance with this section.
(2000 Code, § 151.077) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.078 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR ROW HOUSES AND OTHER MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS
EXISTING AS OF MARCH 1, 2003.
   (A)   Purpose. The village contains certain row houses and other multi-
family dwellings. In order to provide for property development and improvement
while protecting the historic and architectural features which exist, certain
row houses existing as of March 1, 2003, may be rezoned to single-family
attached dwelling units; provided, that such units comply with this chapter and
Building Code and with the following provisions. These provisions are intended
to permit these properties to be developed and conveyed in a more flexible
manner, without detriment to neighboring properties.
   (B)   Rezoning. The conversion of a row house or other multi-family dwelling
existing as of March 1, 2003, to single-family attached dwelling units requires
the prior approval of the Planning Commission. As a condition to approval, the
Planning Commission shall require all of the following:
      (1)   A plat of survey and an legal description of the property
reflecting the exact boundary lines of the parcels to be created by the
conversion, all easements encumbering the parcels and such other matters as may
be reasonably required by the Planning Commission. If a garage is located on a
re-surveyed lot, the garage shall be shown on the survey and must comply with
all applicable provisions of this chapter and the Building Code;
      (2)   Evidence that once the approval of the rezoning is complete the new
single-family residences will comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter; and
      (3)   Such other and further requirements as the Planning Commission may
deem necessary or appropriate. The applicant shall address party wall and
common boundary issues by way of a party wall and common facilities agreement
signed by the owners of all adjoining single-family, attached dwelling units.
Upon request, the Commission shall provide to applicants a sample party wall
and common facilities agreement which is acceptable to the Commission and the
village. If a shared garage or a garage having a party wall is included in a
parcel to be created by the conversion, the Commission further shall require
owners of the shared garage or the garage having a party wall to execute a
common facilities agreement for that purpose and will provide an acceptable
sample form.
   (C)   Residential buildings to front upon a dedicated street or other public
right-of-way; not to be moved to rear of existing buildings. No building or
part of a building designated for residential purposes shall hereafter be
erected or moved to the rear of any existing building. No building designed for
residential purposes shall hereafter be erected or altered unless the building
fronts upon a dedicated street or right-of-way dedicated for public use and
accepted by the village as a public right-of-way.
   (D)   Minimum street frontage. No lot shall contain any building used in
whole or in part for residential purposes unless at least an area not less than
the centerline dimension from party wall to party wall of the lot abuts a
public street. There shall be not more than one single-family dwelling on the
lot.
   (E)   Unobstructed frontage facing dedicated street; qualifying wall.
      (1)   No apartment, residence, home, or other designation of the abode
for one family shall have less than 16 feet of exterior wall frontage facing
the nearest dedicated street property line, so that no other building, portion
of a building, lot, or portion of a lot shall come between the wall and the
street.
      (2)   The minimum of 16 feet applies only where the wall is either
parallel to the adjacent street property line, on a curve, or parallel to a
chord which is at a 90 degree angle to and centers on the same radius that
bisects the proposed qualifying wall.
   (F)   No further accessory buildings. With respect to row houses and other
multi-family dwellings converted to single-family, attached dwelling units
pursuant to this section, no further accessory buildings, outbuildings, or
garages may be constructed or placed upon parcels after the conversion.
   (G)   Yard and lot requirements. Row houses and other multi-family dwellings
converted to single-family attached dwelling units pursuant to this section
shall not be required to comply with the yard specifications set forth in §
151.086(B) and (C), or with the minimum area lot specifications set forth in §
151.086(A).
(2000 Code, § 151.078) (Ord. O-8-03, passed 5-12-2003)
COURT, YARD, AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS
§ 151.085 BUILDING HEIGHT, YARD, AND COURT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In the various districts there shall be provided on each lot a
“required side yard” along each side lot line, a “required rear yard”, and a
“required front yard”, the minimum dimensions of which shall be in accordance
with the following regulations and §
151.086, “tabulation and formulae”.
   (B)   The minimum dimensions of courts and the maximum height of principal
structures shall also be in accordance with said tables and regulations. The
side and rear yard setbacks, height, and size of accessory buildings, when
detached from the principal building, are set forth in division (B)(1)(c)
below. Attached dwelling units, such as condominiums and rowhouses, are
considered as single structures.
      (1)   Height, size and yard regulations for principal and accessory
buildings.
         (a)   Building height.
            1.   a.   The height of principal buildings shall be the mean
vertical distance from the average established grade in front of the lot, or
from the average natural grade at the building line, if higher, to the average
height of the top of the cornice of flat roofs, or to the deck line of a
mansard roof, or to the midheight of a pitched or hipped roof.
               b.   Where a lot faces on two or more streets or alleys of
different average established grades in front of the lot, the higher of the
grades shall control only for a depth of 120 feet perpendicularly back from the
street line of the higher street or alley.
               c.   On a corner lot the height is the mean vertical distance
from the average established grade or from the average natural grade at the
building line, if higher, on the street of greatest width, or if two or more
such streets are of the same width, from the higher of such grades.
               d.   Principal building does not include detached accessory
buildings (see division (B)(1)(c) below).
            2.   Public and semi-public buildings may be erected to a height
not exceeding 45 feet; provided, that the required front, side, and rear yards
required by §
151.086 are increased one additional foot for each two feet such building
exceeds 30 feet in height.
               3.   Chimneys, monumental towers, church steeples and towers,
monuments, domes, false mansards, and belfries may be erected to any height.
            4.   a.   Whenever hospitals, nursing, rest, convalescent homes, or
retirement communities located in Residence B District are to have a center
utilitarian unit to connect wings of such a building, such center unit may, in
order to provide relief from repetition of elements in design, be erected to a
height not exceeding 86 feet, exclusive of belfries, cupolas, domes,
ornamentation, chimneys, and flag poles; provided, that the ground area of such
center unit shall be not greater than one-sixth the ground area of the wings,
and that the total usable floor area of such center unit shall be not greater
than one-third of the total usable floor area of the wings.
               b.   Such height in excess of 45 feet shall not require any
increase in the front, side, or rear yards.
         (b)   Yard dimensions and regulations.
            1.   Front yard.
               a.   In any residential district, all structures shall have a
required front yard which is determined by multiplying the average width of the
area in front of the principal structure by the setback specified in §
151.086(B).
               b.   In any residential district, the alignment of an improved
property must conform to the average alignment of nearby buildings on the same
side of street(s) for a distance of 200 feet along its frontage (for a corner
lot the side is also required to conform to the average) within five feet.
               c.   For rounded or cul-de-sacs lots, alignment is calculated
based on the midpoint of the house frontage to the property line.
            2.   Rear yard. In any residential or business district, all
structures shall have a required rear yard which is determined by multiplying
the average width of the area in back of the principal structure by the setback
specified in §
151.086(B).
            3.   Side yard. In any residential or industrial district, all
structures shall have a required side yard setback as specified in §
151.086(C) (see also corner lots, in division (B)(1)(b)5. below).
            4.   Street-to-street lots. In any residential district where a lot
runs through the block from street to street, the required setback as defined
for front yards in division (B)(1)(b)1. above shall be provided on each street.
            5.   Corner lots. In any residential district on a corner lot, the
required width of the side yard setback along the side street shall be equal to
the required sum of the widths of the two side yards minus three feet, except
in division (B)(1)(b)1.b. above, where condition exists, such structure must
conform to the setback specified in division (B)(1)(b)1.b. above.
            6.   Lot area.
               a.   Within any residential district, as indicated on the
building zone map, every lot shall contain a lot area of not less than that
stipulated in §
151.086(A), “tabulation and formulae”.
               b.   The Planning Commission shall have the power where the
strict application of the requirements of minimum lot areas would result in
undue hardship upon the owner of specific property to reduce the total required
area by not more than 12.5% of such total area.
               c.   The provisions for a minimum lot area of 6,750 square feet
for single-family residence in Residence A, B, and C Districts shall not apply
to lots existing in duly recorded subdivisions, recorded in the County
Recorders office prior to April 23, 1942, or on any plat of subdivision, which
may have been, prior to April 23, 1942, submitted to the Commission and have
endorsed thereon the approval of the Planning Commission.
            7.   Lot width.
               a.   No residence shall be erected in a residential district on
a lot of less than 40 feet in width unless such lot is recorded on a plat of
subdivision in the office of the County Recorder as of April 23, 1942.
               b.   In such instances, the minimum side yard and total side
yards required shall be the same as required for a lot of 40 feet in width.
            8.   Minimum area, yards, and the like. The minimum area, yards,
and other open spaces required by this chapter shall also apply to structures
existing as of April 23, 1942.
            9.   Minimum yards. The minimum yards and other open spaces
required in this chapter for each and every building existing as of April 23,
1942, or for any building hereafter erected or structurally altered shall not
be encroached on or considered as yard or open space requirements for any other
building or structure regardless of any change in ownership of the land
included within those yards or other open spaces.
            10.   Minimum street frontage. Every lot in a residential district
shall have a minimum street frontage of 20 feet.
            11.   A panhandle shaped lot where a narrow strip that is less than
the full lot width is created that satisfies the minimum street frontage but
positions a new or existing residence behind another without direct line of
site of the public street is prohibited.
            12.   Attached garages cannot be the closest point of the principal
structure to the front facing property line. Front facing garages should not be
the predominant architectural feature of the residential facade.
         (c)   Height and yard regulations for accessory buildings.
            1.   a.    Accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in total
height measured from the grade at front of the structure to the highest point
of roof, shall be at least three feet from the rear lot line, and shall be at
least three feet from any side lot line, measured from the nearest point of the
accessory building to the rear lot line or side lot line as the case may be.
               b.   The maximum height of 18 feet is allowable if the building
is six feet or more away from all lot lines. Maximum height will be
interpolated when structure is located between three and six feet. Structures
must be single story only with allowable attic storage.
               c.   In no case shall the maximum height exceed 18 feet. In the
rear yard of a corner lot, no accessory building shall be built closer to the
street than the required front yard setback of either of the adjoining lots, in
no case less than 25 feet.
            2.   All accessory buildings or structures erected in the rear yard
shall not occupy more than 30% required rear yard regardless of use. For lot
widths of 50 feet or less, the maximum footprint is 576 square feet. For lot
widths greater than 50 feet, the maximum footprint is 864 square feet
regardless of the percentage of required rear yard calculation.
      (2)   Court regulations.
         (a)   Generally. A court shall be provided for any room in which
persons live, sleep, or work (except storage rooms) located in any residence
district or in a business district which cannot be reasonably and exclusively
lighted and ventilated as required in this chapter from a street yard.
         (b)   Minimum dimensions.
            1.   Inner court. The minimum length of any side of an inner court
shall be seven feet for each story of the building in which the court is
located.
            2.   Outer court. The minimum length of any side of an outer court
shall be six feet for each story of the building in which the court is located.
         (c)   Minimum area. The minimum area of an inner court or outer court
shall be not less than twice the square of the minimum length of any one side
required for the court.
         (d)   Courts in existence. Courts in existence at the effective date
(March 25, 1996) are permitted to continue, but new buildings must meet all
standards of the State Basic Building Code (including light and ventilation).
(2000 Code, § 151.185) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-16-03, passed 11-
24-2003; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-26-2006; Ord. O-24-22, passed 11-14-2022; Ord.
O-1-25, passed 1-13-2025)
§ 151.086 TABULATION AND FORMULAE.
   (A)   Residential minimum yard requirements.
 
District  Residential Residential Residential Residential Residential Residential
          A, B, C     B and C     B and C     C           C           D
Family    Single-     2- or 3-                            5+
dwelling  family      family      4-family    5-family    multiple-   Multiple
permitted detached    dwelling    dwelling    dwelling    family
                                                          dwelling
                                                          11,750
                                                          square feet
Minimum                                                   plus 1,250
lot area  6,750       10,000      10,500      11,750      square feet 39 units
per       square feet square feet square feet square feet for each    per acre
dwelling                                                  dwelling
                                                          unit in
                                                          excess of 5
 
   (B)   Building height and yard setback regulations.
      Minimum   Maximum Height of Building          Height of building
Zones Lot Width Height  0-18 feet 8-30 feet Over 30 0-18 feet 18-30 Over 30
                                            feet              feet  feet
      Feet      Feet    Front Yard Setback          Rear Yard Setback
                        Feet      Feet      Feet    Feet      Feet  Feet
           Minimum Maximum Height of Building          Height of building
Zones      Lot     Height  0-18 feet 8-30 feet Over 30 0-18 feet 18-30 Over 30
           Width                               feet              feet  feet
           Feet    Feet    Front Yard Setback          Rear Yard Setback
                           Feet      Feet      Feet    Feet      Feet  Feet
Residence  40      30      20        25        - -     30        30    - -
A
Residence  40      30      20        25        - -     20        25    - -
B
Residence  45      35      20        20        - -     20        25    25
C
Residence          45*     10        10        10      20        25    30
D
Business   - -     45      None      None      None    10        15    20
Industrial - -     120     None      None      None    None      None  None
All zones
public and
semi-      80      45      - -       - -       30      - -       - -   **
public
bldgs.
*   Building height for the Residence D District shall be defined as the
vertical distance from the average lot grade at the front of the structure to
the highest point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the peak of a gambrel,
gable, mansard, or hip roof
**   40 (except Residence C: 30 feet)
 
   (C)   Side yard regulations.
      (1)   Minimum side yard setback regulations.
          Height of Building
 Width of 0 to 18 feet          18 to 30 feet           30 plus feet
 Lot      Least     Sum of Both Least Width Sum of Both Least Width Sum of Both
          Width Any Side Yards  Any Side    Side Yards  Any Side    Side Yards
          Side Yard             Yard                    Yard
                    Height of Building
           Width of 0 to 18 feet        18 to 30 feet       30 plus feet
           Lot      Least     Sum of    Least     Sum of    Least     Sum of
                    Width Any Both Side Width Any Both Side Width Any Both Side
                    Side Yard Yards     Side Yard Yards     Side Yard Yards
Residence
A, B, and  40       5         13.00     6         14.25     7         15.75
C
           50       6         14.25     7         15.50     8         17.00
           60       7         15.50     8         17.00     9         18.75
           70       8         17.25     9         18.75     10        20.50
           80       9         19.00     10        21.00     11        22.75
           90       10        21.25     11        23.25     12        25.50
           100      11        23.50     12        26.00     13        28.25
           110      12        26.25     13        29.00     14        31.50
           120      13        29.00     14        32.00               35.00
Residence  10 feet for building abutting commercial or multi-family use; 20
D          feet for building abutting a single- or two-family residence
Business            None
Industrial                                                  10
Public     80                                               20        50
building
 
      (2)   Formulae. For lot values between or above the values on the
foregoing tabulation the following formulae shall be used to determine width of
total side yards.
 
   - 0 to 18 feet         Total side yard equals .00125W2 plus 11 feet
   - 18 plus to 30 feet      Total side yard equals 1.1 (.00125W 2 plus 11 feet)
   - Over 30 feet         Total side yard equals 1.2 (.00125W 2 plus 11 feet)
               (W = total width of lot)
 
      (3)   Width. For least width of any side yard on lot widths between or
above values on the above tabulation, such widths shall be determined by
interpolation or extrapolation.
      (4)   Precedence. Combinations of business and residences, residence
district restriction govern.
(2000 Code, § 151.086) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
Cross-reference:
   Exception for row houses and multi-family dwellings converted to single-
family attached dwellings, see §
151.078
§ 151.087 PERMITTED OBSTRUCTIONS IN REQUIRED YARDS.
   A required yard or court shall, at all times and in every part, be
unobstructed by any permanent or temporary human-made object from its lowest
point to the sky; however, the following obstructions shall be permitted:
   (A)   Walks and driveways of normal and reasonable area.
   (B)   Fences as permitted under this chapter.
   (C)   Outdoor furniture that is readily movable, such as chairs, tables,
lounges, and sun umbrellas.
   (D)   Awnings or canopies above a door or window in a residential district;
provided, such awnings or canopies do not extend into a required side yard more
than four feet.
   (E)   Heating, ventilating, refrigerating, condensing, or back-up electrical
generator equipment, or combinations thereof may be placed in a required rear
yard; provided, that there be no more than two such (three if one is a back-up
generator) obstructions; that no such obstruction shall extend more than four
feet above the ground at the point of the obstruction; and that such
obstructions do not occupy more than 12 (16 if includes a backup generator)
square feet of the required rear yard; and further provided, that such
obstructions be placed as close to the residence for which the required rear
yard is provided as is reasonably possible. Similar equipment may be permitted
in any side yard but may not be placed closer to the side yard property line
than the required side yard setback for lots wider than 50 feet or three feet
for lots 50 feet or narrower. If there are obstacles blocking egress to the
rear yard (i.e. fencing, large tree, other obstructions), the Building
Department may deny the side yard location. No similar equipment is permitted
in the front yard of any structure. Utility meters may not be installed on the
wall of any structure facing a street. Utility meters may be placed above grade
on the side or rear wall of any structure. Refer to §§
151.140 et seq. for geothermal system requirements.
   (F)   Self-contained window type air conditioning equipment not exceeding
one ton capacity may project into a required yard for not more than two feet.
   (G)   The ordinary projection of chimneys, belt courses, cornices, and
ornamental features; provided, that such obstruction shall not project more
than 18 inches into a required yard. Bay windows may project not more than 24
inches into a required yard but may not occupy more than 20% of the wall
length.
   (H)   Steps, slabs, covered and uncovered stoops, and platforms leading to
an entrance door; provided, that no such obstruction shall project into a
required side yard more than three feet or into a required front yard more than
five feet.
   (I)   Paved patios, paved terraces, and decks may be erected in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   Paver patios and decks are not allowed in the required front yard,
but can be located in the side and rear yards as follows:
         (a)   When located in the rear yard and less than six inches above
grade, the edge of the patio can be no closer than one foot from a neighboring
property line, otherwise it must be no closer than three feet.
         (b)   When located in a side yard and less than six inches above
grade, the edge of the patio can be no closer than one foot from a neighboring
property line, if between six inches and three feet above grade, it can be no
closer than three feet. If greater than three feet above grade it must adhere
to the side setback calculation as outlined in §
151.086(C).
      (2)   Any feature incorporated into patio design (e.g. arbor, pergola,
bench) that extends above three feet from grade will be required to be setback
as follows:
         (a)   Be no closer than three feet to a property line when in the rear
yard.
         (b)   Adhere to setback requirements when in the side yard.
         (c)   No feature can extend higher than 15 feet in either the side or
rear yard.
      (3)   Patios must be constructed on a four inches deep compacted base and
run-off from the patio area must be directed to a storm sewer or drainage
swale, and not to a neighbor's property.
      (4)   Any paved patio, terrace, or deck used as a sports area or as a
swimming pool shall be located no closer than 30 feet from any property line
and shall not occupy more than the equivalent of 25% of the required rear yard,
with the following exception: if such uses are clearly a subordinate use, such
as a basketball pole on a driveway, they shall be subject to the minimum side
yard setbacks for that property as specified in this chapter for the primary
structure.
   (J)   Hot tubs and spas are a permitted obstruction if satisfy the following
requirements:
      (1)   Rest on grade (on top of a paved surface or paver stones) or rests
on an elevated deck designed for the load. A hot tub that is partially or fully
below grade will be considered a swimming pool. A hot tub placed directly on
soil/yard is not allowed.
      (2)   Be less than 80 square feet in surface area. Area greater than 80
square feet will be considered a swimming pool.
      (3)   Have a depth of water in any portion greater than two feet but less
than four feet. Water levels less than two feet will be considered a "kiddie
pool" and are not regulated by this code. Water depths greater than 4ft will be
considered a swimming pool.
      (4)   Electrical supply not limited to support heating, pumping,
recirculating, or sanitizing of water must be separately permitted thru IBI.
      (5)   Equipped with a lockable cover when not in use or unsupervised or
be contained inside an approved fencing as described in §
151.103(D) suitable for a swimming pool.
      (6)   Located in the rear yard only, with additional requirements:
         (a)   No portion of the hot tub extends beyond the side walls of the
principal structure nor closer than ten feet from a side neighbor property
line.
         (b)   No portion of the hot tub extends further than 15 feet from the
principal residence rear facing wall
         (c)   No portion of the hot tub is closer than ten feet from the rear
property line.
         (d)   For corner lots, if hot tub is positioned along public street, a
six feet privacy fence is required per § 151.02.
      (7)   Additional landscaping or privacy fence feature may be needed as
determined by the Building Department.
   (K)   Swimming pools shall adhere to the requirements set forth in division
(I)(4) above and §
151.060(A)(3)(b).
(2000 Code, § 151.087) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-8-98, passed 1-
12-1998; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-26-2006; Ord. O-16-22, passed 5-23-2022; Ord.
O-27-22, passed 11-14-2022; Ord. O-7-24, passed 4-8-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Geothermal heating and cooling systems, see
151.140 et seq.
§ 151.088 AWNING AND CANOPY REQUIREMENTS.
   Awnings and canopies constructed on commercial establishments must comply
with the following requirements.
   (A)   Awning and canopy materials shall be restricted to fabrics which are
not glossy, shiny or reflective if coated with a plastic.
   (B)   Awning and canopy framework shall be one of the following types of
construction:
      (1)   An awning shall consist of simple, stationary galvanized pipes or
bars hung from a building facade;
      (2)   Folding horizontal or vertical supporting arms secured to a
building facade; or
      (3)   A canopy shall consist of galvanized rafters and bows not capable
of retraction and which are supported by galvanized pipes which are secured to
the ground.
   (C)   Awning and canopy shapes shall be one of the following types,
illustrations of which are on file and available for inspection in the Col.
Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building.
      (1)   Awning.
         (a)   Trim style with a valance (skirt) terminating in a wave or
scalloped edge;
         (b)   Vertical style with straight ends and a valance (skirt)
terminating in a wave or scalloped edge;
         (c)   Horizontal style with open or closed ends and a valance (skirt)
terminating in a wave or scalloped edge; or
         (d)   A stationary awning may have side curtains and, if front has a
valance (skirt), the side curtains shall terminate in a matching bottom edge.
      (2)   Canopy.
         (a)   A flat front with no hood and scalloped side valance; or
         (b)   High curved bows as front hood with scalloped side valance.
   (D)   Lettering, symbols, and/or a logo shall be permitted only on a front
valance (skirt) of an awning, either the front or the side panels of a canopy,
and if illuminated, shall be back-lit by light sources which are at least six
feet eight inches above grade. Lettering, symbols, and/or a logo shall be
translucent. Full back-lit awning or canopy signs shall not be permitted.
   (E)   Awning and canopy sign size and location of attachment to a building
shall be subject to the following provisions.
      (1)   The uppermost edge of an awning or canopy shall be attached
immediately above a storefront window and/or door.
      (2)   Awnings and canopies shall have a minimum slope adequate to drain
rainwater.
      (3)   Clearance of awnings and canopies above sidewalks and from streets
shall comply with the State Basic Building Code.
      (4)   Awnings and canopies shall not cover architectural features, except
when necessary for weather protection.
      (5)   The perpendicular extension of an awning from the facade to which
it is attached shall not exceed four times the vertical height or rise in the
slope of the awning.
      (6)   The length of a valance (skirt) of an awning or canopy shall not
exceed 12 inches.
      (7)   A full back-lit sign shall be permitted only on the front of a
theater marquee.
      (8)   The following colors shall be permitted for awning and canopy sign
materials:
         (a)   Deep reds such as burgundy, maroon;
         (b)   Deep blues such as navy, midnight, royal;
         (c)   Deep greens, such as forest, shutter;
         (d)   Deep grays;
         (e)   Dark browns, such as walnut, chocolate;
         (f)   Beige;
         (g)   Sand;
         (h)   Black, only as an accent, not as a major field; and
         (i)   White, only as an accent, not as a major field.
(2000 Code, § 151.088) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
Cross-reference:
   Building Code, see
Ch. 150
§ 151.089 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage
or parking of self-propelled passenger vehicles for the use of occupants,
employees, and patrons of buildings erected the effective date of this chapter
(March 25, 1996) and of such extensions, alterations, additions, or changes in
use of such buildings as specified in division (E) below, shall be provided in
amounts not less than hereinafter specified, and shall not subsequently be
reduced below the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Provided, that nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
reconstruction, repairing, or rebuilding and continued use of any conforming
building or structure existing as of the effective date of this chapter (March
25, 1996) which is damaged by fire, collapse, explosion, or act of God,
subsequent to such effective date, subject, however, to all provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, PARKING SPACE shall mean an area with
dimensions not less than nine feet by 18 feet or 162 square feet, exclusive of
drives and aisles giving access thereto, accessible from streets or alleys, or
from private driveways or aisles leading to streets or alleys and suitable and
usable for the storage or parking of one self-propelled passenger automobile;
provided, that when such private driveway is under ownership of other than that
of the parking space to which access is provided, right of access must be
evidenced by an easement of record giving unrestricted right of ingress and
egress over that private driveway or aisle to that parking space. PARKING LOT
shall mean any surface lot which provides off-street parking for motorized
vehicles.
   (D)   Existing off-street parking facilities provided at the effective date
of this chapter (March 25, 1996) and actually being used at that date for the
parking of automobiles in connection with the operation of an existing building
or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required under
this chapter for a similar new building or new use.
   (E)   Whenever in a building or structure which was erected after the
effective date of this chapter (March 25, 1996) there is a change in use or
change in number of employees, or an increase in floor area, or in any other
unit of measurement specified in division (G) below to indicate the required
off-street parking facilities by means of extension, addition, alteration,
breaking, opening, removal of partitions, or by any other means, and the change
in use or increase in floor area or in any other unit of measurement given in
division (G) below to indicate the required off-street parking facilities,
creates a need for an increase of more than 15% in off-street parking
facilities as determined in division (G) below, off-street parking facilities
shall be provided on the basis of the total floor area, as herein defined, or
on the basis of the total units of measurement of the new use or of the altered
or expanded existing use.
   (F)   For the purpose of this section, FLOOR AREA where used with reference
to offices, merchandising, or service types of uses shall mean the gross floor
area used or intended to be used for service to the public as customers,
patrons, clients, patients, or tenants, including areas occupied by fixtures
and equipment used for display or sale of merchandise, except that floor area
devoted to the following uses shall be excluded from the gross floor area.
      (1)   Floors or parts of floors used principally for purposes such as
inactive file storage, storage of office supplies, merchandise storage,
incidental repair or processing of merchandise, toilet or restrooms, fitting
and dressing rooms, utilities, ventilation, heating and air- conditioning
equipment, janitor’s closets, elevator shafts, elevator penthouses, stairways,
and hallways separated from work space by partitions.
      (2)   In hospitals, bassinets shall not be counted as beds.
      (3)   In stadium sports arenas, churches, and other places of assembly in
which patrons or spectators comply, benches, pews, or other similar seating
facilities each 20 inches of such seating facilities shall be counted as one
seat for the purpose of determining requirements for off-street parking
facilities under this chapter.
   (G)   The amount of off-street parking facilities required under divisions
(A) and (E) above shall be determined in accordance with the following:
      (1)   In all dwelling units in all districts, one parking space for each
dwelling unit;
      (2)   Hotels, one parking space for each guest bedroom;
      (3)   Hospitals, one parking space for each bed excluding bassinets;
      (4)   Nursing homes, convalescent homes, and homes for persons who are
elderly, one parking space for each five beds;
      (5)   Theaters, stadiums, sports arenas, and auditoriums, one parking
space for each four seats;
      (6)   Churches, one parking space for each five seats in the main worship
unit;
      (7)   Assembly halls without fixed seats, and exhibition halls, one
parking space for each 25 square feet of floor area used for assembly;
      (8)   Bowling alleys, four parking spaces for each alley;
      (9)   Medical or dental clinics, banks, and business or professional
offices, one parking space for each 225 square feet of floor area;
      (10)   Establishments for the sale and consumption on the premises of
alcoholic beverages, food, or refreshments, one parking space for each three
seats;
      (11)   Mortuaries or funeral homes, three parking spaces for each room
used as a chapel room or slumber room or parlor, or one parking space for each
50 square feet of floor area of assembly rooms used for services, whichever is
greater;
      (12)   Retail stores, wholesale stores, machinery sales, personal service
shops, clothing and shoe repair or service shops and hardware stores, one
parking space for each 200 square feet; and
      (13)   Manufacturing and industrial uses including research and testing
laboratories, creameries, soft drink bottling establishments, printing and
engraving shops, warehouses, and storage buildings, one parking space for each
three employees, computed on the basis of the greatest number of persons to be
employed at any one period during the day or night.
   (H)   Collective parking provisions shall be as follows.
      (1)   Collective provisions of off-street parking facilities for two or
more buildings or uses are permitted; provided, that the total of such off-
street parking facilities, collectively, shall be not less than 85% of the sum
of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in
accordance with division (G) above.
      (2)   Not more than 50% of the off-street parking facilities required by
this chapter for establishments whose peak hours of operation do not normally
coincide may be supplied by contiguous off- street parking facilities: such as,
theaters; churches; bowling alleys; dance halls; and establishments for the
sale and consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages, food, or
refreshments whose normal peak usage differs from business offices, retail
stores, personal service shops, household equipment or furniture shops, and
manufacturing buildings and similar uses.
   (I)   Additional requirements shall be as follows.
      (1)   (a)   The off-street parking facilities required for dwellings
shall be on the same lot or parcel of land as the building they are intended to
serve.
         (b)   For all other uses, the off-street parking facilities required
shall be within 500 feet of the building they are intended to serve, measured
between the nearest point of the off-street parking facilities and the nearest
point of the building.
      (2)   Where by reason of the operation of this chapter, off-street
parking is required of any use in a residential zone and there is insufficient
area in such residential zone to meet the requirements of this chapter in such
zone, and property under the same ownership contiguous thereto is available for
off-street parking, whether or not such area is in the same residential zone,
such contiguous property may be used for off-street parking in order to meet
the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   When units or measurements determining the number of required
parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to
and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall
require one parking space.
      (4)   In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirements
for off-street parking facilities for a use which is similar shall apply.
      (5)   Off-street parking facilities for one use shall not be considered
as providing required parking facilities for any other use except as herein
specified for collective use (see division (H) above).
      (6)   The off-street parking facilities required by this chapter may be
provided by premises which are either under the same owners as the building or
other structure for which the off-street parking facilities are provided, or by
premises under other ownership; provided, that if the premises are under such
other ownership, that provision of off-street parking must be evidenced by
written contract by a lease or easement recorded by the County Recorder.
      (7)   Where parking facilities have been established prior to the passage
of this chapter, or subsequent to the passage of this chapter in compliance
with the terms hereof, that entire area of parking facilities shall be
maintained by the owner thereof so as to be usable for such purpose, and that
parking area shall not thereafter be reduced so long as the uses of such owner,
owner lessees, tenants, or licensees shall continue, and such area shall
thereafter be encroached on by any building or other structure.
      (8)   Wherever parking areas are to be used during darkness, a system of
lighting may be installed to provide an adequate standard of five foot-candles
of illumination over the entire parking areas. All floodlights shall be
shielded so as to reflect light away from all premises and shall not create
more than one-half foot- candles of illumination to abutting residential
districts.
      (9)   Any parking area open to the public shall be maintained in a manner
to keep it as free as practicable from dust, paper, and other loose particles,
and snow and ice shall be promptly removed by the operator. All signs and
markers used to indicate direction of traffic movement and location of
physically handicapped and other special parking spaces shall be maintained in
a neat and legible condition. Likewise, any walls, trees, shrubbery, and
surfacing of the parking spaces and approach drives shall be maintained in good
condition throughout. The Building Commissioner shall have the authority to
prohibit the use of the area for parking purposes unless and until proper
maintenance, repair, or rehabilitation is completed.
      (10)   At least 5% of any parking area open to the public shall be
devoted to landscaped space. Trees and shrubs shall be placed and maintained to
substantially screen all off-street parking areas from the view of adjoining
property in a residential district.
      (11)   (a)   In any residential district, no driveway shall be
constructed less than 12 feet in width. All driveways shall be paved with
concrete, asphalt, brick pavers or crushed stone.
         (b)   The aggregate width of driveway(s) at the street line shall not
exceed 60% of the width of the lot.
         (c)   Required width of curb cuts may exceed the driveway width by
three feet.
      (12)   (a)   In all residential zones, rear yard parking accessed only
from public lanes and streets shall be limited in size to no greater than 12
feet in width and 18 feet in length. Parking areas shall be paved with concrete
or interlocking brick pavers.
         (b)   Parking is permitted only for passenger vehicles. Parking for
boats, recreational vehicles, trailers, and other similar vehicles is expressly
prohibited.
         (c)   Parking area shall be extended continuously from the lane or
street paving such that no unpaved areas exist between the lane or street and
the paved parking area.
(2000 Code, § 151.089) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-
26-2006) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.090 PARKING AND STORAGE OF OVERSIZED VEHICLES AND BOATS.
   (A)   In areas zoned residential, any vehicle in excess of 21 feet in length
or nine feet in height or eight feet in width, including, but not limited to,
buses, trucks, or house trailers, motor homes, mobile homes, travel trailers,
truck campers, and similar vehicles, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and major
recreational equipment, which includes boats, boat trailers, and truck covers,
when not in an enclosed garage, shall be stored, parked, or erected to the rear
of the rear building line, but not in the front or side yard or front side of
the house, except that in no case shall it be closer to the rear or side
property line than five feet. Vehicles shall not extend into the village right-
of-way. In addition, on corner lots parking or storage shall not be permitted
on the side yard nearest the public street.
   (B)   These vehicles, regardless of size, may be parked in the front
driveway of any premises for a period of time not to exceed seven days in any
calendar year for purposes of loading, unloading, and visiting.
   (C)   Upon prior written approval from the Mayor, the vehicles described
above may be occupied as living quarters for no more than seven days.
   (D)   Buses for the purpose of transporting children to sporting events may
be parked in lawfully designated areas for the length of the sporting event.
(2000 Code, § 151.090) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996) Penalty, see §
151.999
Cross-reference:
   Recreational vehicles prohibited on public streets and lanes, see §
76.08
§ 151.091 TEMPORARY PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   In all districts, any temporary portable storage containers, such as
PODS (portable on demand storage), to be located on the property and not within
the public right-of-way shall require an application with the Building
Department for off-street temporary portable storage container approval with
application fee based on the following criteria.
      (1)   Temporary portable storage container placement period shall not
exceed 30 calendar days from date and time of delivery to date and time of
removal. If the container's use is unable to be completed within the 30
calendar-day period, an extension must be requested by contacting the Building
Department.
      (2)   Container placement shall not occur in the property right-of-way,
nor interfere with public sidewalks, trees, and vegetation, nor street
sightlines for operators of motor vehicles on streets and lanes.
      (3)   Container size shall not exceed eight feet in width, 16 feet in
length, and eight feet in height.
      (4)   Container may be placed in front, side, or rear yards, but in no
case shall it be closer to the rear or side property lines than five feet.
      (5)   No portable storage containers shall be placed in the rear of any
property situated on a lane where trucks are prohibited from using the lane. In
those cases, all portable storage containers shall be placed in the front of
the residence after receiving the appropriate permit.
   (B)   In all districts, any temporary portable storage containers, such as
PODS (portable on demand storage) which are to be located on the street shall
require an application from the Building Department for on-street temporary
portable storage container approval with application fee based on the following
criteria:
      (1)   The container placement period shall not exceed 72 hours from date
and time of delivery to date and time of removal. If the container's use is
unable to be completed within the 72-hour period, an extension may be requested
by contacting the Police Department;
      (2)   Containers shall not interfere with trees or other vegetation along
the street. Containers shall be placed up against the vertical edge of the curb
whenever possible or at the edge of pavement where no curb exists to minimize
visual obstruction along the street; and
      (3)   Applications require Police Department approval before the building
department will issue approval.
(Ord. O-19-14, passed 8-11-2014; Ord. O-5-22, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 151.0911 TEMPORARY PORTABLE TOILETS.
   (A)   Self-contained portable toilets" means one or more commercially
manufactured or assembled self-contained toilet facility that is portable and
is not designed or intended for connection to a sewer system with a standard
connection.
   (B)   The temporary use of self-contained portable toilets for construction,
rehabilitation projects, special events, interruption of sewer service for
emergencies or planned upgrades/repairs, and at sites or facilities that are
not permanently inhabited and do not have installed toilet facilities is
allowed.
   (C)   The use of self-contained portable toilets, limited to seven calendar
days or less, for special events such as wedding receptions or family reunions
on private property is allowed. For private property placement self-contained
portable toilets should be placed no nearer the property line than 15 feet and
in the rear yard if that location is serviceable. Self-contained portable
toilets located in residential zones shall be located to provide the maximum
practical screening from roads and adjacent properties as the site allows.
   (D)   The use of self-contained portable toilets, limited to seven calendar
days or less, for special events in public spaces such as community picnics,
concerts, exhibitions is allowed. For placement in public spaces self-contained
portable toilets should be placed 15 feet from the public right-of-way (roads
or sidewalks) and in a least obtrusive location that is serviceable.
   (E)   The use of self-contained portable toilets, limited to thirty calendar
days or less, for construction, rehabilitation projects, special events,
interruption of sewer service for emergencies or planned upgrades/repairs.
Self-contained portable toilets should be placed no nearer the property line
than 15 feet and in the rear yard if that location is serviceable.
   (F)   It is the property owner/event operator's responsibility to ensure
that toilet(s) are not used in a dangerous or inappropriate manner, especially
by children. This may be accomplished by monitoring or securing the toilet(s)
during periods of inactivity, such as nighttime and weekend hours, or by other
effective means as appropriate.
   (G)   It is the responsibility of the property owner of the site where self-
contained portable toilets are located to ensure compliance with the
maintenance requirements. The self-contained portable toilets must be in good
working condition without any broken surfaces or leaks. Doors must be in good
working condition and must be able to be securely latched while in use. The
toilet(s) must be monitored and/or permanently secured or serviced by a
licensed disposal contractor if the holding tank becomes full during the period
of use. It is the responsibility of the property owner of the site where self-
contained portable toilets are located to ensure that these units cause no odor
or public nuisance.
(Ord. O-5-22, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 151.092 TREE PRESERVATION.
   Careful preservation of existing trees is important to protecting one of the
unique characteristics of the village. The Planning Commission is interested in
the preservation of slow growing “specimen trees”, such as oak, and the large
pine trees, especially those over six inches in diameter as measured five feet
from ground level. The Commission is able to consider minor setback variances
if a proposed addition or modification cannot be redesigned or repositioned to
save a “specimen tree” (see §
151.024(F)).
(2000 Code, § 151.091) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.093 UTILITIES.
   (A)   All utility services, including utility distribution systems, shall be
as defined and regulated as in §
52.01. Utility meters are permitted to be installed on the outside of all
structures and are expressly limited to the side or rear facade of buildings.
No meters may be installed on the facade of any building facing the public
right-of-way.
   (B)   Cable, digital, and other television or information services shall be
as defined and regulated as in §
52.02.
   (C)   Cellular or wireless communications towers and facilities for the
provision of personal wireless services shall comply with the following
regulations.
      (1)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this division (C) to:
         (a)   Accommodate the need for cellular or wireless communications
towers and facilities for the provision of personal wireless services while
regulating their location and number in the village;
         (b)   Minimize adverse visual effects of communications towers and
support structures through proper siting, design, and screening;
         (c)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from
communications towers and support failures;
         (d)   Encourage the joint use of any new and existing communications
towers and support structures to reduce the number of such structures needed in
the future; and
         (e)   Recognize and preserve the historical significance of the
village, and protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
      (2)   Definitions.
         CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Personal communications accessed by
means of cellular equipment and services.
         CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA. Any structure or device
used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves between cellular phones,
pagers, commercial mobile services, wireless services, and ground-wired
communications systems, including both directional antennas, such as panels,
microwave dishes and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas such as
whips and other equipment utilized to serve personal communication services.
         CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SITE. A tract, lot, or parcel of
land that contains the cellular or wireless communications tower, antenna,
support structure(s), parking, and any other uses associated with and ancillary
to cellular or wire less communications transmission.
         CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any building or
structure, including equipment shelter, guy wire anchors, accessory to but
necessary for the proper functioning of the cellular or wireless communications
antenna or tower.
         CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER. Any freestanding structure
used to support a cellular or wireless communications antenna.
         CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER, HEIGHT OF. The height from
the base of the structure, at grade to its top; including any antenna located
thereon. Grade shall be determined as the elevation of the natural or existing
topography of the ground level prior to construction of the tower.
         MICRO ANTENNAS. Any cellular or wireless communication antennas which
consists solely of the antenna and which do not have any supporting structures
other than brackets, including micro cells. Micro antennas shall be equal to or
less than five feet in height and with an area of not more than 580 square
inches.
         PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES. Commercial mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services,
including cellular services.
      (3)   Application and permit.
         (a)   No cellular or wireless communications tower shall be
constructed, replaced, or altered without first obtaining the applicable
building permit.
         (b)   1.   Prior to obtaining a permit as set forth in division (C)(3)
(a) above, any company or individual wishing to place a cellular or wireless
communications antenna or tower within the village must attend an application
conference with the Mayor or his or her assignees.
            2.   At this conference, the applicant must submit:
               a.   A preliminary site plan depicting the proposed site to
scale; and
               b.   A rendering of the proposed tower in relation to the
existing site.
         (c)   Upon approval to proceed from the Mayor or the Mayor’s designee,
a building permit application must be submitted to the Building Commissioner
with the information following in this division (C). The Building Commissioner
shall refer the application to the Planning Commission which shall have 30 days
to review the application with respect to the criteria stated in division (C)(
(5) below. The Planning Commission may approve, disapprove, or approve with
conditions an application. Fees for building permits shall be per fee schedule
of the Building Department.
            1.   Site plan. A full site plan shall be required for all proposed
cellular or wireless communications sites, except antenna to be placed on
existing structures, at a reasonable scale, but not smaller than one inch to 50
feet (1 inch: 50 feet), indicating, at a minimum, the following:
               a.   The total area of the site;
               b.   The existing zoning of the property in question and of all
adjacent properties;
               c.   All public and private right-of-way and easement lines
located on or adjacent to the property which is proposed to be continued,
created, relocated, or abandoned;
               d.   Existing topography with a maximum of five-foot contours
intervals;
               e.   The proposed finished grade of the development shown by
contours not exceeding five-foot intervals;
               f.   The location of all existing buildings and structures and
the proposed locations of the cellular or wireless communications tower and all
cellular or wireless communications support structures including dimensions,
heights, and the gross floor area of buildings as part of the tower project;
               g.   The locations and dimensions of all curb cuts, driving
lanes, off-street parking, and loading areas including the number of spaces,
grades, surfacing materials, drainage plans, and illumination of the facility;
               h.   All existing and proposed sidewalks and open areas on the
site;
               i.   The location of all existing and proposed streets;
               j.   All existing and proposed utilities including types and
grades;
               k.   The schedule of phasing of the project;
               l.   Documentation which shows all buildings and structures on
adjacent lots and any additional lot which has a lot line within 100 feet of
the lot on which the cellular tower is proposed to be located, the approximate
elevation of the highest point of each building or structure shall be noted.
The applicant may identify any additional features in the area (such as
existing screening, fences and topography) which may be helpful in considering
the impact of the proposed tower on nearby property; and
               m.   Any other information as may be required to determine the
conformance with this chapter.
            2.   Structural design. All towers and antenna and their
foundations shall be designed by a state licensed structural engineer. Working
drawings shall be submitted in triplicate to the Building Department of the
village and each sheet shall carry the seal of the licensed professional
engineer and his or her signature thereon. A building permit will be issued if
proposed work complies with Ord. O- -97 of the village, § 3109.0 of the State
Basic Building Code, 1997 Edition, and this section.
            3.   Tower and support structure shall be inspected as erected by
an state licensed structural engineer who specializes in tower inspections. All
members, connections, and materials shall be inspected as work progresses and a
completion of the project a certified inspection report and approval of tower
structure and support structure must be submitted to the Building Department.
Fees for such special inspection shall be paid for by the owner.
            4.   For cellular or wireless communications antenna to be placed
on an existing structure, the applicant shall submit such information as
required by the Building Commissioner to ensure compliance with the applicable
provision of this section.
      (4)   Use regulations. The following use regulations shall apply to
cellular wireless communication antennas and towers:
         (a)   A cellular or wireless communications site may be permitted in
industrial zoning district only, and subject to the requirements set forth
herein.
         (b)   Cellular or wireless communications sites in an industrial
zoning district shall not be located any closer to any residential zoning
district than as follows.
            1.   Cellular or wireless communications towers less than 100 feet
in height shall be located no closer than 100 feet to any residential zoning
district.
            2.   For any cellular or wireless communication tower exceeding 100
feet in height, the tower may not be located closer to any residential zoning
district than a distance equal to height of tower, plus 40 feet.
         (c)   A cellular or wireless communications antenna may be mounted to
an existing structure, such as a communications tower (whether such tower is
for cellular or wireless purposes or not), smoke stack, water tower, or other
tall structures in any industrial zoning district if a permit has been granted.
Cellular or wireless communication antenna may only be placed on the top of
buildings that are no less than 35 feet in height.
         (d)   Micro antennas not exceeding five feet in height may be placed
on any buildings in the Industrial A Zoning District. A micro antenna may be
attached to any existing building located in Industrial A District and shall
not be subject to the setback requirements of other cellular or wireless
communication towers provided it is placed on the roof of an existing building.
         (e)   All other uses accessory to the cellular or wireless
communications antenna and towers, including, but not limited to, business
offices, maintenance depots, and materials and vehicle storage, are prohibited
from the site unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district in which the
cellular or wireless communications antenna and/or tower is located.
         (f)   No cellular or wireless communications tower shall be permitted
on any lot on which any nonconforming building or structure is located nor on
which any nonconforming use or activity is occurring without first obtaining a
variance from the Village Planning Commission.
      (5)   Standards for review. The design requirements for cellular or
wireless communications antennas and towers: the following standards shall
apply to all cellular or wireless communications antennas and towers:
         (a)   Placement and co-location.
            1.   The cellular or wireless communications company shall
demonstrate, using the latest technological evidence, why the antenna or tower
must be placed in a proposed location in order to serve its necessary function
in the company’s grid system. Part of this demonstration shall include a
drawing showing the boundaries of the area around the proposed location which
would probably also permit the antenna to function properly in the company’s
grid system. This area shall be considered the allowable zone.
            2.   If the communications company proposes to build a cellular or
wireless communications tower (as opposed to mounting the antenna on an
existing structure), it is required to demonstrate that it has contacted the
owners of nearby “tall structures” within the allowable zone, asked for
permission to install the cellular communications antenna on those structures,
and was denied for either non-economic reasons or that a clearly unreasonably
economic demand was not made by the owner, based on prevailing market values.
“Tall structures” shall include, but not be limited to, smoke stacks, water
towers, buildings over 35 feet in height, antenna support structures, or other
structures or other cellular or wireless communication companies, other
communication towers.
            3.   In order to limit and reduce the number of antenna support
structures needed in the village in the future, the owner of an existing
cellular or wireless communications tower shall not unreasonably deny a request
to accommodate other uses, including other cellular or wireless communications
companies, and the antenna of local police, fire, ambulance departments, the
owner of the existing cellular or wireless communications tower may request
reasonable compensation for the use of the tower.
            4.   For the purpose of encouraging co-location of cellular or
wireless antenna and other uses, cellular or wireless communication towers
shall be designed, engineered, and constructed as follows, unless waived for
good cause to minimize impact on adjoining property by the Mayor:
               a.   Towers less than 75 feet tall shall be designed,
engineered, and constructed to support antennas installed by one or more
cellular or wireless communications servers;
               b.   Towers more than 75 feet in height but less than 150 feet
shall be designed, engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by
two or more wireless communication service users; and
               c.   Towers 150 feet in height or taller shall be designed,
engineered, and constructed to support antennas installed by three or more
cellular or wireless communications service users.
            5.   In addition, an applicant must demonstrate that the area
acquired by lease or otherwise acquired for the use and construction of the
cellular tower and accessory structures is sufficient in size and structural
strength to accommodate such tower and any additional structures that may be
required if additional users are added to the tower.
            6.   As used in (C)(5)(a)5. above, the term USERS shall include the
antennas of Police, Fire, and Ambulance Departments.
            7.   The village may deny the application to construct a new
cellular or wireless communications tower if the applicant has not made a good
faith effort to mount the antenna on existing structures.
         (b)   Antenna tower height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the
antenna/tower is no higher than necessary to function satisfactorily and to
accommodate the co-location requirements as set out in (C)(5)(a) above. No
antenna that is taller than the necessary height shall be approved. Cellular or
wireless communications towers shall be exempt from the maximum height
requirements contained in §
151.085. Cellular towers shall be monopole construction unless it is
demonstrated that another type of tower is required for safety purposes.
         (c)   Setbacks from the base of the tower. If a new cellular or
wireless tower is to be constructed in an industrial zoning district, the
minimum distance between the base of the tower or any guy wire anchors and any
property line which abuts a zoning district other than a residential district
shall be no lower than the greater of the following:
            1.   Forty percent of the tower height;
            2.   Fifty feet; and
            3.   In no case shall the base of the tower be located less than
the height of the tower above grade plus 40 feet from any adjacent structures.
         (d)   Cellular or wireless communications tower safety. All cellular
or wireless communications towers shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices as
approved by manufacturers. Furthermore, the applicant shall demonstrate that
the proposed cellular or wireless communications tower and its antenna are safe
and that the surrounding properties will not be negatively affected by tower
failure, falling ice, nor other debris, electromagnetic fields or radio
frequency interference; however, if a specific safety issue in question is
determined to be regulated by either FCC regulations or applicable Building
Code regulations, and the operation or construction is in compliance with such
regulations, then this requirement for safety shall be deemed to have been met.
Subsequent to the installation of a cellular or wireless communications tower
site, if it is determined by the Village Council, upon presentation of proper
and sufficient documentation, and after a public hearing, that the operation of
a cellular or wireless communications tower is inherently dangerous or is a
demonstrable health hazard, the cellular or wireless communications tower shall
be declared to be a nuisance and all operation shall cease. The tower or
antenna shall also be removed as
provided under division (C)(7) below; however, no order of removal shall be
made if it is inconsistent with existing FCC Regulations.
         (e)   Fencing. A fence shall be required around the cellular or
wireless communications tower and its support structure(s) unless the antenna
is mounted on an existing structure. The fence shall be eight feet in height
and shall be erected to prevent access to non- authorized personnel.
         (f)   Landscaping. Landscaping, in compliance with a plan approved by
the Planning Commission, shall be provided to screen as much of the support
structure and ground level features as is possible, and such landscaping shall
be maintained. In addition, existing vegetation on and around the site shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible.
         (g)   Licensing. The communications company must demonstrate to the
village that it is licensed by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC). The
owner of the tower must also annually provide to the village on January 1 of
each year a list of all users of the tower and each user shall provide the
village with a copy of each users license with the FCC. No approval will be
granted to any applicant unless proof of current FCC license for the proposed
use of the tower is provided.
         (h)   Required parking. If the cellular or wireless communication site
is fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance workers.
If the site is not fully automated, the number of parking spaces shall equal
the number of employees working on the largest shift. All parking
specifications and requirements shall be consistent with the applicable parking
requirements as established in this chapter.
         (i)   Appearance. Cellular or wireless communications towers under 200
feet in height shall be painted silver or have a galvanized finish retained in
order to reduce visual impact. Cellular or wireless communications towers shall
meet all Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations. No cellular or
wireless communications towers may be artificially lighted except when required
by FAA. Furthermore, no cellular or wireless communication tower or antenna and
accessory buildings and structures shall contain any signage. All utility lines
serving the towers shall be underground.
      (6)   Maintenance. An owner of property used as a cellular or wireless
communications site shall maintain such property and all structures in good
condition and free from trash, outdoor storage, weeds, and other debris. Any
owner of a cellular or wireless communications tower shall be required to
notify the Mayor of intent in writing within 30 days of its cessation of
business, its discontinuance of service or transfer of ownership.
      (7)   Abandonment of tower.
         (a)   1.   All providers utilizing towers shall present a report to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, notifying them of any
tower facility located in the village whose use will be discontinued and the
date this use will cease.
            2.   If at any time the use of the facility is discontinued for 120
days, the Building Commissioner may declare the facility abandoned. (This
excludes any dormancy period between construction and the initial use of the
facility.) DISCONTINUED shall mean that the structure has not been properly
maintained, has been abandoned, become obsolete, is unused, or has ceased the
daily activities or operations which have occurred.
            3.   The facility’s owner/operator will receive written notice from
the Building Commissioner and be instructed to either reactivate the facility’s
use within 120 days, or dismantle and remove the facility.
            4.   If reactivation or dismantling does not occur, the
municipality will remove or will contract to have removed the facility and
assess owner/ operator the costs.
         (b)   The village must provide the tower owner three months’ notice
and an opportunity to be heard by the Planning Commission before initiating
such action. After such notice has been provided, the village shall have the
authority to initiate proceedings to either acquire the tower and any
appurtenances attached thereto at the then fair market value, or in the
alternative, order the demolition of the tower and all appurtenances and
removal from the property.
         (c)   The village shall provide the tower owner with the right to a
public hearing before the Planning Commission, which public hearing shall
follow the three-month notice required in division (C)(7)(a) above. All
interested parties shall be allowed an opportunity to be heard at the public
hearing.
         (d)   After a public hearing is held, the Planning Commission may
order the acquisition or demolition of the tower. The village will require
tower applicant to pay for all expenses necessary to acquire or demolish the
tower.
(Prior Code 2000, § 151.092) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-23-97,
passed 7-14-1997; Ord. O- -97, passed 12- -1997; Ord. O-13-98, passed 1-12-
1998; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-26-2006)
§ 151.094 SYNTHETIC GRASS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to regulate the
installation of synthetic grass in all zoning districts thus preserving the
enjoyment of private property, while promoting orderly and environmentally
responsible development. Synthetic grass shall be considered a permitted use in
any zoning district, subject to the requirements of this and any other
applicable section of this code.
   (B)   Definitions. “Synthetic (or artificial) grass or turf” means any
synthetic fiber that resembles real grass, is ultra-violet light (UV) protected
and treated, which is tufted on a porous backing. The surface is in-filled with
media to increase stability, creating a weighted surface. The product is
installed on a porous surface that is designed, compacted, and graded for
positive water drainage.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   No person shall install synthetic grass in any zoning district in
the village without compliance with the provisions of this section and
applicable related requirements of the entire ordinances.
      (2)   Synthetic grass installations constructed prior to the effective
date of this section shall not be required to meet the requirements of this
code; unless any physical condition or modification renders such system un-
repairable or unuseable. If any pre-existing synthetic grass is destroyed or
damaged to the such extent that it cannot be returned to original service, or
any such damage or modification creates an unsafe condition it shall be
replaced or removed in conformity with this section.
      (3)   Synthetic grass is prohibited in any historical districts or on any
landmark structures as defined in §
151.075.
      (4)   Synthetic grass is not allowed in any front yard.
      (5)   Synthetic grass is allowed in side and rear yards with the
following provisions:
         (a)   Not abutting a public street, right-of-way, or park area.
         (b)   Synthetic grass is not allowed in a drainage swale or culvert.
         (c)   Synthetic grass is not allowed in the drip line of a tree canopy
as defined at the mature growth stage.
         (d)   Synthetic grass must have an approved edge border (bender board,
paver, concrete mow strip, etc. with minimum thickness of three-eights inch)
defining the perimeter boundary between natural area as well as along property
edges. The synthetic grass must not extend beyond your property line. A 12-inch
clearance from property lines is recommended.
         (e)   Existing sprinklers systems running underneath or spraying onto
synthetic grassed areas need to be decommissioned.
   (D)   Contents of application. An application for synthetic grass to be
approved in compliance with the standards and criteria of this section and
shall include:
      (1)   A landscape plan or design illustrating the location of planned
synthetic grassed areas and abutting natural areas. All landscaping feature
including trees and shrubs must be located. A plan for drainage of the
synthetic grassed areas must also be included. A typical cross section details
on the compacted base design must be provided.
      (2)   Complete specifications on all materials to be used for the
synthetic grass installation, not limited to the turf, infill material, joining
material (adhesive, tape), border, and compacted base must be provided.
      (3)   Qualifications or certifications of the contractor or installer.
   (E)   Design and performance standards.
      (1)   The compacted base underneath the synthetic grass needs to be
designed in a manner to allow water to naturally permeate into the sub-surface
and not to pool or noticeably run-off into a public storm sewer or right-of-
way. Additional drainage scope may be required to properly discharge the water
from the synthetic grassed areas into or directed to a storm sewer.
      (2)   The color of the synthetic grass needs to simulate the appearance
of natural grass in the surrounding area during summer months. No permanent
paintings or markings of the synthetic grass is allowed.
      (3)   Seams must not be easily visible and grain must be consistent
between synthetic grass areas. Seams can be taped or glued, but not sewn.
      (4)   Synthetic grass must be affixed to a permeable backing with punched
holes to allow for proper drainage of rain water.
      (5)   Synthetic grass must have a minimum face weight of 60 ounces per
square yard.
      (6)   Synthetic grass must come with a minimum 12 year no-fade guarantee,
contain no lead, and of polyethylene, polypropylene, or nylon composition. Any
alternate synthetic grass will require approval from the Building Department
prior to installation or be subject to removal.
      (7)   Synthetic grass height must be between 1.75 and 2.25-inches tall.
Putting greens are considered a sports-field and subject to different zoning
requirements.
      (8)   In-fill medium must be a clean coated sand product (non-organic)
brushed into the fibers to keep them upright and provide ballast to avoid
movement. Any deviations of in-fill materials must be approved by the Building
Department prior to use or be subject to removal.
   (F)   Fees. A fee for synthetic grass permits shall be $120. Permit costs
for patios, decks, or other accessory structures that may be on the landscape
plan or design will be permitted separately.
   (G)   Required maintenance.
      (1)   Synthetic grass must be properly maintained. Failure to do so can
result in a notice of violation for improper maintenance. Some of the most
common maintenance items include:
         (a)   Weeds. No weeds or organic matter can be visible thru sections
of synthetic grass or along the seams or edges. Proper installation of a
compacted based and correct infill materials will reduce the likelihood of
unwanted weeds.
         (b)   Pooling. Water cannot puddle or pool on the surface. Proper
installation and grading of the compacted based and possible auxiliary surface
drains will reduce the likelihood of pooling.
         (c)   Public utility access. Synthetic grass can only be installed on
your property and not in the public right-of-way or utility easements. Any
damaged caused by public utilities repairing or maintaining service to your
house is the homeowner's responsibility.
         (d)   Animal feces and urine. Clean-up from pets must be done in a
timely manner. Odors emanating from urine or feces must be controlled and the
occasional sanitizing or cleansing of the synthetic grass may be required.
      (2)   Product has reached its lifespan. Due to wear and tear, UV ray
exposure, and general weathering, the product may require partial or complete
replacement. Factors for evaluating the lifespan include the condition of the
individual blades, seam quality, and color of the synthetic grass. If the
product has reached the end of its guaranteed lifespan as noted in the
manufacturer's literature, or if maintenance issues are not corrected in a
timely manner, the Building Department can deem the product beyond its lifespan
and require the synthetic grass to be replaced or that the original yard must
be restored to pre-synthetic grass conditions.
(Ord. O-18-22, passed 7-11-2022)
FENCES AND WALLS
§ 151.100 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, all definitions specified in §
151.005 shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   ALLEY. See §
151.005.
   ALONG THE LOT LINE. See §
151.005.
   FENCE. See §
151.005.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. See §
151.005.
   WALL. See §
151.005.
(2000 Code, § 151.100) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-14-22, passed 5-
23-2022)
§ 151.101 FENCE OR WALL IN FRONT YARD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct or erect a fence or a wall more than
four feet in height in a front yard, and that fence or wall shall be not less
than 50% open construction.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to construct or erect so- called chain link or
wire farm fences in a front yard.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to construct a chain link or wire farm fence in
any residential district.
(2000 Code, § 151.101) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-
26-2006; Ord. O-14-22, passed 5-23-2022) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.102 FENCE OR WALL ON CORNER LOT.
   "Required" side yards of corner lots as set forth in §
151.085(B)(1)(b)3. have specific fence requirements as follows.
   (A)   Fences or walls on corner lots shall be no more than four feet in
height, at least 50% open construction, parallel to any lot line bounded by a
public right-of-way, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Within a space of 25 feet from the intersection of the lot lines at
a public right-of-way intersection, that structure shall not exceed three feet
in height, and shall be of 50% open construction; and
      (2)   A fence or wall not exceeding six feet in height may be erected in
a side-rear yard of a corner lot and parallel to a public right-of-way
providing that structure is set back from the lot line bounding the public
right-of-way the "required" side yard setback for a corner lot as set forth in
§
151.085(B)(1)(b)5.
   (B)   Along any rear lot line of a corner lot bounded by a front yard, as
specified in §
151.085(B)(1)(b), a fence or wall shall be no more than four feet in height,
and at least 50% open construction in the abutting front yard but can be up to
six feet tall and of privacy style for the portion of the rear lot line that
abuts the side and rear yard.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to construct or erect a so- called chain link or
wire fence (except as lining for permitted fence) on a corner lot in a rear or
side yard bounded by a public right-of-way.
(2000 Code, § 151.102) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-14-22, passed 5-
23-2022) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.103 FENCE OR WALL IN SIDE OR REAR YARD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct or erect a fence or wall more than
four feet in height, except that in Residence A, B, and C Districts these
structures may be constructed or erected to a height not to exceed six feet at
any point along the lot lines bounding side or rear yards.
   (B)   A fence or wall not exceeding six feet in height may be erected
parallel to and along the lot line bounded by a lane or alley in a rear yard
where the side lot lines of the rear yard adjoin the side lot lines of the rear
yard of adjacent property. The fence or wall need not be 50% open construction.
   (C)   Any fence or wall constructed or erected in a rear yard bounded by a
public right-of-way shall be not less than 50% open construction, except where
the structure is farther back from the public right-of-way than any "required"
yard setback for the principal use as established by this chapter and except
where otherwise noted.
   (D)   Fences at least four feet in height with secure, self-latching gates
shall enclose all swimming pools.
(2000 Code, § 151.103) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-14-22, passed 5-
23-2022) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.104 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Material.
      (1)   Materials used for construction of all fences or walls shall be
subject to approval by the Building Commissioner. The following types of fences
may be erected except where prohibited elsewhere in this chapter: split rail;
board-onboard; shadow box; basket weave; picket, stockade; lattice; combination
board and lattice or picket; post and rail (horizontal board); vertical board;
solid panel board; wrought iron; and extruded aluminum profiles (powder
coated).
      (2)   If a fence is constructed of boards, pickets, wire, or other
material applied to rails or posts, the rails or posts shall be on the owner's
side and the applied material on the neighbor's side, unless the fence is so
constructed as to provide finished surface on each side such as staggered
vertical boards on each side of horizontal rails.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful to construct or erect a fence made of the
following materials:
         (a)   Barbed wire on or as a part of fence or walls in a residential
district or business district;
         (b)   Electrified wiring on or as a part of fences or walls in a
residential district or business district (except where part of an invisible
fence system);
         (c)   Picket fences having pickets connected by wire, that is, so-
called snow fences, in a residential district or business district; and
         (d)   Wire fences, including chain link, in any residential district.
      (4)   Barbed wire may be used in the industrial district if on top of a
fence or wall having a height of at least eight feet.
      (5)   Electrically supervised fence may be used in the industrial
district consisting of single wire at the top of a fence set back into the
owner's property at least nine inches from the fence line; voltage in the line
shall not exceed 24 volts; the line shall be insulated from the remainder of
the fence; and the entire installation shall be approved by the Inspection
Bureau, Inc.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful to plant, trim, or otherwise maintain hedging
that is in excess of three feet in height within 25 feet of the intersection of
two or more streets.
      (7)   All fences shall be placed entirely on the property owner's lot. No
setback is required for fencing in any yard, except for fences that parallel a
public right of way or invisible fences.
      (8)   The maximum permitted height of fences constructed on top of a wall
shall be measured from the grade line of the abutting property.
   (B)   Fence support structure. All fences must be secured with below ground
posts except wire fencing used as a liner for a permitted fence.
(2000 Code, § 151.104) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-
26-2006; Ord. O-14-22, passed 5-23-2022) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.105 SPECIAL FENCES.
   (A)   In addition to those fences herein before permitted, open metal fences
enclosing public recreational grounds, railroad rights-of-way, industrial
properties, and fuel storage tanks for industrial and institutional use, and to
enclose for safety purposes any other hazardous industrial or institutional
equipment or structure subject to approval of the Commissioner, may be erected
to a height not to exceed 12 feet. Any above-ground mechanical equipment such
as cooling towers, transformers, waste disposal containers, or similar items
located in any business zone shall be completely screened from view to a height
of six feet with a solid masonry or wood screen wall. Such screen wall shall be
maintained in good condition at all times. Industrial zones are not required to
meet this requirement. Above-ground transformers located in any residential
zone shall be screened with properly maintained, solid hedging. The location of
any above- ground transformer shall be as discreet as possible and individually
approved by the village Planning Commission.
   (B)   Invisible fences. A wire or signal generating device (typically a pet
containment system) for the transmission of radio signals from a radio
transmitter, by which a radio receiver near the wire is activated by radio
signals therefrom, to cause a noise and/or electrical shock signaling the
nearness of the radio receiver to the wire as a boundary or separation of one
area from another:
      (1)   An electronic fence, "invisible fence," or similar containment
system shall require a building permit, same as construction of any other fence
or barrier requires.
      (2)   An electronic fence, "invisible fence," or similar containment
system must have its boundary no less than 18 inches from the property line of
the property on which the electronic fence, "invisible fence," or other similar
containment is constructed. For placement in areas bounded by public property
or a sidewalk, an electronic fence, "invisible fence," or similar containment
system must have its boundary no less than three feet from the sidewalk or
public space.
      (3)   The placement of training flags or other temporary visible barriers
is restricted to 30 days after the installation of the invisible fence.
(2000 Code, § 151.105) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-
26-2006; Ord. O-4-22, passed 2-28-2022; Ord. O-14-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 151.106 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Fences or walls in need of repair or other maintenance shall be
repaired, restored, or removed as directed by the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   If the length of fence requiring repair exceeds 50% of the total
length of that span of repair or restoration of a nonconforming existing fence
or wall erected before the effective date of this chapter (March 25, 1996),
such fence or wall shall be removed or replaced by a fence or wall in
conformity with this chapter.
(2000 Code, § 151.106) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-14-22, passed 5-
23-2022)
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
§ 151.115 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate the construction,
modification, operation and abandonment by discontinuation of use of solar
energy systems, subject to reasonable conditions that will protect the public
health, safety, and welfare while preserving the enjoyment of private property,
promoting orderly land use, and development, allowing the safe, effective, and
efficient use of solar energy systems. Solar energy systems shall be considered
a permitted use in any zoning district, subject to the requirements of any
other applicable chapter of this code.
(Ord. O-3-22, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 151.116 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONMENT. Choosing to give up or discontinue use of the solar energy
generation system in whole or part.
   ALTERNATING-CURRENT (AC) MODULE. A complete, environmentally protected unit
consisting of solar cells, optics, inverter, and other components, exclusive of
tracker, designed to generate AC power when exposed to sunlight.
   APPLICANT. The person or entity filing an application under this subchapter.
   ARRAY. A mechanically integrated assembly of modules or panels with a
support structure and foundation, tracker, and other components, as required,
to form a direct-current power producing unit.
   FACILITY OWNER. The entity or entities having equity interest in the solar
energy facility, including their respective successors and assigns.
   GROUND MOUNT. A solar electrical system that is mounted directly to ground-
mounted structure instead of solely on a structure roof.
   OPERATOR. The entity responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the solar energy system.
   SOLAR CELL. The basic photovoltaic device that generates electricity when
exposed to light.
   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (ACTIVE OR PASSIVE). The equipment, assembly or building
construction and requisite hardware that provides and is used for collecting,
transferring, converting, storing, or using incident solar energy for water
heating, space heating, cooling, generating electricity, or other applications
that would otherwise require the use of a conventional source of energy such as
petroleum products, natural gas, manufactured gas, or electricity produced from
a nonrenewable resource. Such systems include passive solar energy systems that
capture the sun's energy in building design and construction components; solar
thermal energy systems that convert sunlight to heat as in a hot water tank or
swimming pool; and photovoltaic solar energy systems that convert sunlight to
electricity.
   SOLAR PANEL. One of any type of assembly that produces energy, either
electrical, heat or hot water for use or distribution include PV (photovoltaic)
an electrical device consisting of an array of connected solar cells, heat
collectors and interstitial spaces including trombe panels, solar shingles, or
hydronic panels for water heating systems.
   SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS. The total components and subsystems that, in
combination convert solar energy into electrical energy suitable for connection
to utilization load.
(Ord. O-3-22, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 151.117 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   No person shall construct, erect, maintain, extend, or remove a solar
energy system in any zoning district in the village without compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and applicable related requirements of the entire
ordinances.
   (B)   Solar energy systems constructed prior to the effective date of this
subchapter shall not be required to meet the requirements of this code, unless
any physical condition or modification renders such system unrepairable or un-
useable. If any pre-existing solar energy system is destroyed or damaged to
such extent that it cannot be returned to original service, or any such damage
or modification creates an unsafe condition it shall be replaced or removed in
conformity with this chapter.
(Ord. O-3-22, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 151.118 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   Solar equipment shall only be an accessory use in residential and
business zoning districts. Solar panels are a use permitted by right at any
residential or non-residential building. In non-residential districts, solar
equipment, other than solar panels, may be located on the roof in compliance
with all requirements of this code.
   (B)   An application for a solar energy system shall be approved in
compliance with the standards and criteria of this subchapter and shall
include:
      (1)   A narrative describing the proposed solar energy system, including
the approximate generating capacity of the project and the number,
manufacturer, and model of the solar panels to be installed, their individual
generating capacity, and a description of ancillary systems.
      (2)   A site plan to scale of the subject property showing the planned
location of the solar panels, setback lines, proposed and existing ancillary
equipment buildings, and structures. Elevation views are required for all roof
mounted applications.
      (3)   Certificates of design compliance obtained by the equipment
manufacturers from Underwriters Laboratories and other similar ce1tifying
organizations to evidence that the design of the solar energy system conforms
to applicable industry standards, including those of the American National
Standards Institute.
      (4)   If the system is to interconnect to a local utility grid the
operator or owner shall provide evidence that the local public electric utility
company has been informed of the customer's intent to install an interconnected
customer-owned generator. A copy of the power purchase agreement along with the
inter-connectivity Agreement shall be provided.
      (5)   Provide manufacturer's literature for all systems showing
compliance for design and structural requirements of stale codes or provide
design and structural certification. All panels on residential roofs shall be
placed parallel to the roof slope. All panels on non-residential roofs shall
provide this information regardless of slope.
      (6)   A description of emergency and normal shutdown procedures and
location of electrical disconnection switch to Village Building and Fire
Departments. Placement of disconnect switch shall be mounted at the same
elevation, and within 24 inches of primary line power meter unless further
directed by the Building Department. Provide placard, as directed by Building
Department, denoting location of disconnect switch within 24 inches of
disconnect switch. The system hardware should be located in the rear yard, but
at no time should this be located in the front yard.
(Ord. O-3-22, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 151.119 DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Lighting. Solar energy systems shall be lit only if required by an
applicable authority. Lighting of other parts of the solar energy systems, such
as appurtenant structures, shall be limited to that required for safety and
operational purposes, and shall be reasonably shielded from abutting
structures.
      (2)   Construction codes. To extent applicable, the solar system shall
comply with the Ohio Building Code and any other applicable building and fire
codes.
      (3)   Electrical codes. Permit applications for solar energy systems
shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the electrical components, as
supplied by the
manufacturer, in sufficient detail to allow for determination that the manner
of installation conforms to all relevant and applicable local, state, and
national codes, including the current national electric code NEC (NFPA 70).
Solar energy systems interconnected to local utility shall have provide surge
and lightning arrestors. All solar energy systems shall be grounded to reduce
lightning strikes. All electrical lines and utility wires shall be buried
underground.
      (4)   Utility notification. Permits for solar energy systems shall not be
issued until evidence has been provided that the utility company approves the
customer's intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator.
Applicant shall supply the letter of approval from the utility company at the
time of application.
      (5)   Appearance and signage. The factory or original equipment
manufacturer identification and/or logo are permitted. Required signage and
emergency services disconnect placard shall be appropriate warning signs
(danger-high voltage or caution-electrical shock hazard or ai1y other
recognized safety precaution signage) installed at the base of the solar array.
      (6)   Installation. Solar panels must be installed in accordance with the
manufacturer's design and operation standards, as well as all county, state,
and federal guidelines. Reasonable access for emergency response shall be
provided to all solar systems and components including a 24-inch clear area
around all flat-roof or ground-mounted solar array(s).
      (7)   Roof-mounted. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be permitted
in all zoning districts provided that the roof-mounted solar system is subject
to all other requirements of zoning and building regulations, and all
applicable local and state fire and building codes. Pitched roof-mounted arrays
shall be parallel to the roof. The distance between the roof and the uppermost
portion of the solar panels shall not exceed 18 inches. Pitched-roof-mounted
solar systems shall not be located within 18 inches of the edge of the roof.
Roof-mounted panels on a flat roof shall not project vertically more than five
feet from the surface of the roof and shall be buffered as prescribed by city
ordinance. At no time should any portion of a panel extend beyond the highest
point of the respective roof line section, regardless of roof type in a
residential area. Roof mounted panels can only be located on rear yard facing
roof sections. Panels are not permitted on slate, stone, or clay tile roofing.
      (8)   Ground-mounted.
         (a)   Ground-mounted solar panels located on the ground or attached to
a framework located on the ground shall not exceed four feet in height above
the adjacent grade.
         (b)   All related equipment shall be buffered from the adjacent
properties by fencing and/or approved landscaping features and must be
maintained and effective through the life of the system.
         (c)   Ground-mounted solar panel arrays shall not exceed 25% of the
required rear yard and within the setbacks defined by other chapters of the
village ordinances.
         (d)   Non-residential. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be
permitted in the rear yard only of a nonresidential property but shall not be
located within the rear yard setback of any nonresidential property. Ground-
mounted solar energy equipment shall be installed in compliance with the
applicable building code.
         (e)   Residential. Ground-mounted solar energy systems shall not be
permitted in the front or side yard of a residential property. Such equipment
shall be subject to the applicable rear yard coverage regulations and setbacks
for accessory structures.
         (f)   Rainwater run-off must not be directed to neighboring properties
and should be directed to public storm water systems.
         (g)   Any trees obstructing installation or efficient operation of the
solar system must be separately approved and permitted for removal. These trees
must be identified at time of application.
         (h)   Commercial and retail business. No ground installations
permitted.
         (i)   Historical District I Landmark Structures. No ground
installations permitted. Only solar shingles or equivalent may be utilized
after review from the Architectural Review Board.
(Ord. O-3-22, passed 2-28-2022; Ord. O-10-24, passed 6-10-2024)
§ 151.120 FEES.
   Base application fee shall be $180, plus other applicable plan review fees
as determined by Building Department at time of application. For projects
requiring plan review fees to be paid by applicants per Village Codified
Ordinances.
(Ord. O-3-22, passed 2-28-2022)
§ 151.121 ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   At such a time a solar energy system is scheduled to be abandoned or
operation is to be discontinued, the applicant will notify the Building
Department of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. If
applicant fails to notify the Building Department, then in that event the
provisions contained under (C) herein below shall apply.
   (B)   Upon abandonment or discontinuation of use, the owner shall physically
remove the solar energy system within 180 days from the date of abandonment or
discontinuation of use. This period may be extended 60 days at the request of
the owner but only upon the approval of the Building Department. "Physically
remove" shall include, but not be limited to (not applicable to solar shingles
themselves):
      (1)   Removal of the solar energy system and related above grade
structures.
      (2)   Restoration of the location of the solar energy system to its
natural condition, except that any landscaping, grading may remain in the
after-conditions.
   (C)   In the event that an applicant fails to give such notice, the system
shall be considered abandoned or discontinued if the system is out-of-service
for a continuous six-month period. After 12 months of inoperability, the
Building Department shall issue a notice of violation to the owner of the solar
energy system. The owner shall have the right to respond to the notice of
violation within 30 days from receipt. The Building Department shall withdraw
the notice of abandonment and notify the owner that the notice has been
withdrawn if the owner provides information that demonstrates the solar energy
system has not been abandoned.
   (D)   If the owner fails to respond to the notice of violation or if after
review by the Building Department it is determined that the solar energy system
has been abandoned or use discontinued, the owner of the solar energy system
shall remove the system at the owner's sole expense within 60 days of receipt
of the notice of violation.
(Ord. O-3-22, passed 2-28-2022)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 151.124 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of these regulations are to:
   (A)   Enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community.
   (B)   Promote and maintain attractive, high value residential, retail,
commercial and industrial districts, and preserve the scenic and natural beauty
of designated areas.
   (C)   Provide necessary, yet reasonable and appropriate, signage for all
residential, institutional and business uses in the community.
   (D)   Ensure that signs are located and designed to maintain a safe and
orderly pedestrian and vehicular environment, and to avoid confusion or
hazardous conflict between traffic control signs and devices, and any other
permitted sign.
   (E)   Enhance traffic and pedestrian safety.
   (F)   Provide the public with a safe and effective means of locating
businesses, services and points of interest within the municipality.
   (G)   Provide review procedures that enable and ensure the comprehensive
evaluation of a sign's appropriateness to the site, building and surroundings,
adherence to these purposes, and consistent enforcement of this chapter's
regulations.
   (H)   Establish and enforce a reasonable procedure for the eventual removal
of legally non-conforming signs.
(Ord. O-2-20, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 151.125 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (A)   SIGN and OWNER.
      (1)   A SIGN is a structure which includes any object, device, display,
graphic, support structure, or other part thereof, which is situated indoors or
outdoors or is attached to, painted on, or displayed from any premises in order
to direct attention to or announce an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event, or location, by any means,
including words, letters, figures, designs, logos, symbols, fixtures, colors,
illumination, or projected images. Any flag, pennant, streamer, pole, pylon,
foundation, or architectural device shall be construed as a "sign" when it is
demonstrable that it is intended to draw attention to or announce or identify
an enterprise. "Sign support structure" includes any mechanism, framework, or
securing system used to support or secure a sign into its permanent location.
      (2)   OWNER OF SIGN. For the purposes of this section, the owner of
property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign
unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to
the attention of the Building Commissioner.
      (3)   Except for temporary yard signs, and as otherwise permitted in this
chapter, no property may contain more than one sign.
   (B)   Definition of signs according to type of message conveyed.
      ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign directing attention to a business, commodity,
service, or  entertainment conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the
premises where the sign is maintained, including a billboard sign.
      BULLETIN BOARD SIGN. Any sign or structure of permanent character, but
with movable letters, words, or numerals, which is located on the premises of a
public educational, institutional, religious, or charitable organization and is
used to identify the name of the institution or organization and/or to announce
their activities.
      BUSINESS SIGN. A sign directing attention to a business, commodity,
service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered upon the same premises as
those upon which the sign is maintained.
      CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A sign which is located on a lot where construction is
in progress, which indicates the name of the project, architect, engineer,
contractor, or other similar information concerning the project.
      DEVELOPMENT SIGN. A sign which, by symbol or name, identifies a
subdivision, or residential development, a shopping center, or retail
development.
      DIRECTIONAL SIGN or INFORM- ATIONAL SIGN. Any sign which serves solely to
provide special information such as direction, entrance/exit, parking, and
which does not include business names, brand names, or information regarding
product lines or services.
      DIRECTORY SIGN. A secondary sign on which the names and locations of
occupants or the use of a building or property are identified.
      IDENTIFICATION SIGN. The primary sign which indicates the name or address
of a building, institution, or person, or the permitted use, activity, or
occupation pertaining to the premises.
      INCIDENTAL SIGN. A secondary sign which conveys information pertinent to
the use, activity, or occupation conducted on the premises, such as the hours
of operation or credit card information.
      MEMORIAL PLAQUE. A plaque designating names of buildings, and/or date of
erection and other items such as architect or others involved in the building's
creation, cut into or attached to a building's surface.
      NAME PLAQUE. A small sign indicating the name, address, or title of the
owner, renter, or lessee of the premises on which the sign is located.
      PROFESSIONAL SIGN. A sign indicating the name and occupation of a
professional person or group of associated professional persons.
      REAL ESTATE SIGN. Any sign which advertises or announces the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises upon which the sign is located.
      TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign or advertising display constructed of cloth,
canvas, light fabric, paper, cardboard, or other light materials, which is
displayed for a limited time only. Residential yard signs and signs painted on
window surfaces which are readily removed by washing shall also be considered
temporary signs. Temporary signs are not, nor are intended to be, permanently
attached to a building, structure or the ground.
      TRADEMARK or LOGO SIGN. An identification sign portraying a symbol, or
trademark, with or without lettering, of a business or industry, and which
symbol or trademark had been used on signs in other locations and in printed
advertising.
      YARD SIGN. A temporary sign, which is mounted on a stake or a frame
structure (often made from wire) that includes one or more stakes.
   (C)   Definitions of signs according to location or method of attachment.
      AWNING or CANOPY SIGN. A sign that is painted on or attached to a canopy
or an awning.
      BALLOON SIGN. An inflated nonporous object filled with air or other gas
used for business identification or advertisement.
      BILLBOARD SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business use,
service, activity, commodity, or profession which is not conducted, sold, or
offered upon the property where such sign is located.
      ENTABLATURE SIGN. A sign whose complete visible surface is mounted within
the area of an entablature or any place thereof, including the cornice, frieze
or architrave.
      FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign which is supported by one or more poles or
columns, or other type of base, set in or upon the ground and not attached to
any building (see also PYLON SIGN and GROUND SIGN).
      GROUND SIGN. A freestanding sign, other than a pylon or pole supported
sign placed upon or supported by the ground independently of any other
structure.
      HANGING SIGN. See PROJECTING STREET AND YARD SIGNS.
      INCIDENTAL SIGN. A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of
business hours, goods, facilities, or services available on the premises.
      INTERIOR DISPLAY SIGN. Any sign whose visible surface, entire
construction, and support system is mounted within the interior of a building.
      MARQUEE SIGN. A sign attached to a permanent canopy which is usually of
metal and glass, projecting over the entrance to a building.
      MOBILE SIGN. Any portable sign whose structure is secured to wheels,
runners, casters, or a parked trailer, parked vehicle, or other mobile device.
      OFF-PREMISES SIGN. A sign relating information about a particular use,
building, owner, occupant and/or activity, but which is installed on property
other than that to which it refers.
      PARAPET. See UPPER WALL SIGN.
      PIER, PILASTER, or COLUMN SIGN. A sign whose complete visible surface is
mounted within the area of a pier, column, pilaster, or other vertical surface
which is part of the facade, with a bottom edge beginning at the facade base,
or at grade, and the upper edge ending at an entablature, parapet, lintel,
roof, or any upper facade element or the bottom line of an upper wall area.
      POLE SIGN. A freestanding, other than a pylon or ground sign, erected and
maintained on a mast or pole and not attached to any building.
      PROJECTING STREET SIGN. A sign which is suspended from, attached to, or
supported by a building or structure and extending away from said building or
structure, and which projects into the right-of- way of any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other thoroughfare. A PROJECTING SIGN shall also include a sign
suspended from the ceiling of a marquee, canopy, or vestibule where such sign
is located in the street right- of-way.
      PROJECTING YARD SIGN. A sign erected approximately perpendicular to the
wall of a building, including a sign erected at the corner of a building and
projecting into an open space or yard but not projecting into the right-of-way
of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public thoroughfare.
      PYLON SIGN. Any freestanding sign on a pylon: a large structure or
structures, such as a gateway, marking an entrance or approach.
      REFACED SIGN. Any sign that requires a replacement facing shall be
permitted without acquisition of a building permit except for signs located in
a historic district.
      ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained upon a roof or
one that projects above the highest point of a building with a flat roof, the
eave-line of a building with gambrel, gable or hip roof, or the deck line of a
building with a mansard roof.
      STREAMER, BANNER, or PENNANT SIGN. A long narrow piece of cloth or any
nonrigid  material, with no enclosing framework, possessing characters,
letters, illustrations, or ornamentations, excluding official flags, which is
hung from a staff or stretched or hung between two or more supports.
      WALL SIGN. Any sign attached to, or erected against the wall or a
building or structure, which does not extend more than 12 inches therefrom, nor
extends above the roof line, and having the exposed face or the sign in a plane
parallel to the plane of such wall.
         (a)   UPPER WALL SIGN or PARAPET SIGN. A sign whose complete visible
surface is mounted within the area of a wall surface which is part of the
facade above the first-floor windows, doors, piers, entablature, or any other
elements defining the first floor or the pedestrian level or a facade.
         (b)   WINDOW SIGN. Signs affixed to, in contact with, or within 12
inches of a window; installed for purposes of viewing from outside the
premises. This does not include merchandise located in a window.
   (D)   Definitions of signs according to illumination.
      FLASHING SIGN. Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light
source, or which includes the illusion of flashing or intermittent light by
means of animation or an externally mounted intermittent light source.
      ILLUMINATED SIGN. A sign with an artificial light source incorporated for
the purpose of illuminating the sign, including the following:
         (a)   FRONT-LIT SIGN. An illuminated sign in which the lighting source
is separate from the sign, and shines onto the face of the sign.
         (b)   BACK-LIT SIGN. An illuminated sign in which the light source is
behind the face of the sign.
            1.   BACK-LIT LETTER SIGN. A back-lit sign in which only the
lettering on the face of the sign is illuminated.
            2.   FULL BACK-LIT SIGN. A back-lit sign in which the entire face
of the sign is illuminated.
            3.   NEON SIGN. Signs employing the use of neon lighting or
luminous tubes in any manner.
(2000 Code, § 151.125) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-
26-2006; Ord. O-3-08, passed 2-25-2008; Ord. O-2-20, passed 2-10-2020)
§ 151.126 SIGNS WITHIN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Permitted signs. Within any residential district as designated on the
building zone map, only the following signs shall be permitted subject to the
provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   Traffic or other municipal signs pertaining to the health, welfare,
and safety of the village; highway signs erected by or at the direction of the
state, including legal notices, danger signs, emergency signs, and non-
advertising signs, when approved by the Mayor;
      (2)   One non-illuminated or "front-lit" "name plaque sign", not
exceeding one square foot in area, shall be permitted for each single-family
dwelling. Name plaque signs shall not be placed nearer to a street lot line
than 15 feet;
      (3)   Signs and "bulletin boards" pertaining to public or semipublic
recreational or educational uses permitted in the residential districts. These
signs or bulletin boards shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and shall be
erected only on the premises of the use to which the sign refers. No more than
one sign or bulletin board may be erected for each premises. Bulletin board
signs shall not be placed nearer to a street lot line than 15 feet;
      (4)   Name of building or date of erection, fabricated of incombustible
material and built into the walls of a building. Name of building shall not
exceed six square feet in areas and shall not be placed nearer to a street lot
line than 20 feet;
      (5)   Memorial signs, plaques, and tablets, when approved by the Council;
      (6)   Temporary signs not intended for permanent use, subject to
requirements specified in §
151.131; such signs will not exceed six square feet in area and shall not be
placed nearer to a street lot line than 15 feet. Also, such signs shall not be
placed outside the width of the house that is facing the street. An exception
may exist where permanent shrubbery or topography prevent view of sign if
placed as required above. In such event, approval may be given the Chief of
Police for a location other than that required under normal conditions as long
as it does not create a safety issue.
      (7)   Hospital or a nursing, rest or convalescent home located within
residential district may have one identification sign and additional
"incidental" signs in order to denote entrances and exits. Incidental signs
shall not exceed four square feet in area and shall not be placed nearer to a
property line than 25 feet;
      (8)   "Professional signs" for home occupations as permitted by §
151.060(A)(7). Not more than one such sign shall be permitted for each premises
and each sign shall not exceed two square feet in area. These signs shall be
"wall signs" or lettered on the glass surface of a window or door. The top of
the sign shall not be higher than the top of the front door; and
      (9)   Temporary signs made of lightweight wood or cardboard, or of wire
frame and plastic, denoting political cause or candidate not over six square
feet in area. Such signs shall be placed back from every street lot line at
least the distance in feet equal to the number of square feet area of the sign;
provided, that no such sign shall be placed nearer to a street lot line than 15
feet. An exception may exist where permanent shrubbery or topography prevent
view of sign if placed as required above. In such event, approval may be given
by the Mayor for a location other than that required under normal conditions.
      (10)   Identification signs. All properties within the village shall have
numbers prominently displayed on the front of the premises to assist emergency
service personnel to identify the property in a timely manner from the street.
For those properties with a rear access alley, identification signs shall be
placed on both the front and rear of the property to assist emergency service
personnel. For properties within the historic district, the Architectural
Review Board shall establish clear guidelines relative to such identification
signs and numbers.
   (B)   Prohibited signs. All other signs, announcements, declarations,
demonstrations, displays, or insignia, other than those specified in division
(A) above, shall be prohibited, including those designated in §
151.127(B).
(2000 Code, § 151.126) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-20-00, passed 12-
20-2000; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-26-2006; Ord. O-3-08, passed 2-25-2008; Ord.
O-2-18, passed 1-8-2018; Ord. O-2- 20, passed 2-10-2020; Ord. O-28-20, passed
11-23- 2020) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.127 SIGNS WITHIN BUSINESS A DISTRICT.
   (A)   Permitted signs. Within the Business A District, as designated on the
building zone map, only the following signs shall be permitted subject to the
provisions of this chapter and in conformance with requirements of the State
Basic Building Code.
      (1)   Signs as permitted and as regulated in residential districts as
specified in §
151.126, except as otherwise provided herein;
      (2)   Each business occupant directly abutting a street or off-street
parking lot in Business A District shall be permitted only one “identification
sign”, with the following exceptions:
         (a)   In the case of premises abutting more than one street, or an
off-street parking area, the occupant may install one “identification sign”
facing each street and off-street parking area;
         (b)   In the case of a “truncated building” the occupant may install
one identification sign parallel to the diagonal wall of the building and one
identification sign facing one street;
         (c)   In premises containing multiple occupants, there may be one
“development” or building name identification sign;
         (d)   In premises containing multiple occupants who do not have direct
access onto a street or off-street parking, and use common corridors to exit,
there may be one “directory sign” which lists the occupants therein. This sign
may be a “freestanding” or “wall” sign. Such sign shall be limited in area to
one square foot per corporate or individual tenant; and provided further, that
such total area shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. If “freestanding”, the
highest point of sign, including support structure, may be no higher than eight
feet above grade. All such signs must be non- illuminated or “front-lit”; or
         (e)   In premises containing multiple occupants whose business
directly abuts or faces a
street or off-street parking, there may be one identification sign for each
business facing each abutting street or off-street parking lot.
      (3)   Permitted identification signs shall be as follows:
         (a)   Signs lettered on the glass surface of windows or doors of the
premises not exceeding in area more than 25% of the total available window and
door area; provided, that the maximum letter size shall be six inches high and
six inches wide, that there shall be no background, and that the glass shall
remain untinted and undisturbed. A sign lettered on the glass surface of a
window or door may be either an identification sign or an incidental sign;
         (b)   “Pier, pilaster, or column identification” signs horizontally
centered on a pier, pilaster, or column. Such signs shall not exceed 12 square
feet in area, with a maximum height of four feet and a maximum width of three
feet; provided, that a visible border of the wall of not less than six inches
shall be maintained at all edges of the sign-encompassing rectangle;
         (c)   “Entablature identification signs” on the frieze of an
entablature, with a maximum height of 12 inches; provided, that a visible
border of not less than three inches between letters and top and bottom edges
of sign-encompassing rectangle, that a visible border of the frieze of not less
than six inches shall be maintained at each of the side edges of the sign
encompassing rectangle, and that no decorative elements of the entablature
shall be covered by the sign;
         (d)   “Upper wall sign” not exceeding 25 square feet in area, with a
maximum height of three feet; provided, that a visible border of the wall of
not less than 12 inches shall be maintained at each of the top and bottom edges
of the sign-encompassing rectangle, that a visible border of the wall of not
less than 16 inches shall be maintained at each of the side edges of the sign
encompassing rectangle. Exception: when the building is setback more than 25
feet from the front property line, in order to allow equivalent visibility, the
sign may increase its area to a maximum of 40 square feet if installed at a
height of at least 20 feet above grade and with proportional increases in
edging and border dimensions as indicated above and including the lettering,
which may increase in size by one inch for every 30 feet beyond the first 25
feet;
         (e)   “Awning identification signs” on a front valance (skirt) of a
permitted awning with lettering and/or a logo not exceeding eight inches in
height adhering to the letter requirements set forth in §
151.130(C); provided, that a visible border of the front valance (skirt) of not
less than three inches shall be maintained at all edges of the sign-
encompassing rectangle. Exception: an awning sign may increase letter,
graphics, or logo size by one inch for every 30 feet beyond the first 25 feet
from the property line;
         (f)   “Canopy identification signs” on either, but not both, a front
or the sides of a permitted canopy with lettering and/or a logo not exceeding
eight inches in height adhering to the letter requirements set forth in §
151.130(C); provided, that a visible border of not less than three inches shall
be maintained at all edges of the sign;
         (g)   A theater marquee with the following provisions:
            1.   A marquee sign shall not exceed one-half square foot for each
foot of the horizontal dimension of the wall to which the marquee is attached;
provided, that such total not exceed 100 square feet;
            2.   A marquee sign shall not extend beyond the horizontal or
vertical limits of the marquee; or
            3.   The sign may be an “identification sign” and/or a “business
sign” announcing the events conducted upon the premises. Note: in addition to a
marquee, a theater may have one identification sign.
      (4)   Permitted incidental signs shall be as follows:
         (a)   One “incidental sign”, not exceeding two square feet in area,
containing credit card and security information, hours of operation, and other
like information on a window, entrance, door, or door recess area of the
premises of a business or occupation;
         (b)   One “logo” as an accompaniment for, or in addition to, the
principal identification sign. Such logo shall not exceed three square feet in
size, nor shall it exceed 25% of the total size, nor of the total height of the
accompanying identification sign;
         (c)   One menu board incidental sign, not exceeding three square feet
in area, on or adjacent to an entrance door to a restaurant;
         (d)   “Interior display sign” or “window sign”, “illuminated or non-
illuminated signs”, including “front-lit”, “back-lit letter”, exclusive of
merchandise displays, installed behind a window and visible to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic; provided, that the maximum letter size on such sign shall
be six inches high and six inches wide; or
         (e)   “Incidental signs” not exceeding two square feet in area
reasonably necessary to designate a parking lot or an entrance other than the
principal entrance of a business or occupation conducted on the premises. Such
signs may be wall signs or freestanding.
      (5)   Permitted temporary signs shall be as follows:
         (a)   Construction signs as specified in §
151.131(A)(3);
         (b)   Real estate signs as specified in §
151.131(A)(4); or
         (c)   Temporary product signs and signs announcing special sales or
promotions, installed only on the inside of windows or doors, not exceeding
more than 25% of the total available window area. Such signs must be removed no
later than 60 days after erection.
   (B)   Prohibited signs. All signs, announcements, declarations,
demonstrations, displays, or insignia, other than those specified in division
(A) above, shall be prohibited, including the following signs which shall be
expressly prohibited in any Residential or Business A:
      (1)   Roof signs (see also § 151.130(F)(4));
      (2)   Billboards including signs attached to a building or supported
independently in the form of a board, panel, or table used for the display of
posters, printed or painted advertising matter;
      (3)   Signs painted on the walls of buildings;
      (4)   Exposed neon signs, symbols, and logos installed on the exterior of
building or behind a window or door on the interior and visible to pedestrian
traffic;
      (5)   Full back-lit signs, except as theater identification sign or
marquee;
      (6)   Projecting yard and street signs suspended from a stem or building
overhang and extending perpendicular to a face of a building;
      (7)   Freestanding signs, except as permitted in §
151.126(A)(3) and (A)(6), and division (A)(2)(d) above, with the exception that
pylon signs, pole signs, and ground signs are expressly forbidden;
      (8)   Flashing signs and signs incorporating movement or the illusion of
movement, including lighted electronic information displays such as, but not
limited to, electronic message centers and time and temperature units which
periodically change information;
      (9)   Advertising signs, political signs, or handbills, posters, or
notices of any kind, political or otherwise, in or upon any curbstone, lamp
post, telephone pole, electric light or power pole, hydrant, public drinking
fountain, public trash container, courtesy bench, tree, or any portion of any
public sidewalk, street, or sign;
      (10)   Flags, banners or streamers used for celebrations, are permitted
if approved by the Mayor. National, state, and municipal flags are permitted
unless excessive size and/or height is utilized for advertising or business
promotion, in which case they are strictly forbidden;
      (11)   Mobile signs;
      (12)   Signs, including support structures, which interfere with fire
force. No sign shall be constructed, maintained, or erected in any way that
will interfere with the proper and convenient protection of property by the
Fire Department or with public safety or convenience;
      (13)   Signs, including support structures, obstructing traffic
visibility or which may interfere with vehicular or pedestrian safety. No sign
of any kind shall be erected in such a manner as to obstruct the line of sight
of traffic or traffic lights at intersections;
      (14)   Radios, phonographs, tape recorders, whistles, bells, gongs,
sirens, or other sound or noise- making devices in connection with signs or
used separately for advertising purposes;
      (15)   Off-premises signs;
      (16)   Abandoned signs which no longer identify a bona fide business,
lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, or for which no legal owner can
be found;
      (17)   Searchlights used for advertising purposes;
      (18)   Balloon signs;
      (19)   Signs determined by the Building Commissioner to be unsafe or
insecure;
      (20)   Signs containing words, phrases, symbols, or characters, such as
“stop” or “danger”, which might mislead, interfere with, or confuse traffic; or
      (21)   Signs or advertising containing obscene material when considered
by the standards of the community.
(2000 Code, § 151.127) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-9-98, passed 1-
12-1998)
§ 151.128 SIGNS WITHIN INDUSTRIAL A DISTRICT.
   (A)   Within the Industrial A District as indicated on the building zone
map, the following signs shall be permitted subject to the provisions of this
chapter and in conformance with requirements of the State Basic Building Code.
   (B)   Signs as regulated in Business A Districts as indicated on the
building zone map with the following exceptions.
      (1)   A wall sign shall not exceed one-half square foot for each foot of
horizontal dimension of the wall to which the sign is attached; provided, that
such total not exceed 50 square feet. A wall sign shall be erected only on the
exterior of a building extending a maximum of 18 inches outward from its face
and not beyond the horizontal limits of such wall and not above the parapet or
eaves of the roof.
      (2)   Freestanding signs erected on or supported by the ground are
permitted when pertaining to the business or occupation conducted on the
premises and when the freestanding sign does not project beyond a property line
of the premises. Such sign shall have a total sign surface area (in square
feet) per establishment no greater than two times the street frontage of the
lot (in feet), but in no case greater than 50 square feet in area and shall not
exceed 40 feet in height above grade.
      (3)   Projecting yard signs are permitted provided they are no more than
40 square feet in area and provided such signs do not extend beyond a property
line of the premises.
      (4)   A roof sign is permitted in Industrial District A. Such sign shall
not exceed an area of two square feet for each foot of the horizontal dimension
of the wall or roof to which the sign is attached, plus three square feet for
each foot by which the vertical dimension between the bottom of the sign and
the ground or sidewalk elevation below the sign exceeds 50 feet, may extend
above the top of the wall to which it is attached.
      (5)   Signs painted on smokestacks are permitted.
(2000 Code, § 151.128) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.129 SIGNS WITHIN HISTORIC DISTRICT.
   Within the Historic District as indicated on the building zone map, signs as
specified in §§
151.126 and
151.127 shall be permitted, subject to all provisions of this chapter and in
conformance with requirements of the State Basic Building Code. In addition,
permitted signs shall be of material and style harmonious with any landmark
structure to which they are attached. Signs within historic districts or
attached to historic structures require a certificate of appropriateness.
(2000 Code, § 151.129) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.130 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION FOR SIGNS.
   All signs, including support structures, shall be constructed of approved
materials as hereinafter prescribed and no sign shall be constructed or erected
until after the construction, support, and bracing have been approved by the
Building Commissioner as complying with this chapter and the State Basic
Building Code.
   (A)   Construction materials.
      (1)   All signs, exclusive of awnings, shall be constructed of wood,
metal, glass, tile, terra cotta, and/or plastic; provided, that the visible
surfaces shall have a matte finish, that is, non-glossy and non- reflective. If
paint, varnish, or lacquer is applied to a sign as a final finish, the paint,
varnish, or lacquer shall have a flat or low gloss finish; and
      (2)   Awning and canopy construction, see §
151.088.
   (B)   Color. Color choices for all signs, exclusive of awnings (see §
151.088), shall be guided by colors selected from collections of colors found
in the Village Color Guidelines which are on file and available for inspection
at the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building. Additional approved colors
include:
      (1)   White or gold for a field (background) color or lettering and
graphics color;
      (2)   Black for lettering, graphics, and border color only; and
      (3)   Established, standard corporate logo colors.
   (C)   Lettering. Lettering, graphics, and/or logos shall comply with the
following provisions:
      (1)   A sign having an area of 12 square feet or greater shall have a
letter, graphics, or logo height and width not exceeding 12 inches, except a
sign greater than 25 square feet which may increase letter, graphics, or logo
size by one inch for every 30 feet beyond the first 25 feet from the property
line;
      (2)   A sign having an area of less than 12 square feet shall have a
letter, graphics, or logo height and width not exceeding six inches;
      (3)   Letter type faces shall be selected from or be similar to
collection of type face styles which are on file and available for inspection
at the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building (see Appendix D);
      (4)   In any one sign there shall be permitted a maximum of three
different lettering sizes and a maximum of two different type face styles; and
      (5)   Any logo or extra graphics shall either be incorporated into the
lettering or made a part of a single sign with treatment similar to and
harmonious with the type face style of the lettering.
   (D)   Illumination. Only identification signs permitted in §§
151.127(A) and
151.128(A) may be illuminated, subject to the following provisions, unless
otherwise specified in §§
151.127(A) or
151.128(A). For each sign one of the following types of illumination shall be
selected:
      (1)   Front lighting using incandescent bulbs, with each bulb mounted in
a separate reflector in such manner that the bulb is invisible. One bulb lamp
unit shall be permitted per four linear feet of a sign, and a bulb shall not
exceed 150 watts. Each bulb lamp unit shall be mounted on a stem and shall be
not more than three feet from the sign surface. Front lighting of awning signs
shall not be permitted;
      (2)   Back-lit letter identification signs, including awning signs, in
which only letters, numbers, logos, graphics, or other identifying symbols may
be illuminated. One 40-watt fluorescent bulb shall be permitted per 12 inches
of a sign in side-by-side relation being a minimum six inches between the
lengthwise centerline of a bulb and an interior edge/wall of sign encasement
which is parallel to the bulb’s centerline (excluding the sign faces which are
to be illuminated). The sign background shall be opaque;
      (3)   Silhouette identification signs, exclusive of awning signs. The
light sources shall be invisible and shall be of the single luminous tube type
following the shapes of the letters and not the outlines thereof; and
      (4)   Awning and canopy illumination, see §
151.088.
   (E)   Size of sign area. Sign sizes shall be determined as follows.
      (1)   When a sign has its message within a background which borders or
frames that message, the sign area shall be the total area of the background
excluding any border or frame, if the border or frame conforms with “standards
of design”.
      (2)   When a sign’s letters are applied directly to a wall, entablature,
or facade surface without a background which provides a border or frame, the
sign area shall be the total area of the smallest rectangle or combination of
rectangles which encompasses all elements of the sign message.
      (3)   Awning and canopy sign size, see §
151.088.
   (F)   Sign depth and height.
      (1)   A wall sign may extend over any street, sidewalk, or other
thoroughfare, a distance not to exceed three inches measured perpendicular to
the wall;
      (2)   Around ornamental features of building; a wall sign may be inclined
from the vertical only to an extent necessary for conformity to the general
contour of the walls around projections or ornamental features; provided, that
no part of such sign, except the thickness thereof, shall extend beyond the
lines of the projection in any direction;
      (3)   Against bays; wall signs erected against bays shall follow the
general contour thereof;
      (4)   Projection above wall into line of roof; no wall sign shall project
above the top of the wall to which it is attached; or
      (5)   No sign shall be mounted on a roof except in Industrial A District
where the restrictions in §
151.128 apply.
(2000 Code, § 151.130) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-10-98, passed 1-
12-1998) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.131 TEMPORARY SIGNS.
   (A)   A temporary sign may include the following:
      (1)   Decorations and banners. Decorations and banners for the promotion
of civic, welfare, or charitable enterprises erected for a stated period of
time and which shall be removed within 24 hours after the expiration of that
time may be authorized by the Mayor;
      (2)   Advertising signs. Advertising signs within store window subject to
requirements in §
151.127.
      (3)   Construction signs. Construction signs advertising the identity of
a construction company, repair company, landscaper, architect, or other entity
are specifically not permitted in any yard. Contractors performing work for
which a building permit has been secured, are required to erect a 12-inch wide
by 8-inch double faced sign painted white with six-inch black machine letters
denoting the address of the property. Such sign shall be placed five feet
inside the property for the purpose of directing delivery trucks to the
property in an expeditious fashion. Address sign shall be promptly removed at
the conclusion of construction.
      (4)   Real estate signs. Non-illuminated signs advertising the sale,
rental, or lease of the premises on which the sign is located. Not more than
one such sign shall be permitted for each lot or lots or structure. These signs
shall not exceed six square feet in area. Exception: real estate signs for
commercial leasing in Business District A may have one sign not to exceed 25
square feet. No real estate sign shall be placed nearer to the street line than
15 feet; and
      (5)   Temporary signs for public uses. Any sign used for public
demonstrations or announcements, or for the promotion of civic welfare or
charitable or educational enterprises erected for a stated period of time and
which shall be removed within 24 hours after the expiration of that time may be
authorized by the Mayor and a special permit issued by and erection under the
supervision of the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   The erection of a temporary sign is subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   All temporary signs, except for sign designated in division (A)(1)
above, shall be located on the private property to which they refer.
      (2)   If erected in a front yard, such temporary signs shall be set back
midway between building and pavement or street and shall be located on private
property. No temporary sign shall extend into the right-of-way of any street,
sidewalk, alley, or other thoroughfare, except for a sign permitted as a
decoration or banner set forth in division (A)(1) above.
(2000 Code, § 151.131) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996; Ord. O-12-06, passed 12-
26-2006)
§ 151.132 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   In any residential district, Business A District, and Industrial A
District, any legal sign erected before the effective date of this subchapter
(March 25, 1996) may be retained; provided, that such sign is in conformity
with the structural standards imposed by this subchapter, that such sign is
maintained in good repair and condition as determined by the Building
Commissioner; and provided further, that the burden of proof of legal status
shall be upon the owner of the sign.
   (B)   In any residential district, Business A District, and Industrial A
District, any legal nonconforming sign shall lose its legal nonconforming
status and shall be brought into compliance with all requirements of this
subchapter for a new sign upon occurrence of any one of the following:
      (1)   Alteration of the sign in whole or in part, in any way
structurally, in size, or in the sign message, except that a nonconforming sign
damaged by fire, wind, or earthquake, or other act of God may be restored to
the original condition of the sign before such calamity; provided, that the
damage to the sign is less than 65% of the original cost of the sign, at the
date of the calamity. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the strengthening
or restoration to a safe condition of a sign declared by the Building
Commissioner to be unsafe;
      (2)   Relocation of the sign either on the same premises or on different
premises;
      (3)   Replacement of a like nonconforming sign;
      (4)   Increase in the degree of illumination; or
      (5)   Repainting of a sign in colors different from the original colors
and which are not in compliance with the requirements of this subchapter;
provided, that nothing herein contained shall prevent the repainting or
touching-up of a sign in its original colors.
(2000 Code, § 151.132) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
§ 151.133 SIGN PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Approval of new signs.
      (1)   A building permit issued by the Building Commissioner shall be
required for all new signs proposed to be installed within any district. A
permit is not required for signs permitted under §
151.126(A)(1) through (A)(6). In addition, a certificate of appropriateness
issued by the Architectural Review Board shall be required prior to
construction, alteration, restoration, or erection of all signs in the Historic
District or signs for landmark structures located outside of the Historic
District. The certificate of appropriateness shall be requested prior to an
appeal, if necessary, to the Planning Commission because of a denial of the
Building Commissioner for a building permit.
      (2)   An application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a
color sketch of each proposed sign or awning as it would appear on the facade
or surface to which it is to be attached, and color photographs of the existing
facade and immediately adjacent facades.
      (3)   The Building Commissioner shall find as a condition to approval
that each proposed sign or awning conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Relocating signs.
      (1)   A permit to relocate a sign shall be issued by the Building
Commissioner only if the sign complies or is altered to comply with all
requirements of this subchapter for new signs and in the case of a historic
structure, a certificate of appropriateness has been issued.
      (2)   The face of any structure from which a sign, graphic, or logo is
removed for any reason shall be restored to remove any scars or other visible
evidence of the sign, graphic, or logo. Restoration shall be completed within
30 days after removal. Application for an extension of time may be made to the
Building Commissioner accompanied by a showing of sufficient cause why
restoration cannot be completed within the prescribed time.
   (C)   Appeal.
      (1)   Any appeals concerning decisions of the Building Commissioner
regarding §
151.132 and this section shall be taken to the Planning Commission (see §
151.024). If involving a historic structure or located within a historic
district, a certificate of appropriateness shall be requested prior to the
appeal to Planning Commission.
      (2)   Appeals for all Architectural Review Board decisions regarding
certificate of appropriateness for signage proposed for structures and property
within the Historic District or involving historic structures shall be taken to
the Village Council (see § 151.025(C)).
(2000 Code, § 151.133) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996) Penalty, see §
151.999
GEOTHERMAL SYSTEMS
§ 151.140 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to promote the use and construction of a
geothermal heating or cooling systems within the village while protecting the
village's water resources. In furtherance of this overall purpose, this
subchapter addresses the following:
   (A)   Protect and preserve the water resources and water supply that serve
all the village's residents;
   (B)   Conserve and beneficially manage geothermal resources and thermal
groundwater in a comprehensive and coordinated manner so as to assure their
continued availability and productivity;
   (C)   Continue to support and assist in the development of individual
private geothermal resources and thermal groundwater uses, including
residential, institutional, commercial and industrial activities;
   (D)   Maximize the public welfare and economic benefit to be derived from
geothermal resources and thermal groundwater;
   (E)   Minimize the potential for damage or degradation to geothermal
resources and thermal groundwater;
   (F)   Protect the surface and subsurface environment during development and
utilization of geothermal resources and thermal groundwater; and
   (G)   Allow for the installation and maintenance of geothermal heating
systems that are safe, efficient, and utilize modern technology.
(Ord. O-7-24, passed 4-8-2024)
§ 151.141 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLOSED LOOP SYSTEMS. A geothermal heat pump system which relies on the
contained circulation of geothermal fluids through an underground loop of
pipes. The loops act as a subsurface heat exchanger, which transports the heat
to or from the ground. The loop of pipe is installed either vertically in
borings or horizontally in trenches.
      (1)   CLOSED LOOP, HORIZONTAL. A closed loop system where the loops of
the pipe are laid horizontally in the ground, in trenches.
      (2)   CLOSED LOOP, VERTICAL. A closed loop system where the loops of the
pipe are installed vertically into the ground, in well borings.
   GEOTHERMAL FLUID. Any fluid transporting or capable of transporting
geothermal heat.
   OPEN LOOP SYSTEMS. A geothermal heat pump system which relies on the
circulation of groundwater from a supply well, spring or surface water. The
source for heat, groundwater is moved from the ground to a heat pump. The water
is then transferred to a discharge area, typically a surface water body, storm
or sanitary sewer system, or recharge well.
(Ord. O-7-24, passed 4-8-2024)
§ 151.142 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   No person shall install a geothermal system in any zoning district in
the village without compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
applicable related requirements of the entire Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Geothermal installations constructed prior to the effective date of
this chapter shall not be required to meet the requirements of this chapter
   (C)   Geothermal installations are not allowed in any front yard.
   (D)   Geothermal installations are allowed in a side or rear yard with the
following provisions:
      (1)   Well locations must be setback three feet from all side or rear
property lines;
      (2)   A minimum of ten feet from any public utilities (electrical, gas,
water, sewer); and
      (3)   Not in a designated floodplain.
(Ord. O-7-24, passed 4-8-2024)
§ 151.143 CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   An application for geothermal heating and cooling systems shall be approved
in compliance with the standards and criteria of this chapter and shall
include:
   (A)   Locations and depths of all well drillings referenced from established
property lines and surface elevation. If there is doubt to the compliance of
well locations, a survey may be required.
   (B)   Complete specifications of all equipment and materials to be used for
the geothermal system.
   (C)   Manual-J loss/gain calculation and geothermal design report specific
to the manufacturer of the geothermal equipment.
   (D)   Qualifications or certifications of the HVAC contractor and well
digger.
(Ord. O-7-24, passed 4-8-2024)
§ 151.144 DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Open loop systems shall be prohibited;
   (B)   Only vertical closed loop systems shall be permitted;
   (C)   Only nontoxic, biodegradable circulating fluids are permitted;
   (D)   The design and installation of geothermal systems and related
boreholes for geothermal heat pump systems shall conform to applicable industry
standards, including those of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI),
the International Ground Source Heat Pump Association (IGSHPA), the American
Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), the Air-Conditioning and
Refrigeration Institute (ARI), or other similar certifying organizations, and
shall comply with the Residential Code of the Ohio Building Code and all other
applicable village zoning requirements.
(Ord. O-7-24, passed 4-8-2024)
§ 151.145 FEES.
   All applications for a geothermal heating system permit shall be accompanied
by an application fee, which shall be non-refundable, and such fee will be
according to a fee schedule established by village resolution. Engineering and
other professional fees incurred in the review of the permit application shall
be paid by the applicant.
(Ord. O-7-24, passed 4-8-2024)
§ 151.146 MAINTENANCE AND ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Any leakage of the geothermal fluid requires the system to be shut
down immediately until successful repairs are completed and inspected. The
owner of the system is responsible for all costs related to repair and clean-up
of the leakage. A geothermal heating system continuing defective operation
shall be prosecuted as a violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   Access and notification. In connection with the principal functions
and activities of the village's resource management responsibilities, officials
may, upon notice to the applicant, enter upon any property within the village
for purposes of inspecting geothermal systems or monitoring the operational
characteristics of such facilities. When such inspection or monitoring is
necessary to the assessment of other indices related to geothermal or
groundwater reservoir management, or protection of the public safety and
welfare, the village shall provide affected occupants with prior notice,
describing the nature, purpose, and duration of the necessary inspection or
monitoring. Such inspections or monitoring shall be conducted in accordance
with applicable village and state procedures for inspections.
   (C)   No geothermal heating system constructed or altered after the
effective date of this subchapter shall be operated or altered in such a manner
as to cause geothermal fluids or thermal groundwater to be discharged onto the
surface of the ground or into any public drainage facility.
   (D)   The applicant shall notify the municipality within 30 days of the
abandonment of any geothermal heating system.
   (E)   If the geothermal system remains nonfunctional or inoperative for a
continuous period of one year, the system shall be deemed to be abandoned and
shall constitute a public nuisance. The owner shall remove the abandoned system
at their expense after a demolition permit has been obtained in accordance with
the following. The heat pump and any external mechanical equipment shall be
removed. The heat transfer fluid shall be captured and disposed of in
accordance with applicable regulations. The top of the pipe/coil shall be
properly capped.
(Ord. O-7-24, passed 4-8-2024)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter, or fails to conform
to any provision thereof, or fails to obey any lawful order of the Building
Commissioner, issued in pursuance thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined an amount not to exceed $500. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day that a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties specified above, the following penalty
shall apply to all designated historic districts and structures. Whoever
proceeds with or completes demolition, alteration, reconstruction, enlarging,
or remodeling within the Historic District(s) or of a landmark or proceeds with
or completes demolition, alteration, construction, installation, or
reconstruction of a sign or awning of a landmark structure or any structure
located within the Historic District, without first obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness in violation of this section, or fails to comply with the terms
of a certificate of appropriateness after issuance thereof, shall be given 30
days, after a hearing duly conducted pursuant to §
151.021(E) within which to remedy such violation by obtaining a certificate of
appropriateness or to comply with the terms of an issued certificate of
appropriateness. Thereafter, the Architectural Review Board shall conduct an
inspection of the structure involved and render a decision in the manner
provided in §
151.025. If the Board determines that the violation or failure to comply has
not been corrected, each day’s continuance of such violation or failure to
comply, after notice has been sent by mail, shall constitute a separate offense
subject to the fine above provided (see also Building Code Penalty § 1260: PM-
106).
(2000 Code, § 151.024) (Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
APPENDIX A: BUILDING ZONE MAP
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/304b384ee4f64a5cbbcf9b0f40522f54158e7975/
IMAGES/0-0-0-32.jpg]
 
   (A)   (1)   This Appendix A shall be amended to reflect the fact that the
parcels identified as Parcel Nos. 6927 and 6928 on the attached zoning map are
hereby designated to be Business A zoning as opposed to Residence B zoning.
      (2)   Any plans for a business use on said parcels shall be subject to
review and approval by the Village Architectural Review Board and the Village
Planning Commission.
      (3)   The change of zoning from Residence B to Business A on the attached
Appendix A shall remain in effect for five years from the date of passage of
this ordinance if no applications for building permits are submitted during
that period; however, if any building permits are applied for and approved
during that five-year time period, the parcel shall remain as Business A. In
the event no permits are issued for the construction of a building on these
properties for a period of five years from the date of passage, said zoning for
the parcels specified herein shall revert back to Residence B zoning and be
subject to all of the terms and conditions of said Residence B zoning.
      (4)   This division (A) shall take effect at the earliest date allowed by
law.
   (B)   (1)   This Appendix A as amended by Ord. O-20-10, expiring on October
10, 2015, which set forth a change in zoning from Residence B to Business A
zoning of two parcels of real estate located on Madisonville Road at Lane K in
the village, shall be extended for a additional period of three years, expiring
on October 10, 2018.
      (2)   Any plans for a business use on said parcels shall be subject to
review and approval by the Village Architectural Review Board and the Village
Planning Commission.
      (3)   Zoning from Residence B to Business A on the attached Appendix A
shall remain in effect for an additional three years to October 10, 2018, if no
applications for building permits are submitted during that period; however, if
any building permits are applied for and approved during that time period, the
parcel shall remain as Business A. In the event no permits are issued for the
construction of a building on these properties during that time, said zoning
for the parcels specified herein shall revert back to Residence B zoning and be
subject to all of the terms and conditions of said Residence B zoning.
      (4)   This division (B) shall take effect at the earliest date allowed by
law.
(Ord. O-20-10, passed 10-11-2010; Ord. O-19-13, passed 10-14-2013)
APPENDIX B: COMMERCIAL FRONT AWNING SHAPES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/304b384ee4f64a5cbbcf9b0f40522f54158e7975/
IMAGES/0-0-0-34.jpg]
 
APPENDIX C-1: ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/304b384ee4f64a5cbbcf9b0f40522f54158e7975/
IMAGES/0-0-0-36.jpg]
 
APPENDIX C-2: ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/304b384ee4f64a5cbbcf9b0f40522f54158e7975/
IMAGES/0-0-0-38.jpg]
 
APPENDIX C-3: ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/304b384ee4f64a5cbbcf9b0f40522f54158e7975/
IMAGES/0-0-0-40.jpg]
 
APPENDIX D: SIGNAGE LETTERING
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/304b384ee4f64a5cbbcf9b0f40522f54158e7975/
IMAGES/0-0-0-42.jpg]
 
APPENDIX E: PETITION AND APPEAL PROCESS
Document Application (See §  First     Petition Body First Appeal Final Body
         151.021)             Authority               Body         Appeal
            Application (See §                                First       Final
Document    151.021)             First Authority Petition Body Appeal Body Body
                                                                           Appeal
Building                         Building                      Building    Village
Code (See   Building permit      Commissioner                  Appeal      Council
Ch. 150)                                                       Board
Zoning Code
(See this   Building permit      Building                      Planning    Village
chapter)    certificate of       Commissioner                  Commission  Council
note*       occupancy
below)
                                                               Planning
                                 Building                      Commission
                                 Commissioner                  (If
                                 (All petitions                approved, a
Zoning Code                      for conditional               new
(See this   Conditional use      use must                      conditional Village
chapter)                         proceed to                    use, must   Council
                                 Planning and                  proceed to
                                 Zoning                        Village
                                 Commission)                   Council for
                                                               final
                                                               approval)
                                 Building
                                 Commissioner
§                               (All petitions
151.075,    -Building permit     for certificate Architectural             Village
except as   -Certificate of      of              Review Board              Council
it pertains appropriateness      appropriateness
to signs*                        must go to ARB,
                                 except signs
                                 below)
                                                 Architectural
                                 Building        Review Board
§                               Commissioner    (if review
151.075,    Building permit      and Chairperson requested by              Village
except as   -Certificate of      of              Building                  Council
it pertains appropriateness      Architectural   Commissioner
to signs*                        Review Board    and
                                                 Chairperson
                                                 of ARB)
§          - Approval for
151.041:    subdivision          Building        Planning                  Village
Subdivision - Certificate of     Commissioner    Commissioner              Council
of land     appropriateness if
            applicable
* Note: If situation requires both a petition for a certificate of appropriateness
from ARB and a request for a variance from the Planning Commission, the
certificate of appropriateness shall be petitioned for first, the variance second.
Any final appeal from either the decision of the ARB or the Planning Commission
shall thereafter be taken to Village Council
 
(Ord. O-4-96, passed 3-25-1996)
CHAPTER 152: RENTAL DWELLINGS AND UNITS
Section
   
152.01   Conditional rental permit or rental permit
   
152.02   Permit validity
   
152.03   Written application
   
152.04   Inspection of dwellings
   
152.05   Application fee
   
152.06   Issuance from Building Department
   
152.07   Naming tenants as condition of rental permit
   
152.08   Nonconformities
   
152.09   Transfer or permit
   
152.10   Misdemeanors
   
152.11   Defect warranties
§ 152.01 CONDITIONAL RENTAL PERMIT OR RENTAL PERMIT.
   (A)   No owner of residential real property located within the village shall
rent to new tenants, any dwelling or dwelling unit in such real property for
any form of consideration, vacant as of January 1, 2022, unless he or she holds
a valid conditional rental permit or rental permit issued by the office of the
Building Department in the name of the owner and for the specific dwelling or
dwelling unit for rent, pursuant to an inspection to be made by the Building
Department.
   (B)   If the owner, occupant, or agent thereof does not consent to the
proposed inspection, the code official may appear before any judge in a court
of competent jurisdiction and seek an administrative search warrant to allow an
inspection. Any such application shall be made within ten calendar days after
the non-consent. The application for the warrant shall specify the basis upon
which the warrant is being sought and shall include a statement that the
inspection will be limited to a determination whether there are violations of
the code provisions identified in this section. The court may consider any of
the following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in
its decision as to whether a warrant shall be issued:
      (1)   Eyewitness account of violation;
      (2)   Citizen complaints;
      (3)   Tenant complaints;
      (4)   Plain view violations;
      (5)   Violations apparent from city records;
      (6)   Property deterioration;
      (7)   Age of property;
      (8)   Nature of alleged violation;
      (9)   Condition of similar properties in the area;
      (10)   Documented violations on similar properties in the area;
      (11)   Passage of time since last inspection;
      (12)   Previous violations on the property.
   (C)   If a warrant is issued, no owner, occupant, or agent thereof shall
fail or neglect, upon presentation of a warrant, to properly permit entry
therein by the code official or his/her duly authorized designee for the
purpose of conducting a rental inspection and examination pursuant to this
section and consistent with the terms of the warrant. If the court declines to
issue a warrant, or if no warrant is sought, the rental inspection shall still
take place but the scope thereof shall be limited to such areas as are in plain
view. A limited-scope rental inspection conducted pursuant to this paragraph
shall be considered a "rental inspection" for purposes of Chapter 152 and all
other provisions of the rental inspection program set forth in this section.
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 152.02 PERMIT VALIDITY.
   (A)   A rental permit shall be valid for three years from issuance. For
rental permit renewals, the length of validity of a rental permit will be based
upon results of the "rental condition inspection for occupancy checklist" at
the time of renewal. If there are five or fewer infractions noted on the
"rental condition inspection for occupancy checklist" and none of the
infractions are a "life safety" issue, a rental permit extension of five years
will be granted after any noted deficiencies are corrected. If more than five
infractions are noted or any "life safety" issues noted, a rental permit
extension of three years will be granted after any noted deficiencies are
corrected.
   (B)   A conditional rental permit shall be valid for 30 days. An extension
may be granted if the landlord/owner demonstrates a good faith effort to
address the inspection violations and provides documentation and a projected
schedule for the correction of noted deficiencies. This does not apply to any
life safety issues and an extension may not exceed 90 days.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be
required to be inspected if written complaints about the condition of the
dwelling or dwelling unit have been filed with the Village Building Department
by any tenant. The standard "rental condition inspection for occupancy
checklist" developed by the Building Department shall form the basis for the
inspection. The inspection fee shall be paid by the tenant.
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 152.03 WRITTEN APPLICATION.
   An owner shall apply for a rental permit by filing a written application
with the office of the Building Department which contains the following
information:
   (A)   Name of owner;
   (B)   Address of owner;
   (C)   Address of property to be inspected; and
   (D)   Name of tenant (if known at time of inspection).
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 152.04 INSPECTION OF DWELLING.
   (A)   Prior to issuing a rental permit or conditional rental permit, the
office of Building Department shall require an inspection of the dwelling or
dwelling unit by the Building Department or his or her designee within five
business days of receipt of the application for inspection.
   (B)   The Building Department or designee shall inspect the dwelling for
compliance with "International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) 2021,"
including any and all future updates and amendments, using the Building
Department's "rental condition inspection for occupancy checklist. The owner
(or his or her representatives) shall be in attendance at this inspection.
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 152.05 APPLICATION FEE.
   The owner shall pay an application fee of $80. The application fee shall
accompany the application. In the event that deficiencies are noted, a follow-
up re-inspection may be necessary and an additional fee of $60 will be charged.
No inspections will be conducted until all fees are paid in full. If a property
owner or a management company can arrange to have, several rental units
inspected at the same time, the initial inspection fees of $80 will be reduced
as follows: 20% for two to four units and 40% for five plus units. If for the
convenience of the tenant or property owner an inspection is conducted within
the valid rental permit period, the inspection fees will be prorated
accordingly.
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 152.06 ISSUANCE FROM BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   Upon completion of the final inspection, the office of the Building
Department or his or her designee shall issue a rental permit to an owner who:
   (A)   Files a written application;
   (B)   Pays the permit fee required in this section;
   (C)   Schedules and attends required inspections; and
   (D)   Is in compliance with all applicable zoning and building codes.
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 152.07 NAMING TENANTS AS CONDITION OF RENTAL PERMIT.
   The owner shall furnish to the office of the Building Department the names
of all tenants within seven days of the date of occupancy of the dwelling or
dwelling unit. Failure to do so will result in the revocation of the rental
permit or conditional rental permit and a fine of $60.
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 152.08 NONCONFORMITIES.
   (A)   When an owner has applied for a rental permit, and upon inspection,
the Building Official is unable to certify that the dwelling or dwelling unit
for which a rental permit is sought conforms to the requirements of this
chapter or the rules, regulations, and ordinances in the "rental condition
inspection for occupancy checklist," the office of the Building Department may,
when the nonconformity in his or her opinion does not constitute an immediate
threat or danger to the health, safety, or public welfare of the community or
the inhabitants or potential inhabitants of the dwelling or dwelling unit,
issue a conditional rental permit to the applicant. The office of the Building
Department shall not grant a conditional rental permit if the dwelling or
dwelling unit constitutes an immediate threat or danger to the health, safety,
or public welfare of the community of the inhabitants or potential inhabitants
of the dwelling or dwelling unit.
   (B)   A conditional rental permit shall set forth the reasons why the
dwelling or dwelling unit does not conform to this chapter and the condition
for occupancy checklist. The time for the owner to secure conformity shall not
exceed 30 days.
   (C)   If the owner has not corrected the violations within 30 days of
receiving notice from the office of the Building Department, the Building
Department shall give written notice to the owner that the issued conditional
permit has been revoked.
   (D)   If a tenant occupies a unit based on a conditional rental permit, the
owner shall notify his or her tenant or potential tenant that until the owner
receives the required rental permit, the tenant may be required to vacate the
unit.
   (E)   Any decision by, or issue raised by action of the office of the
Building Department under this section is subject to appeal to the Village
Planning Commission by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after
receipt of a written notice or letter from the office of Building Department. A
hearing shall be held by the Village Planning Commission within 15 days after
such notice of appeal is filed and a decision by the Village Planning
Commission shall be rendered no later than 20 days after the filing of the
written notice of appeal. During the pendency of any appeal, enforcement of
this chapter shall be stayed.
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 152.09 TRANSFER OR PERMIT.
   A conditional rental permit or rental permit as provided in this section is
transferable only by notification to the office of Building Department. When an
owner transfers his or her interests in or control of a dwelling or dwelling
unit, he or she shall notify the office of the Building Department within seven
days after the transfer. The notice shall include the name and address and
telephone number of the person who has succeeded to his or her interest or
control.
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 152.10 MISDEMEANORS.
   An owner who rents any dwelling or dwelling unit for any form of
consideration without a valid conditional rental permit or rental permit as
provided herein shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. Each day of such
violation shall be considered a separate violation and subject to the fines
associated with such violation.
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
§ 152.11 DEFECT WARRANTIES.
   The issuance of a conditional rental permit or rental permit does not
constitute any warranty, express or implied, from the village that the dwelling
or dwelling unit is free from defect. The village and its designated inspectors
assume no liability whatsoever regarding safety of units.
(Ord. O-2-07, passed 2-12-2007; Ord. O-15-22, passed 5-23-2022)
CHAPTER 153: STREET OPENINGS
Section
   
153.01   General provisions
   
153.02   Applications and permits
   
153.03   Deposit or security for payment
   
153.04   Installation of sewer branches and water service branches by contract
   
153.05   Interference with vehicular traffic
   
153.06   Trenching; backfilling; tunneling
   
153.07   Temporary restoration
   
153.08   Methods, materials, and equipment used in making restoration
   
153.09   Restoration of unimproved surfaces; heavily traveled roadway: Class 5
   
153.10   Restoration of macadam streets: Class 4
   
153.11   Concrete base for asphalt streets: Classes 2, 3, and 7
   
153.12   Sheet asphalt: Class 3
   
153.13   Concrete pavement: Class 1
   
153.14   Cement walks
   
153.15   Brick walk
   
153.16   Sod areas
   
153.17   Concrete base only: Class 8
   
153.18   Responsibility for settlement in restored areas
   
153.19   Classification of pavements
   
153.20   Schedule of charges
   
153.21   Force account or cost plus
   Appendix A: Sample Drawings
   Appendix B: Charges
§ 153.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   These rules and regulations shall be made a part of the specifications
for any and all projects in which the opening of the surface or the tunneling
of a public way is involved. They shall also be embodied in the proposal for
submitting bids on contracts, and in the formal contract, and the contractor
shall be required to perform all work covered by these rules and regulations in
strict accordance therewith.
   (B)   In performing work under these specifications, the permittee is fully
responsible that his or her operations conform to all applicable statutes,
rules, or regulations of the village and the state.
(2000 Code, § 153.01) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.02 APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Street opening permits are issued by the Building Commissioner.
Applications and permits shall be on forms and provided by the village.
   (B)   The application shall give the location and dimensions of the proposed
opening, the purpose for which the opening is to be made, the kind of pavement
or surface to be opened, and the approximate date that the opening will be
made. The period of time allowed for closing an opening will be governed by the
size and nature of the opening. If the work is not completed within the time
designated on the permit, the permit may be cancelled and a cancellation charge
of $4 applied.
   (C)   If the work has been started but not completed within the time
allowed, the permit may be cancelled. If cancelled, a cancellation charge, plus
all accrued restoration charges shall be paid by the permittee.
   (D)   Before the work can proceed, a new permit must be secured under the
same procedure as required in starting a new job.
   (E)   All applications for mains, conduits, manholes, and other major
subsurface structures shall be accompanied by a plan and typical cross section
showing, as nearly as possible from records available, the location of the
existing underground structures and the location of the proposed structure.
Plans shall be submitted in triplicate. See sample drawings in Appendix A. The
issuance of a permit will be based on the approved plans. No work which
deviates from an approved plan shall be performed unless and until an approval
of the change of plan has been secured from the Building Commissioner.
(2000 Code, § 153.02) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.03 DEPOSIT OR SECURITY FOR PAYMENT.
   (A)   Restoration of pavement or payment of the cost thereof must be assured
in one of the following ways:
      (1)   The applicant has made a cash deposit equal to the estimated charge
for restoration at schedule prices;
      (2)   The applicant is operating under a contract with the village
involving the opening of public ways, in which case he or she may obtain a
street opening permit without cash deposit, but all restoration charges shall
be paid on completion of the contract work and prior to payment to the
contractor of the final estimate of money;
      (3)   In the event that the contractor fails to keep the restoration work
fully apace with the trench work, the permit may be cancelled and the
contractor required to make the deposits as specified in division (A)(1) above.
In the case of large contracts involving long trenches, the contractor shall
pay promptly any partial billing of restoration charges. The village reserves
the right to withhold any or all unpaid restoration charges from any funds due
the contractor;
      (4)   The applicant is a village or county department whose functions
require the installation or maintenance of underground structures; and
      (5)   The applicant is a public utility corporation whose franchise
empowers it to make its own paving restoration, but such permits will be issued
only when the restoration work keeps fully apace with the openings being made.
Such corporations shall pay promptly all bills for inspection at scheduled
rates, and all bills for restoration done by village forces.
   (B)   If at any time during the course of the work it appears that the cash
on deposit is inadequate to cover the cost of restoration, an additional sum
shall be deposited by the permittee in an amount equal to the difference
between the deposit and the revised estimate of charge.
   (C)   Where the contractor makes his or her own restoration, or operation is
of unusual size or difficulty, the village reserves the right to assign an
inspector to control street opening or street restoration. In such cases, the
permittee shall bear the entire cost of such inspection and shall deposit with
the village the estimated amount of such inspection in advance. If
underestimated, the permittee shall advance additional funds.
(2000 Code, § 153.03) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.04 INSTALLATION OF SEWER BRANCHES AND WATER SERVICE BRANCHES BY CONTRACT.
   Where the village enters into a contract providing for the installation of
sewers or sewer branches, or for the installation of water mains or water
service branches, the contractor shall obtain the necessary permits as provided
in §
153.03(A)(2).
(2000 Code, § 153.04) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.05 INTERFERENCE WITH VEHICULAR TRAFFIC.
   (A)   The permittee shall carry on the work authorized by the permit in such
manner as to cause a minimum of interference with traffic. He or she shall
provide adequate warning signs and devices to warn and guide traffic, and shall
place the signs and warning devices in a position of maximum effectiveness.
   (B)   The minimum requirement for warning signs when necessary shall be a
set of advance warning signs placed on all primary approaches to the work, at a
minimum distance of 400 feet, but as required by best visibility; sufficient
signs and markers in the immediate vicinity of the job shall also be
maintained.
   (C)   Where difficult or potentially hazardous conditions exist, competent
flagpersons shall be provided to effect a safe and orderly movement of traffic.
Where insufficient traffic lanes exist because of street openings, adequate
bridging shall be supplied by the contractor. When traffic congestion occurs in
spite of all precautions, the contractor shall be responsible for requesting
police assistance.
   (D)   On main thoroughfares and in congested districts, sufficient traffic
lanes shall be kept open at all times to permit substantially normal traffic.
Unless this can be accomplished, work shall be done only during the period
between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., or between midnight and 7:00 a.m. as directed
by the Chief of Police.
   (E)   In case of an emergency occurring in any important thoroughfare, the
permittee must notify the Police and Fire Departments immediately.
(2000 Code, § 153.05) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.06 TRENCHING; BACKFILLING; TUNNELING.
   (A)   Trenching.
      (1)   Whenever culverts, sewers, manholes, valve chambers, catch basin
connections, water mains, gas pipe, or electric conduits, or house connections
thereto, or any type of subsurface facilities are exposed in excavating, the
permittee shall, at his or her own expense, protect them from damage.
      (2)   In all cases where an opening is to be located under or near any
railroad track, or in any way jeopardizes the safe operation of railroad
equipment or any subsurface facility, the permittee shall notify the owner or
operator thereof sufficiently in advance of the date on which opening is to be
made. The entire cost of supporting and maintaining tracks or other facility
and the entire cost of services necessary for safe operation of railroad
equipment, shall be borne by the permittee. No obstructions of any nature shall
be placed on tracks.
      (3)   The permittee shall use all necessary precautions to protect
persons or property from injury or damage. Barricades and sufficient warning
lights shall be placed along the opening. Flagpersons shall be provided by the
permittee if considered necessary by the Chief of Police.
      (4)   The length, width, and location of the trench, also the manner in
which the work is done, shall be acceptable to the Village Engineer. Every
precaution shall be taken to safeguard the work, and to inconvenience the
public as little as possible.
      (5)   The permittee shall carefully remove the paving and base course
materials and store them in piles separated from the excavated earth. Excavated
material shall be placed so as not to obstruct gutters or drains and in such
manner as will cause minimum inconvenience to the public. If necessary,
temporary covers for gutters shall be installed to ensure adequate drainage. In
special cases, it may be necessary to haul part or all of the excavated
material from the street.
      (6)   Openings shall be properly sheeted and braced where necessary, to
prevent caving, slipping, or cracking of sides. Sheeting and bracing, used to
support the sides of the opening, shall be carefully removed as the backfilling
of the trench progresses, but if considered by the Village Engineer necessary
for the protection of the banks, the sheeting and bracing shall be cut off two
feet below the surface of the subgrade and left in place. If pavement along the
sides of the opening is or becomes undermined and unsupported, the permittee
shall, at his or her own cost and expense, break down and remove such
undermined pavement and the foundation thereof, and shall also remove all loose
earth and replace with earth properly compacted in the manner provided under
division (B) below.
   (B)   Backfilling.
      (1)   Unless the Village Engineer elects alternate methods A or B in
divisions (B)(5) and (B)(6) below, backfill shall be made with material
excavated from the trench, except under no condition will soil with an
excessive amount of clay, frozen lumps, or other unstable substances be used as
backfill. Alternate method A will be required at all important intersections
and certain other special locations, as for example, where insufficient
clearances exist between structures, preventing proper and expeditious
compaction of the backfill.
      (2)   After the pipe or conduit has been placed, approved backfill
material, free from rock, shall be placed in four-inch layers thoroughly tamped
by mechanical means to a plane at least six inches above the top of the
structure. Backfill above the level of six inches above the top of the
structure shall be deposited uniformly and brought up gradually in layers not
exceeding five feet in thickness. Each layer of backfill shall be compacted by
the use of water jets at least one and one-quarter inch inside diameter and of
sufficient length to extend to the bottom of the backfill layer. The jet shall
be operated with a water pressure of at least 40 pounds per square inch and in
such a manner as to permeate the backfill thoroughly.
      (3)   Flooding may be used instead of jetting, in which case each layer
shall be compacted by thorough flooding with water. During flooding, the water
shall be allowed to flow slowly to the trench from high points and shall be
worked down to the full depth of the backfill later by bars. All bars shall be
long enough to extend entirely through the layer being filled. They shall be
forced down through the loose backfill material and as withdrawn, the water
allowed to flow down and around the bar. Sufficient hose shall be provided in
order to apply water to the trench at intervals not to exceed 100 feet.
      (4)   When alternate backfill methods A or B in divisions (B)(5) and (B)
(6) below are used, the permittee may elect to make immediate permanent
restoration and will not be required to make temporary restoration as specified
in §
153.07.
      (5)   In alternate backfill method A, the backfill above six inches above
the top of the structure shall consist of a well-graded bank run gravel with
the top size not exceeding three inches in its largest dimension, and
containing not over 20% silt. The bank run gravel shall be brought to a plane
parallel to and uniform 24 inches below the finished pavement and thoroughly
compacted by flooding with water. During flooding, water shall be allowed to
flow slowly into the trench from high points. Sufficient hose shall be provided
in order to apply water to the trench at intervals not to exceed 100 feet.
      (6)   In alternate backfill method B, the backfill above six inches above
the top of the structure shall consist of the original excavated earth backfill
in horizontal layers not exceeding six inches in depth before compaction. Each
layer shall be thoroughly compacted by approved power tamping equipment and
methods. In single isolated cuts, hand tamping may be substituted for power
tamping but backfill materials shall be placed in horizontal layers not
exceeding four inches in depth before compaction and each layer thoroughly
compacted.
   (C)   Tunneling.
      (1)   Tunneling is often necessary where pipe or conduit passes under
curb, or underground facilities. The permittee shall not do any tunneling
except by permission of the Village Engineer. Where tunneling has been resorted
to, the permittee shall bed the pipe or conduit as specified under division (B)
above. The remainder of the space from top of this fill to the roof of the
tunnel shall be completely filled with l:4:8 concrete of suitable consistency,
thoroughly tamped to fill the entire space, and to afford a rigid support for
the tunnel roof for its entire area. The complete backfilling of a tunnel shall
be performed under the supervision of a Village Inspector. The permittee shall
notify the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building not less than 24 hours in
advance of the date that such backfilling is to start.
      (2)   In the installation of small service pipes, it is suggested that
the pipe be jacked through or that a hole of sufficient size be bored. In such
cases, charge for inspection and issuance of permit only will be made for that
portion of street over services so installed.
(2000 Code, § 153.06) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.07 TEMPORARY RESTORATION.
   (A)   When alternate backfill methods A or B in §
153.06(B)(5) and (B)(6) are satisfactorily followed, the permittee may elect to
perform permanent restoration immediately, in which case no temporary
restoration will be required.
   (B)   Where standard backfilling operations, as described in §
153.06, are followed, or where satisfactory backfill compaction is not obtained
with alternate backfill methods A or B in §
153.06(B)(5) and (B)(6), the permittee shall provide a temporary pavement and
maintain it until the permanent restoration is made. This temporary pavement
may, in some cases, be accomplished by carefully replacing the old paving
materials on the compacted backfill in the same order they occupied before
removal. The top surface shall be neatly replaced with the interstices filled
and leveled with fine dry material and with a crown of not to exceed one inch
above the adjoining pavement. Loose material, which may be scattered over the
pavement by traffic, will not be considered proper temporary restoration.
   (C)   When opening lies within a traffic lane, the permittee shall provide a
temporary bituminous concrete surface.
(2000 Code, § 153.07) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.08 METHODS, MATERIALS, AND EQUIPMENT USED IN MAKING RESTORATION.
   Methods, materials, and equipment used in making restoration shall conform
to the current edition of the State Department of Transportation Construction
and Material Specifications insofar as they are applicable. On request of the
Village Engineer, a permittee making his or her own restoration shall furnish
to the village a full report of laboratory tests of any or all materials used
for restoration. Tests shall be made by a competent testing laboratory. All
sample and testing costs shall be paid by the permittee. On concrete pavement
or concrete base, the permittee shall pay the cost of procuring and testing
cylinders. These cylinders shall be taken and tested by technicians of the
laboratory, at least two cylinders for every 100 square yards of pavement or
fraction thereof; one cylinder to be tested at the age of seven days, the other
at 28 days. Materials failing to meet specifications will be rejected and shall
be removed from the project by the permittee.
(2000 Code, § 153.08) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.09 RESTORATION OF UNIMPROVED SURFACES; HEAVILY TRAVELED ROADWAY: CLASS 5.
    After the backfilling has been completed to a point 12 inches below
finished grade, the remainder of the opening shall be completely filled in two
six-inch courses with broken concrete, broken stone, broken hard vitrified
brick or tile, or other approved material. Each course shall be thoroughly
compacted by rolling or by tamping if rolling is not practicable. At least 60%
of broken or fractured materials used for such paving shall be from two inches
to four inches in size. Material exceeding four inches shall be rejected. The
surface shall be neatly finished with clean screenings and shall conform to the
grade of the roadway adjacent to the opening.
(2000 Code, § 153.09) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.10 RESTORATION OF MACADAM STREETS: CLASS 4.
   (A)   Restoration of openings in first class macadam roadways, whether
water-bound, oiled, or bituminous, and whether composed of gravel or broken
stone, shall be made as provided in the City of Cincinnati Drawing No. 729,
Standard Restoration Bituminous Concrete on Stone Base, which drawing is made a
part of these rules and regulations and attached hereto.
   (B)   In the case of rough macadam or gravel streets or roads, which have
never been treated with oil or tar, restoration shall be made as specified in §
153.09.
   (C)   Where any part of the opening is within two feet of the paved portion
of a first class macadam roadway having earth berms, restoration shall be made
as provided in division (A) above.
   (D)   Where any part of the opening is within two feet of a paved portion of
a Class 1, 2, or 3 roadway having an earth berm without curb and gutter, the
restoration shall be according to divisions (A) or (B) above whichever the
Village Engineer considers necessary.
   (E)   Where the opening is within two feet of plain macadam roadway (Class
5), the restoration shall be made as specified in §
153.09.
(2000 Code, § 153.10) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.11 CONCRETE BASE FOR ASPHALT STREETS: CLASSES 2, 3, AND 7.
   (A)   When an opening is to be restored in an asphalt surfaced street that
has a concrete base, the first operation in restoring the pavement over the
trench shall consist of installing a concrete base not less than nine inches in
thickness of Class 2, l:7 concrete. A nine-inch depth will be required
irrespective of the kind and depth of pavement base in the street at the time
the opening was made. After the backfilling has been completed, the material
under the edges of the old base shall be dug out to a depth and width of four
inches. The material then excavated may be used to round up the backfill in the
center, so that the bottom of the new base will be arched in form. The concrete
shall be thoroughly tamped under the edges of the old base and shall be brought
up to the same level as the top surface of the old base. If it is necessary to
further build up the grade of the base, the contractor shall place a separating
layer of tar paper, asphalt emulsion, or other suitable material at the level
of the top of the old base. Then more concrete may be poured to bring the base
up to the desired level. For asphalt paving, the final grade of the base shall
be not less than two and one-half inches below the street surface grade. The
surface of concrete base which is to receive binder shall be marked or grooved
so as to key and prevent displacement of the binder.
   (B)   The concrete shall stand at least 24 hours before the pavement is
laid. The permittee shall keep the pavement blocked against traffic until the
base has attained the age of at least three days or for a longer period if so
ordered by the Village Engineer.
   (C)   If, in the opinion of the Mayor, it is advisable to block the street
area against traffic for the time required for the setting of ordinary
concrete, the permittee shall be required to use an approved brand of quick-
setting cement, or a lower water cement ratio, or approved accelerator. Similar
steps may be required by the Village Engineer if the base is poured when the
temperature is below 40°F.
(2000 Code, § 153.11) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.12 SHEET ASPHALT: CLASS 3.
   (A)   In the replacement of the various types of asphaltic street pavements,
the restoration shall be made with an asphalt mixture which shall correspond to
one of the mixtures specified in the specifications of §
153.08. Rolling will be required for all longitudinal openings. The total depth
of the bituminous wearing surface shall normally be two and one-half inches.
    (B)   Streets which have been resurfaced with asphaltic or bituminous
concrete, using a machine paver shall be considered equal to sheet asphalt
pavement irrespective of the kind of base previously existing. The restoration
shall consist of a concrete base and sheet asphalt surface and shall be similar
in all respects to sheet asphalt restoration.
   (C)   In accordance with the specifications, §
153.11, the top of the concrete base is placed uniformly two and one-half
inches below the grade of the street surface. It is roughened or marked so that
it will retain the bituminous binder. The binder is placed loose on this
concrete base and raked so that it is uniformly at, or below the finished grade
of the street. The binder should then be rolled so that it is ready to receive
traffic. Where the cut is too small to receive a roller, it can be rolled with
a loaded dual-wheeled truck provided the driver of the truck is careful to roll
in straight lines parallel with the side of the trench. Smaller cuts may be
tamped. After compaction by traffic, the binder should be the same depth over
the entire area, below the street grade between one-half inch and three-fourths
inch.
(2000 Code, § 153.12) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.13 CONCRETE PAVEMENT: CLASS 1.
   (A)   Extreme care shall be taken in opening concrete pavements to prevent
damage to the adjoining pavement. Unless specific approval is obtained from the
Village Engineer, pavement shall be opened with the use of paving breakers or
by pneumatic drilling outlining the cut, followed by the use of paving
breakers.
   (B)   Opening in concrete pavement shall be restored in compliance with City
of Cincinnati Standard Drawing No. 734 attached hereto and the following
specifications in division (C) below.
   (C)   The thickness of the new concrete pavement shall be two inches greater
than the original pavement where the opening was made, but in any case the
thickness shall be not less than eight inches. The edge of the pavement under
the old concrete pavement shall be undermined in a manner similar to that
prescribed for concrete base in §
153.11. The opening shall be squared by straight lines, enclosing the opening
placed not less than two inches at any point from the original edges. This
squaring shall be done by sawing, use of pneumatic chisels, or manually.
Squaring shall not be vertical, but the edges shall be flared in toward the
center of the opening, while the bottom of the existing concrete pavement shall
be slightly undercut to aid in keying the restored pavement. The old
reinforcement shall be straightened out into the new pavement and the
deficiency supplied by a strip of new 42 pound 1004 mesh lapping back on the
old reinforcement. The concrete shall be l:5 mix air entrained concrete as
specified in the construction and material specifications of §
153.08.
   (D)   Prior to the placing of any concrete, the sides of the existing
pavement shall be thoroughly washed with clean water. The subgrade shall be
dampened. Longitudinal openings exceeding 20 feet in length shall be restored
with concrete having a slump of three inches or less.
   (E)   This concrete shall be vibrated with an internal type vibrator giving
particular attention to the pavement edges. Restoration of and small
longitudinal openings in concrete pavements shall be made with concrete having
a maximum slump of one inch. This concrete shall be thoroughly tamped in place.
The finish shall match the surrounding pavement. Curing shall be done in
accordance with the construction and material specifications of §
153.08.
   (F)   The area shall be blocked against traffic for the period of time the
Village Engineer deems necessary to prevent damage to the restored pavement.
Sufficient warning lights will be displayed to prevent accidents to pedestrians
or traffic. If, in the opinion of the Mayor, it is inadvisable to block the
street area against traffic for the time required for the setting of ordinary
concrete, the permittee shall be required to use an approved brand of quick
setting cement, or a lower water cement ratio, or an approved accelerator.
Similar steps may be required by the Village Engineer if the base is poured
when the temperature is below 40°F.
(2000 Code, § 153.13) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.14 CEMENT WALKS.
   (A)   In the restoration of cement walks, in addition to the question of
serviceability and durability of restoration, the matter of appearance will be
considered in determining the area to be restored, regardless of the size of
the opening. The restoration of complete blocks will be required.
   (B)   When restoring, cement walks shall be neatly squared, cut by a series
of straight lines at least four inches back from the lines of the opening. The
cement work shall conform to the specifications for concrete walks of the
village. The new work shall be joined up with the old cement work in a neat and
professional manner. Cement walks will be one course except when two course is
necessary to match adjoining area. Expansion joints shall be restored where
required regardless of whether they existed in the original pavement.
(2000 Code, § 153.14) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.15 BRICK WALK.
   (A)   Longitudinal openings in brick walks shall be restored as cement walk
unless otherwise ordered by the Mayor. The restoration shall be as cement walk
full width of walk, regardless of the actual width of the opening.
   (B)   (1)   Where the small opening is made and it is necessary to restore
in kind the restoration shall be made as follows: a foundation of not less than
five inches of thoroughly tamped cinders or gravel shall be provided.
      (2)   The brick shall be laid on, and the joints filled with fine dry
sand.
      (3)   All defective bricks shall be replaced by new or used whole brick
of quality equal to those in the adjacent walk.
(2000 Code, § 153.15) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.16 SOD AREAS.
   (A)   When an opening has been made in sodded areas, not only the actual
area disturbed shall be restored, but any adjacent sod area which may have been
damaged or destroyed in connection with the permittee’s work, shall also be
renewed. If the existing sod can be removed without damage, it may be relaid,
but all damaged sod shall be replaced with new sod.
   (B)   Restoration of sod by the permittee will not be considered complete
until all restored sod has knitted with the subgrade, and all maintenance
necessary (such as watering) shall be the responsibility of the permittee and
shall be considered a part of the restoration.
(2000 Code, § 153.16) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.17 CONCRETE BASE ONLY: CLASS 8.
   Restoration of concrete base applies where the permittee desires to make an
opening in a public way under improvement by village contract, and where the
old concrete base is to be retained as a part of the improvement.
(2000 Code, § 153.17) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.18 RESPONSIBILITY FOR SETTLEMENT IN RESTORED AREAS.
   (A)   The permittee, in accepting and acting under a street opening permit,
thereby agrees to assume full responsibility for injury and damage to persons
and property incurred because of any settlement of a restored area, and further
agrees to pay all costs involved in reconditioning such areas.
   (B)   (1)   If any settlement in a restored area occurs within a period of
one year from date of completion of the permanent restoration, it shall be
considered as conclusive evidence of defective backfilling.
      (2)   Any expense incurred by the village in connecting such settlement
shall be paid by the permittee.
(2000 Code, § 153.18) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.19 CLASSIFICATION OF PAVEMENTS.
   For the purpose of fixing restoration charges, pavements are classified as
follows:
   (A)   Class 1: Concrete;
   (B)   Class 2: Not used;
   (C)   Class 3: Asphalt, other bituminous pavements on concrete base, or
machine paved bituminous paving irrespective of kind of base;
   (D)   Class 4: Bituminous concrete pavements on stone base;
   (E)   Class 5: Low type pavements (plain macadam and gravel, not surface
treated or oiled);
   (F)   Class 6: Sidewalks, cement, brick, or flagstone;
   (G)   Class 7: Concrete base only or any similar material used as a base
incident to the resurfacing of a street under contract or by village forces;
   (H)   Class 8: Street under complete construction or reconstruction (not
merely resurfacing), or any entirely unimproved area except as provided in §
153.10(C);
   (I)   Class 9: Sodded areas; and
   (J)   Class 10: Tunnels.
(2000 Code, § 153.19) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
§ 153.20 SCHEDULE OF CHARGES.
   (A)   Complete restoration. Fees shall be in accordance with current
schedule on file at the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building.
   (B)   Inspection charges. Rates of charges shall be in accordance with
current schedule on file at the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building.
   (C)   Cancellation charge. If a permit is unused by the permittee within the
time specified therein or if incorrect information is contained in the
application which requires the issuance of a new permit, the unused or
incorrect permit shall be cancelled and a charge of $4 made for the issuance
and cancellation of each permit.
   (D)   Additional charges. The prices given in the schedule are basic prices
to be charged for a standard opening, which has been excavated and backfilled
in accordance with these rules and regulations. If paving blocks or paving
bricks have been damaged to such an extent that 20% or more must be discarded,
the permittee shall pay for all blocks in excess of 20% at current market
prices delivered to the work.
   (E)   New street. If, by special action of the Mayor, a permit is issued to
open any pavement less than three years old, an additional charge will be made
for such opening. This additional charge shall be on a sliding scale and shall
be 2% of the regular charge for each unelapsed month or fraction thereof of the
three year restricted period. For example, if the pavement is 27 months old
when the opening is made, the additional charge will be 18% over the regular
charge. If the pavement is nine months old when the opening is made, the
additional charge will be 54% over the regular charge.
(2000 Code, § 153.20) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
Cross-reference:
   Charges, see
Appendix B
§ 153.21 FORCE ACCOUNT OR COST PLUS.
   In the restoration of relatively large areas, the Mayor may order the work
charged for on a force account basis, as follows: the sum of field labor,
supervision equal to 10% of total field labor, material used, charge for use of
equipment at schedule rental rates, inspection, and issuance of permit charge
as provided, accounting charge of 2% of the total of preceding items, and 2% of
the total of all preceding items.
(2000 Code, § 153.21) (Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
APPENDIX A: SAMPLE DRAWINGS
Section
   
I.   Bituminous concrete on stone base
   
II.   Plan for a permit to install or alter underground structures
   
III.   Concrete street openings
   
IV.   Opening in public ways
SECTION I. BITUMINOUS CONCRETE ON STONE BASE.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/304b384ee4f64a5cbbcf9b0f40522f54158e7975/
IMAGES/0-0-0-44.jpg]
 
(Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
SECTION II. PLAN FOR A PERMIT TO INSTALL OR ALTER UNDERGROUND STRUCTURES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/304b384ee4f64a5cbbcf9b0f40522f54158e7975/
IMAGES/0-0-0-46.jpg]
 
(Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
SECTION III. CONCRETE STREET OPENING.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/304b384ee4f64a5cbbcf9b0f40522f54158e7975/
IMAGES/0-0-0-48.jpg]
 
(Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
SECTION IV. OPENINGS IN PUBLIC WAYS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/304b384ee4f64a5cbbcf9b0f40522f54158e7975/
IMAGES/0-0-0-50.jpg]
 
(Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
APPENDIX B: CHARGES
Section
   
I.   Restoration charges
   
II.   Inspection charges
SECTION I. RESTORATION CHARGES.
   (A)   Class 1: Concrete of portland cement.
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $120 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $51 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $26 per square yard
 
   (B)   Class 2: Not used.
   (C)   Class 3: Asphalt pavement on concrete base.
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $105 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $46.50 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $25 per square yard
 
   (D)   Class 4: Asphalt pavement on stone base.
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $55 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $19 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $16 per square yard
 
   (E)   Class 5: Low type pavements (plain macadam, gravel, cinders).
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $25 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $10 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $7 per square yard
 
   (F)   Class 6: Sidewalks, concrete, or asphaltic concrete.
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $69 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $28 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $19 per square yard
 
   (G)   Class 6A: Driveways, concrete, or asphaltic concrete.
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $69 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $28 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $21 per square yard
Note:
(Rustic terrazzo sidewalks and driveways are treated as a special item under
control of the Village Engineer for price)
 
   (H)   Class 7: Concrete base only or any similar material used as a base
(incident to the complete resurfacing of a street by contract or by village
forces).
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $75 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $29 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $24 per square yard
 
   (I)   Class 8: Bituminous aggregate base (black base).
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $63 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $23 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $19 per square yard
 
   (J)   Class 9: Unimproved, sod, or seeding.
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $33 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $11 per square yard
12.1 square feet to 50 square feet        $6 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $3 per square yard
 
   (K)   Class 9A: Unimproved, sod, or seeding.
 
Adjacent to main trench $60 per square yard
 
   (L)   Class 10: Tunneling: $30 per service.
   (M)   Class 11: Curbing, concrete, or asphalt.
 
Charge base on linear foot
Concrete                   $8 per linear foot
Asphalt (100 feet or less) $8 per linear foot
Asphalt (Over 100 feet)    $6 per linear foot
 
   (N)   Class 12: Asphalt (surface only).
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $24 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $9 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $7 per square yard
 
   (O)   Class 13: Ditches (improved or unimproved).
      (1)   Concrete ditch.
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $70 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $25 per square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $18 per square yard
 
      (2)   Asphalt ditch.
 
Minimum permit (two square yards or less) $60 each permit
2.1 square yards to 12 square yards       $23 er square yard
Over 12 square yards                      $17 per square yard
 
      (3)   Unimproved ditch.
 
Charge based on linear foot $4 per linear foot
 
   (P)   Class 14: Road planning.
 
Charge based on square yard price per pass $0.70 per square yard per pass
 
   (Q)   Class 15: Joint sealing.
 
Minimum permit up to 250 linear feet $30 each permit
All area over 250 linear feet        $.75 per square yard
 
   (R)   Class 16: Seal coating.
 
Minimum permit (30 square yards or less) $30
All area over 30 square yards            $0.75 per square yard
 
   (S)   Charge for cancellation of permit: $4 each permit;
   (T)   Administration processing charge: $1 each permit; and
   (U)   Street opening fee. To be applied only to permits involving opening of
street pavement and will be based on the area, as estimated at the time such
permit is applied for and granted.
(Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
SECTION II. INSPECTION CHARGES.
   (A)   Inspection charges: When restoration is made by permittee, including
charge for issuance of permit;
   (B)   Delay. Any delay in work will necessitate charge for inspection at
rate in effect at time work is performed.
                  Rate                          Rate
Class of Pavement Minimum for 2 Square Yards or Over 2.1 Square Yards
                  Less and Exceptions           (Plus Minimum) and Exceptions
                  Rate                          Rate
Class of Pavement Minimum for 2 Square Yards or Over 2.1 Square Yards
                  Less and Exceptions           (Plus Minimum) and Exceptions
1                 $7                            $0.90
2                 $7                            $0.90
3                 $7                            $0.90
4                 $7                            $0.90
5                 $6.20                         $0.85
6                 $5.20                         $0.80
6A                $5.20                         $0.80
7                 $5.20                         $0.80
8                 $7                            $0.90
9                 $5.20                         $0.80
9A                $5.20                         $0.10
10                Cost plus                     Cost plus
11                $9.30 (linear feet)           $0.60 (linear feet)
12                $7                            $0.90
13                $7                            $0.90
14                Cost plus                     $0.05
15                $10 (500 linear feet or less) (Minimum)
                  $12 (501 linear feet or more) (Maximum)
                  $10 (30 square yards or less)
16                $17 (31 square yards or less)
                  $0.10 (101 square yards or
                  more, plus the 17 rate)
 
   (C)   Tunnel backfilling and boring operation. Charges for the inspection of
the backfilling of tunnels and the sealing of boring operations, under road
pavements, are at the current cost plus basis and for the actual period worked.
Costs depends on whether the Inspector worked on regular or premium rates and
if paid minimum call-out pay and fringe benefits. These charges may be in
addition to the other regulated permit fees;
   (D)   Night and other special work assignments. When the project requires
inspection at a time other than regular working hours, the charges for
inspection shall be at the required overtime rate for the period being worked.
Cost plus must be added to this rate. The inspection fee for the project shall
be the actual total of hours worked to include cost plus; and
   (E)   Additional charges. All the necessary traffic aids furnished by the
village through the permit, shall be charged to the permittee at the time of
completion. These charges may be in addition to the other regulated permit
fees.
(Ord. O-23-81, passed 10-26-1981)
CHAPTER 154: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Statutory authorizations
   
154.002   Findings of fact
   
154.003   Statement of purpose
   
154.004   Methods of reducing flood loss
   
154.005   Lands to which these regulations apply
   
154.006   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
154.007   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.008   Interpretation
   
154.009   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
154.010   Definitions
Administration
   
154.025   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
154.026   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
154.027   Floodplain development permits
   
154.028   Application required
   
154.029   Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application
   
154.030   Inspections
   
154.031   Post-construction certifications required
   
154.032   Revoking a floodplain development permit
   
154.033   Exemptions from filing a development permit
   
154.034   State and federal development
   
154.035   Map maintenance activities
   
154.036   Data use and flood map interpretation
   
154.037   Use of preliminary flood insurance rate map and/or flood insurance
study data
   
154.038   Substantial damage determinations
Use and Development Standards for
Flood Hazard Reduction
   
154.050   Generally
   
154.051   Use regulations
   
154.052   Water and wastewater systems
   
154.053   Subdivisions and other new developments
   
154.054   Residential structures
   
154.055   Nonresidential structures
   
154.056   Accessory structures
   
154.057   Recreational vehicles
   
154.058   Gas or liquid storage tanks
   
154.059   Assurance of flood-carrying capacity
Appeals and Variances
   
154.070   Appeals Board established
   
154.071   Powers and duties
   
154.072   Appeals
   
154.073   Variances
   
154.074   Procedure at hearing
   
154.075   Appeals to the Court
Enforcement
   
154.090   Compliance required
   
154.091   Notice of violation
 
   
154.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Street openings, See
Ch. 153
   Zoning Code, see
Ch. 152
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATIONS.
   Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the
legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. Therefore, the Council of
the Village of Mariemont, State of Ohio, does ordain as follows.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The Village of Mariemont has special flood hazard areas that are subject to
periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base. Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
   (G)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (H)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood prone areas;
   (I)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (J)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (K)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (L)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.004 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSS.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood, waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.005 LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.
   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the Village of Mariemont as identified in §
154.006 including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the
Village of Mariemont.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.006 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   (A)   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or
maps are adopted:
      (1)   Flood Insurance Rate Map of (FIRM) and Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
for Hamilton County, Ohio, and Incorporated Areas both effective June 7, 2023.
      (2)   Other studies and/or maps, which may be relied upon for
establishment of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year
floodplain, floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard.
      (3)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered Professional Engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved
by the Village of Mariemont as required by §
154.052 Subdivisions and Other New Developments.
   (B)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps
and/or studies are on file at the Col. Donald L. Shanks Municipal Building,
6907 Wooster Pike, Mariemont, Ohio 45227.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.007 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including subdivision regulations, zoning, or building codes. In the event of a
conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more
restrictive shall be followed. These regulations are not intended to repeal,
abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.008 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
shall be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.009 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. These regulations do
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations
shall not create liability on the part of the Village of Mariemont, any officer
or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood
damage that results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.010 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   APPEAL. A request for review of the floodplain administrator's
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The BASE FLOOD may also be referred to as the 1% CHANCE ANNUAL
FLOOD or 100- YEAR FLOOD.
   BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the
base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the BASE
FLOOD ELEVATION is the lowest adjacent natural grade elevation plus the depth
number (from one to three feet).
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR.
   EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT). Issued by President Carter in
1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted in
or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless
there is no practicable alternative.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FILL. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). Usually the initial map, produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES. Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   Zone A: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood
in any given year; base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   Zones A1-30 and Zone AE: Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood in any given year; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   Zone AO: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood
in any given year; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow
on sloping terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   Zone AH: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood
in any given year; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of
ponding); base flood elevations are determined.
      (5)   Zone A99: Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   Zone Band Zone X (shaded): Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (6)   Zone C and Zone X (unshaded): Areas dete1mined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and non-structural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real  estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION or FPE. The base flood elevation plus two feet of
freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative
source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood elevations, or
base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the floodplain
administrator.
   FLOODWAY.
      (1)   A FLOODWAY is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood
discharge. A FLOODWAY is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated
height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any
point within the community.
      (2)   The FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area and is usually
characterized by any of the following: moderate to high velocity flood waters,
high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion
forces.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. Freeboard tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office;
      (4)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained
by the Village of Mariemont's historic preservation program, which program is
certified by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS. An analysis performed by a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with
standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood
elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are broken down into the
following categories:
      (1)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A comment by FEMA
regarding a proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the
hydrologic or hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in
the modification of the existing regulatory floodway, the effective base flood
elevations, or the special flood hazard area. A CLOMR does not amend or revise
effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, or flood
insurance studies.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR).
A revision based on technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows
changes to flood zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations,
and planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the
base flood elevation and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard
area.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an "enclosure below the
lowest floor" which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The te1m
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". For the purposes
of these regulations, a manufactured home includes manufactured homes and
mobile homes as defined in R.C. Ch. 4781.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As specified in the O.A.C. 4781-12-01(K), a
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK means any tract of land upon which three or more
manufactured homes, used for habitation are parked, either free of charge or
for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building, structure, vehicle,
or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the facilities of the park. A
tract of land that is subdivided and the individual lots are not for rent or
rented but are for sale or sold for the purpose of installation of manufactured
homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home park, even though three or more
manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the
local government authority. MANUFACTURED HOME PARK does not include any tract
of land used solely for the storage or display for sale of manufactured homes.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base
flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are
referenced.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). The NFIP is a federal program
enabling property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance
protection against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide
an insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the Federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make
flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the "start of construction" commenced
on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted by the
Village of Mariemont and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for
which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of
an initial FIRM (May 17, 2004), and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
   PERSON. Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An agency is further defined in the R.C. § 111.15(A)
(2) as any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited
to, any board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council,
institution, state college or university, community college district, technical
college district, or state community college. "Agency" does not include the
general assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general's department, or
any court.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT. A person registered to engage in the
practice of architecture pursuant to R.C. §§ 4703.01 and 4703.19.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person registered as a professional
engineer pursuant to R.C. Ch. 4733.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. A person registered as a professional
surveyor pursuant to R.C. Ch. 4733.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Also known as AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD, it
is the land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of
flooding in any given year. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are designated by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood
insurance studies, flood boundary and floodway maps and flood hazard boundary
maps as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, or A99. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS may also
refer to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal state or
local sources of data including but not limited to historical flood information
reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone
soils associated with a watercourse.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or  the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to the before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial
damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanita1y, or safety code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure".
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.025 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Mayor and/or their designee is hereby appointed to administer and
implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.026 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include but are not limited to:
   (A)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas.
   (B)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information.
   (C)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance.
   (D)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed.
   (E)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary
for the administration of these regulations including flood insurance rate
maps, letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and denial of
permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of
issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, floodproofing
certificates, variances, and records of enforcement actions taken for
violations of these regulations.
   (F)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations.
   (G)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings.
   (H)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up.
   (I)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to dete1mine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.027 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity including but not limited to filling, grading,
construction, alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or alteration
of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any
identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
154.006, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the
requirements of these regulations have been met.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.028 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all
development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in contact
with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be made by
the owner of the property or his/her authorized agent, herein referred to as
the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form
furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is
in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an
application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development's
location. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing.
   (B)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed.
   (C)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures.
   (D)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of, these regulations.
   (E)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit when applicable:
      (1)   Floodproofing certification for non-residential floodproofed
structure as required in § 154.54.
      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a
structure not meeting the design requirements of §
154.053(E) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.
      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
154.058(C).
      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevation, but no floodway as required by §
154.058(B).
      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
158.059(A).
      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and other new
developments as required by §
154.053.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.029 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Review.
      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in § 158.028 has been received
by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section 404 of the
Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401
of the Clean Water Act.
   (B)   Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application,
the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the
application. If the Floodplain Administrator is satisfied that the development
proposed in the floodplain development application conforms to the requirements
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue the permit. All
floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon the commencement of
work within 180 days. A floodplain development permit shall expire 180 days
after issuance unless the permitted activity has been substantially begun and
is thereafter pursued to completion.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.030 INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate
times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with
permit conditions.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.031 POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:
   (A)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered professional surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For
elevated structures in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation,
the elevation certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's
representative.
   (B)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
154.035(A), a letter of map revision.
   (C)   For new or substantially improved nonresidential structures that have
been floodproofed in lieu of elevation, where allowed, the applicant shall
supply a completed Floodproofing Certificate for Non-Residential Structures
completed by a registered professional engineer or architect together with
associated documentation.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.032 REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things,
the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Appeals Board in accordance with §§
154.070 through
154.075.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.033 EXEMPTIONS FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be required for
maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing, or for small
nonstructural development activities (except for filling and grading) valued at
less than $2,500.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.034 STATE AND FEDERAL DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Development that is funded, financed, undertaken, or preempted by
state agencies shall comply with minimum NFIP criteria.
   (B)   Before awarding funding or financing or granting a license, permit, or
other authorization for a development that is or is to be located within a 100-
year floodplain, a state agency shall require the applicant to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the agency that the development will comply with minimum
NFIP criteria, and any applicable local floodplain management resolution or
ordinance as required by R.C. § 1521.13. This includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the Ohio Department of Commerce and
subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the O.A.C. 4781-12.
      (2)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under R.C. Ch. 4906.
      (3)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under R.C. Ch. 3734.
   (C)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency, and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management.
      (1)   Each federal agency has a responsibility to evaluate the potential
effects of any actions it may take in a floodplain; to ensure that its planning
programs and budget request reflect consideration of flood hazards and
floodplain management; and to prescribe procedures to implement the policies
and requirements of EO 11988.
(Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.035 MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   To meet the National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have
flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the Village of
Mariemont's flood maps, studies, and other data identified in §
154.006 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified:
   (A)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         (a)   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         (b)   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
         (d)   Subdivision or other new development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
154.052.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with §
154.035(A), prepared in a format required for a conditional letter of map
revision or letter of map revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and
processing fees for these map revisions shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a conditional letter of
map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         (a)   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
         (b)   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in riverine areas where FEMA has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway.
      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map
revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to §
154.035(A)(1).
   (B)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain Administrator may
request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does
not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such
as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate
supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor of the Village of
Mariemont and may be submitted at any time.
   (C)   Annexation/detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator
shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the Village of
Mariemont have been modified by annexation or the community has assumed
authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that the
Village of Mariemont's Flood Insurance Rate Map accurately represent the
Village of Mariemont's boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a
map of the Village of Mariemont suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the
new corporate limits or the new area for which the Village of Mariemont has
assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.036 DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.
   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps
and other data showing areas of special flood hazard:
   (A)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or
in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state, or other source.
   (B)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or
lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps
and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood
hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in §§
154.070 through
154.075.
   (D)   Where an existing or proposed structure or other development is
affected by multiple flood zones, by multiple base flood elevations, or both,
the development activity must comply with the provisions of this chapter
applicable to the most restrictive flood zone and the highest base flood
elevation affecting any part of the existing or proposed structure; or for
other developments, affecting any part of the area of the development.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.037 USE OF PRELIMINARY FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP AND/OR FLOOD INSURANCE
STUDY DATA.
   (A)   Zone A.
      (1)   Within Zone A areas designated on an effective FIRM, data from the
preliminary FIRM and/or FIS shall be reasonably utilized as best available
data.
      (2)   When all appeals have been resolved and a notice of final flood
elevation determination has been provided in a letter of final determination
(LFD), BFE and floodway data from the preliminary FIRM and/or FIS shall be used
for regulating development.
   (B)   Zones AE, A1-30, AH, and AO.
      (1)   BFE and floodway data from a preliminary FIS or FIRM restudy are
not required to be used in lieu of BFE and floodway data contained in an
existing effective FIS and FIRM. However:
         (a)   Where BFEs increase in a restudied area, communities have the
responsibility to ensure that new or substantially improved structures are
protected. Communities are encouraged to reasonably utilize preliminary FIS or
FIRM data in instances where BFEs increase and floodways are revised to ensure
that the health, safety, and property of their citizens are protected.
         (b)   Where BFEs decrease, preliminary FIS or FIRM data should not be
used to regulate floodplain development until the LFD has been issued or until
all appeals have been resolved.
      (2)   If a preliminary FIRM or FIS has designated floodways where none
had previously existed, communities should reasonably utilize this data in lieu
of applying the encroachment performance standard of §
154.059(B) since the data in the draft or preliminary FIS represents the best
data available.
   (C)   Zones B, C, and X. Use of BFE and floodway data from a preliminary
FIRM or FIS are not required for areas designated as Zone B, C, or X on the
effective FIRM which are being revised to Zone AE, A1-30, AH, or AO.
Communities are encouraged to reasonably utilize preliminary FIS or FIRM data
to ensure that the health, safety, and property of their citizens are
protected.
(Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.038 SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, etc. After such a damage event, the
Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Require owners of substantially damaged structures to obtain a
floodplain development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or
reconstruction.
   (B)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 154.050 GENERALLY.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §§
154.006,
154.036(A), or
154.037.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.051 USE REGULATIONS.
   All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or any other applicable
land use regulation adopted by the Village of Mariemont are allowed provided
they meet the provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.052 WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.
   The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and
waste disposal systems in the absence of any more restrictive standard provided
under the Ohio Revised Code or applicable state rules:
   (A)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
   (B)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (C)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.053 SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development shall
be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all
applicable standards in these regulations;
   (B)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage;
   (C)   All subdivision proposals and all other proposed new development shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage;
   (D)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less; and
   (E)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to
FEMA in §
154.035(A)(1)(d) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by §
154.052(D).
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.054 RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   The requirements of this section apply to new construction of residential
structures and to substantial improvements of residential structures in zones
A, A1-30, AE, AO, and AH, when designated on the community's effective FIRM,
and when designated on a preliminary or final FIRM issued by FEMA under the
circumstances provided in §
154.037.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or
above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring (division (A))
and construction materials resistant to flood damage (division (B)) are
satisfied.
   (B)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. Where flood
protection elevation data are not available the structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest
adjacent natural grade.
   (E)   New construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured
homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the flood protection
elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings to allow the automatic equalization of hydrostatic pressure may
have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure meets the
following standards:
      (1)   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage;
      (2)   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
      (3)   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
   (F)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
   (G)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt
from the development standards of this section.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.055 NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   The requirements of this section apply to new construction and to
substantial improvements of nonresidential structures in zones A, A1-30, AE,
AO, and AH, when designated on the community's effective FIRM, and when
designated on a preliminary or final FIRM issued by FEMA under the
circumstances provided in §
154.037.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of §
154.054(A) through (C) and (E) through (G).
   (B)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
      (1)   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood
protection elevation;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
division (B)(1) and (B)(2) above.
   (C)   Where flood protection elevation data are not available the structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet
above the highest adjacent natural grade.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.056 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Structures that are 600 square feet or less which are used for parking and
storage only me exempt from elevation or dry floodproofing standards within
zones A, A1-30, AE, AO, and AH designated on the community's FIRM. Such
structures must meet the following standards:
   (A)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
   (B)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
   (C)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
   (D)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
   (E)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
   (F)   They shall meet the opening requirements of §
154.053(E)(3);
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.057 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Recreational vehicles on sites within zones A, A1-A30, AE, AO, or AH must
meet at least one of the following standards:
   (A)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for
more than 180 days;
   (B)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (C)   They must be placed on the site pursuant to a floodplain development
pe1mit issued under §§ 154.027 and 154.028 and meet all standards of §
154.054.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.058 GAS OR LIQUID STORAGE TANKS.
   Within zone A, A1-A30, AE, AO, or AH, new or substantially improved above
ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent flotation or
lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.059 ASSURANCE OF FLOOD-CARRYING CAPACITY.
   Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in these
regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that the
reduction of the flood carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:
   (A)   Development in floodways.
      (1)   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
      (2)   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
         (a)   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
154.035(A);
         (b)   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
         (c)   Certification that no structures are located in areas that would
be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
         (d)   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
         (e)   Concurrence of the Mayor of the Village of Mariemont and the
Chief Executive Officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed
actions.
   (B)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
      (1)   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
      (2)   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
         (a)   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an increase
of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why these
alternatives are not feasible;
         (b)   Section
154.059(A)(2)(a) and (A)(2)(c) through (A)(2)(e).
   (C)   Alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations, a
watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the "bank full
stage." The field determination of "bank full stage" shall be based on methods
presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or
other applicable publication available from a federal, state, or other
authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse,
the following standards apply:
      (1)   The bank full flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bank full flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
      (2)   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
Village of Mariemont specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an
agreement is required, it shall be made a condition of the floodplain
development permit.
      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in §
154.035(A)(1)(c) when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
APPEALS AND VARIANCES
§ 154.070 APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The Village of Mariemont's Planning Commission is hereby appointed to
serve as the Appeals Board for these regulations as established by Village of
Mariemont code §
151.024.
   (B)   Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed in Col. Donald L.
Shanks Municipal Building, 6907 Wooster Pike, Mariemont, Ohio 45227.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.071 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.
   (B)   Authorize variances in accordance with §
154.073 of these regulations.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.072 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action
of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person shall file,
within 30 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action,
a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any
item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator's decision. Such
appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the
Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain
Administrator shall transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which
the Floodplain Administrator's decision was made to the Appeals Board.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.073 VARIANCES.
   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a
variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not inconsistent
with federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.
   (A)   Application for a variance.
      (1)   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
      (2)   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
      (3)   All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a variance
application fee set in the schedule of fees adopted by the Village of
Mariemont.
   (B)   Notice for public hearing. The Appeals Board shall schedule and hold a
public hearing within 30 days after the receipt of an application for a
variance from the Floodplain Administrator. Prior to the hearing, a notice of
such hearing shall be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the community at least ten days before the date of the hearing.
   (C)   Public hearing. At such hearing the applicant shall present such
statements and evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such
variance applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of
fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of these regulations and the following factors:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.
      (6)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area.
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (D)   (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant.
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws.
         (d)   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages.
         (e)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (2)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
   (E)   Other conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in division (C)(1) to (C)(11) have
been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.074 PROCEDURE AT HEARING.
   (A)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
   (B)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
   (C)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony in
support of the appeal or variance.
   (D)   The administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition to
the appeal or variance.
   (E)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
   (F)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become part
of the record for appeal.
   (G)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
   (H)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its decision.
The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and thereafter
issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable
time after the hearing.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.075 APPEALS TO THE COURT.
   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the Hamilton County Court of Common Pleas, pursuant to R.C. Ch.
2506.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.090 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations,
unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in
§
154.033.
   (B)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with §
154.091.
   (C)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with §
154.091.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.091 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of these regulations, they shall give notice of such
violation to the person responsible therefore and order compliance with these
regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:
   (A)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (B)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of
these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action, which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
   (C)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (D)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;
   (E)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense and
shall constitute a minor misdemeanor. Any person who violates these regulations
or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof
be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the Village of Mariemont.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Village of Mariemont from taking
such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
The Village of Mariemont shall prosecute any violation of these regulations in
accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(Ord. O-26-10, passed 11-8-2010; Ord. O-9-23, passed 4-10-2023)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
II.   ROAD, STREET, AND LANE RENAMINGS
TABLE I: ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord. No. Date       Description
                    Rezoning Mariemont Central Heating Station Building from
                    Residential A with a park overlay designation for a portion
O-16-07  11-26-2007 of the property that comprises the hillside area and to a
                    Residential C area for the area at the bottom of the
                    hillside closest to the Mariemont Landing Development
                    Rezoning Steam Plant property from Residential A and
O-11-08  5-12-2008  Industrial to Resident A (Park District overlay) and
                    Residence C
                    Rezoning from Residence B to Residence D to grant a five-
O-19-16  10-10-2016 foot rear yard setback variance to the properties located
                    at 3814, 3816, 3818 Miami Road
                   
 
TABLE II: ROAD, STREET, AND LANE RENAMINGS
 
Ord. No. Date      Description
O-23-14  9-8-2014  Renaming Lane L to Millar Rogers Lane and Lane K to Hank
                   Kleinfeldt Lane
O-2-17   1-23-2017 Naming the lane that goes from the swim club down to the
                   lower 80 park and gardens Algonquin Way
                  
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ohio Revised Code
References to Ohio Administrative Code
References to 1967 Code
References to 2000 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
R.C. Section Code Section
R.C. Section                           Code Section
1.01                                   10.01
1.02                                   10.02
1.05                                   10.02
1.08                                   93.005
1.14                                   10.03
1.15                                   10.03
1.23                                   10.05
1.42                                   10.03
1.43                                   10.03
1.44                                   10.02
1.45                                   10.03
1.46                                   10.03
1.47                                   10.18
1.48                                   10.18
1.49                                   10.18
1.50                                   10.07
1.51                                   10.06
1.52                                   10.06
1.54                                   10.04
1.55                                   10.05
1.56                                   10.05
1.57                                   10.04
1.58                                   10.04
1.59                                   10.02
                                       32.25,
                                       34.12,
7.16                                   93.005,
                                       93.043,
                                       94.03
9.312                                  32.29
9.481                                  30.15
9.60                                   35.13
9.62                                   Ch. 34
Title LVII                             97.02
109.43                                 30.08
109.511                                34.05
109.578                                35.02
109.578(C)(1)                          35.02
109.578(C)(2)                          35.02
109.578(C)(3)                          35.02
109.77                                 34.05
111.15(A)(2)                           154.010
117.44                                 31.041
                                       32.29,
                                       34.05,
Ch. 119                                35.02,
                                       91.10,
                                       92.28
Ch. 120                                36.01
                                       30.09,
121.22                                 97.21,
                                       151.024,
                                       151.025
121.22(D) and (E)                      30.09
121.22(D), (E) and (J)                 30.09
125.04                                 32.25
125.071                                30.08
125.30                                 97.02
125.60 through 125.6012                32.25
128.01(A)                              136.20
128.96(F) through (H)                  136.20
128.99(A), (B)                         136.20
133.14                                 36.06
Ch. 135                                32.13
140.06                                 36.01
Ch. 147                                34.15
149.011                                30.09
                                       30.08,
149.43                                 32.29,
                                       97.21
149.43(B), (E)                         30.08
149.43(C)                              30.08
153.54                                 32.26
153.54(A)(1) and (B)                   32.29
163.01 through 163.22                  93.005
Ch. 167                                36.01
177.01 through 177.03                  34.07
177.02                                 34.07
307.052                                36.01
323.25                                 93.005
323.65 to 323.79                       93.005
Ch. 339                                30.09
339.14                                 36.01
343.01                                 36.01
343.012                                36.01
351.02                                 92.01
505.106                                34.14
505.375                                36.01
Ch. 513                                30.09
519.01                                 93.004
701.01                                 10.02
701.07                                 30.09
709.023                                97.02
Ch. 713                                37.01,
                                       151.024
713.07                                 151.040
713.08                                 151.040
713.10                                 151.040
713.12                                 151.023,
                                       151.077
713.21                                 36.01
713.22                                 36.01
713.23(D)                              32.25
713.231                                36.01
713.30                                 36.01
Ch. 715                                30.09
715.05                                 Ch. 34,
                                       Ch. 35
715.20                                 93.006
715.23                                 90.01
715.26                                 93.005
715.26 through 715.30                  93.005
715.261                                93.005
715.29                                 93.020
715.30                                 93.005,
                                       93.020
715.40                                 93.035
715.43                                 93.035
715.44                                 Ch. 93
715.47                                 93.043
715.60                                 Ch. 91
715.67                                 10.99,
                                       130.99
715.691                                97.02,
                                       97.06
715.70                                 97.02,
                                       97.06
715.71                                 97.02,
                                       97.06
715.72                                 97.06
715.74                                 97.02
Chapter 718                            97.02
718                                    97.01
718.01(L)                              97.02
719.012                                93.005
Ch. 725                                30.09
729.01 et seq.                         55.45
731.08                                 33.03
731.09                                 32.01
731.09 through 731.13                  Ch. 31
731.091                                32.01
731.10                                 32.02
731.11                                 30.07,
                                       32.03
731.12                                 32.04
731.13                                 32.05,
                                       33.03
731.15                                 32.26
731.16                                 32.27
731.17 through 731.27                  Ch. 32,
                                       32.11
731.231                                10.06,
                                       93.005
                                       30.15,
731.28                                 Ch. 32,
                                       32.01
731.31                                 30.15
731.43                                 30.07
731.43(A)                              32.06
731.44                                 32.07
731.45                                 32.08
731.46                                 32.09
731.47                                 32.10
731.48                                 32.28
731.49                                 32.11
731.50                                 32.12
731.51                                 93.056
731.52                                 93.057
731.53                                 93.058
731.54                                 93.059
733.23                                 31.001
733.24                                 Ch. 31,
                                       31.020
                                       30.07,
733.25                                 31.027,
                                       32.06
733.30                                 Ch. 31,
                                       31.021
733.31(A)                              30.07
733.32                                 Ch. 31,
                                       31.022
733.33                                 31.022
733.34                                 31.024
733.35                                 31.026
733.35 through 733.39                  35.02
733.35 to 733.39                       35.02
733.36                                 31.026
733.37                                 31.026
733.38                                 31.026
733.39                                 31.026
733.40                                 33.03
733.41                                 31.025
733.48                                 31.075
733.68                                 30.02
733.69                                 30.04
733.70                                 30.05
733.71                                 30.06
                                       31.060,
735.271                                32.25,
                                       32.26,
                                       32.27
735.272                                31.076
735.273                                31.076
735.31                                 31.060
735.32                                 31.061
735.33                                 31.061
737.15                                 34.02
737.16                                 34.03
737.161                                34.04
737.162                                34.05
737.17                                 34.05
737.171                                34.06
737.18                                 34.07
737.19                                 34.08
737.20                                 34.09
737.21                                 35.01
737.22                                 35.02,
                                       35.15
737.221                                35.02
737.23                                 35.03
737.24                                 35.04
737.25                                 35.05
737.27                                 35.08
737.29                                 34.10
737.31                                 34.11
737.32                                 34.12
737.33                                 34.13
737.99                                 34.14
743.05 to 743.07                       31.076
743.10                                 31.076
743.11                                 31.076
743.18                                 31.076
743.24                                 31.076
Ch. 749                                30.09
749.04                                 36.01
749.22                                 36.01
753.02                                 30.14
901.51                                 131.21
901.99(A)                              131.21
925.62                                 90.34
925.99(B)                              90.34
935.16                                 90.07
951.01                                 90.01
951.02                                 90.01
951.10                                 90.01
951.11                                 90.02
951.12                                 90.03
951.13                                 90.04
951.99                                 90.01
Ch. 955                                90.27
955.01                                 90.29
955.011(B)                             90.32
955.012                                Ch. 34,
                                       Ch. 90
955.10                                 90.27
955.11                                 90.01,
                                       90.28
955.21                                 90.29
955.22                                 90.01
955.221                                90.01
955.24                                 90.30
955.25                                 90.31
955.26                                 90.05
955.261(A)(2)                          90.08
955.261(A)(3)                          90.08
955.28(A)                              90.08
955.39                                 90.05
955.43(A), (B)                         90.32
955.43(C)                              90.32
955.50                                 90.33
955.99(A)                              90.28
                                       90.27,
955.99(B)                              90.30,
                                       90.31
955.99(C)                              90.05,
                                       90.33
955.99(D)                              90.32
955.99(E)                              90.29
955.99(E) through (H), (J)             90.01
Ch. 956                                90.27
956.01                                 90.23
956.06                                 90.23
959.01                                 90.20
959.02                                 90.21
959.03                                 90.22
959.04                                 90.21,
                                       90.22
959.13                                 90.23
959.131                                90.23
959.132                                90.23
959.15                                 90.24
959.16                                 90.24
959.17                                 90.24
959.21                                 90.37
959.99(B)                              90.21
959.99(C)                              90.22,
                                       90.24
959.99(D)                              90.23,
                                       90.37
959.99(E)                              90.23
959.99(E)(3)                           90.20
959.99(E)(7)                           90.37
959.99(I)                              90.24
1311.49                                90.02
1332.32(A)                             30.30
1333.61                                30.09
1343.03(A)                             36.06
Ch. 1347                               31.027
1349.17                                131.31
1349.99                                131.31
1521.13                                154.034
1531.01                                90.23
Ch. 1533                               Ch. 90
1533.161                               90.35
1533.171(A)                            131.24,
                                       135.05
1533.85                                Ch. 93
1533.99(B)                             90.35
1533.99(C)                             131.24,
                                       135.05
1547.30                                Ch. 94
Chapter 1705                           97.02
Ch. 1713                               90.32
1717.01                                90.23
1717.06                                90.23
                                       30.09,
Ch. 1724                               36.01,
                                       93.005
Ch. 1728                               30.09
1901.021                               33.01
1901.031                               33.01
1901.26                                31.026
Ch. 1905                               Ch. 31
1905.01                                33.01,
                                       33.04
1905.03                                33.01,
                                       33.04
1905.03(C)                             33.01,
                                       33.04
1905.031                               33.01,
                                       33.04
1905.031(C)                            33.01,
                                       33.04
1905.032                               33.01
                                       Ch. 33,
1905.05                                33.01—
                                       33.04
1905.20                                33.02
1905.201                               33.02
1905.21                                33.03
Ch. 2125                               36.05
2151.27                                92.13
2151.356 through 2151.358              92.13
2151.86                                35.02
2152.19                                36.01,
                                       36.03
2152.20                                36.01,
                                       36.03
2301.51 through 2301.58                36.01
2305.16                                36.04
2323.51(A)                             30.09
Ch. 2506                               154.075
2705.01                                33.20
2705.02                                33.21
2705.03                                33.22
2705.031                               33.23
2705.04                                33.24
2705.05                                33.24
2705.06                                33.26
2705.07                                33.27
2705.08                                33.28
2705.09                                33.29
2705.10                                33.30
2743.01                                30.15
2743.02                                36.02
Ch. 2744                               36.02
2744.01                                36.01
2744.02                                36.02
2744.03                                36.02,
                                       36.03
2744.04                                36.04
2744.05                                36.02,
                                       36.05
2744.06                                36.06
2744.07                                36.07
2744.08                                36.08
2744.081                               36.08
2744.082                               36.08
2744.09                                36.09
2901.01                                130.02
2901.02                                130.03
2901.03                                130.04
2901.04                                130.05
2901.05                                130.13
2901.06                                130.14
2901.08                                130.15
2901.09                                130.21
2901.11                                130.16
2901.13                                130.06
2901.20                                72.116,
                                       72.131
2901.21                                130.07
2901.22                                130.08
2901.23                                130.09
2901.24                                130.10
2903.05                                135.02
2903.06                                135.03
2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E)-(G) 135.03
2903.09                                135.01
2903.10                                135.19
2903.11                                33.01
2903.12                                33.01
2903.13                                33.01,
                                       135.04
2903.14                                135.04
2903.16                                135.19
2903.21                                135.06
2903.211                               33.01,
                                       135.06
2903.216                               135.11
2903.22                                135.06
2903.31                                135.17
2903.311(B), (C)                       135.17
2903.33                                135.20
2903.34                                135.20
2903.341                               135.20
2903.35                                135.20
2903.36                                135.20
2905.03                                135.07
2905.12                                135.09
2907.01                                133.01
2907.04                                133.02
2907.06                                133.03
2907.071                               133.22
2907.08                                133.05
2907.09                                133.04
2907.10                                133.06
2907.23                                133.07
2907.231                               133.07
2907.24                                133.08
2907.241                               133.08
2907.25                                133.09
2907.26                                133.13
2907.31                                133.10
2907.311                               133.11
2907.33                                133.12
2907.35                                133.10
2907.36                                133.14
2907.37                                133.15
2907.38                                133.16
2907.39                                133.17
2907.40                                133.18
2909.01                                131.01
2909.02                                91.37
                                       35.02,
2909.03                                91.37,
                                       131.02
2909.06                                131.03
2909.07                                131.04
2909.08(A) through (E)                 131.05
2909.09                                131.03
2909.101                               131.35
2909.11(B) through (D)                 131.02
2909.31                                136.21
2911.21                                131.06
2911.211                               33.01,
                                       131.06
2911.23                                131.06
2911.32                                131.07
2913.01                                131.01
2913.02                                131.08
2913.03                                131.09
2913.04                                131.10
2913.07                                131.33
2913.11                                131.11
2913.21                                131.12
2913.31(B), (C)(2)                     131.26
2913.32                                131.27
2913.33                                131.13
2913.34                                131.29
2913.40                                131.23
2913.401                               131.23
2913.41                                131.14
2913.42                                131.15
2913.43                                131.16
2913.44                                131.28
2913.441                               132.11
2913.45                                131.17
2913.46                                93.002
2913.47                                131.23
2913.48                                131.23
2913.51                                131.18
2913.61(B) through (E)                 131.19
2913.71                                131.20
2913.72                                131.25
2913.73                                131.25
2915.01                                134.01
2915.02(A) through (G), (K)            134.02
2915.03                                134.03
2915.04                                134.03
2915.05                                134.05
2915.06                                134.14
2915.061                               134.14
2915.09                                134.06
2915.091                               134.10
2915.092                               134.11
2915.093                               134.12
2915.094                               134.13
2915.10                                134.07
2915.11                                134.08
2915.12                                134.09
2915.13                                134.12
2915.14                                134.15
2917.01                                132.10
2917.03                                132.01
2917.031                               132.01
2917.04                                132.02
2917.05                                132.03
2917.11                                132.03
2917.12                                132.05
2917.13                                132.06
2917.14                                132.17
2917.21                                132.07
2917.211                               133.21
2917.31                                132.08
2917.32                                132.08
2917.40                                132.13
2917.41                                132.14
2919.01                                135.10
2919.21                                135.13
2919.22(A) through (E), (H)            135.14
2919.224                               135.12
2919.23                                135.15
2919.231                               135.15
2919.24                                135.18
2919.25                                33.01,
                                       135.16
2919.26                                33.01
2919.27                                33.01,
                                       135.23
                                       36.01,
2921.01                                36.02,
                                       136.01
2921.04                                136.17
2921.13                                136.02
2921.14                                136.14
2921.15                                136.19
2921.21                                136.03
2921.22                                136.04
2921.23                                136.05
2921.24                                136.16
2921.25                                136.16
2921.29                                136.21
2921.31                                136.06
2921.32                                136.07
2921.321                               90.08,
                                       136.15
2921.33                                136.08
2921.331(A) through (C), (E), (F)      70.02
2921.36                                136.13
2921.37                                136.13
2921.42                                136.09
2921.43                                136.10
2921.44                                136.11
2921.45                                136.12
2921.51                                132.12
2921.52(A) through (D)                 136.18
2923.02                                130.11
2923.03                                130.12
2923.11                                137.01
2923.11(M)                             91.01
2923.12                                92.14,
                                       137.02
2923.121                               92.14
2923.1211(B), (C)                      137.13
2923.1212                              137.13
2923.122(C) through (G)                137.11
2923.126                               137.13
2923.131                               137.12
2923.15                                137.03
2923.16                                137.04
2923.162                               137.09
2923.17                                91.11,
                                       91.36
2923.18                                137.10
2923.19                                137.06
2923.20                                137.07
2923.201                               137.14
2923.211                               137.08
2923.24                                137.05
2923.41 et seq.                        93.003
2923.41                                93.003
2923.43                                93.003
2925.01                                71.45,
                                       138.01
2925.03                                93.002
2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)           138.06
2925.11                                138.03
2925.12                                138.04
2925.13                                138.05
2925.14                                138.13
2925.141                               138.13
2925.31                                138.07
2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G)        138.10
2925.33                                138.10
2925.34                                138.20
2925.36(A)-(D), (F)                    138.08
2925.37(A), (G)                        138.12
2925.50                                138.09
2925.51                                138.11
2925.511                               138.11
2925.55                                138.18
2925.56                                138.18
2925.57                                92.28,
                                       138.18
2925.57(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b)         92.28
2925.58                                92.28,
                                       138.18
2925.62                                138.21
2927.01                                135.28
2927.02                                135.25
2927.021                               92.28,
                                       135.25
2927.021(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b)        92.28
2927.022                               92.28,
                                       135.25
2927.023                               135.25
2927.024                               135.25
2927.03                                135.21
2927.11                                131.36
2927.12                                135.22
2927.15                                135.29
2927.17                                133.19
2927.27                                130.20
2929.21                                130.99
2929.21 to 2929.28                     72.131
2929.22                                130.18
2929.23                                133.99
2929.24                                130.99
2929.25                                130.99
2929.26                                130.99
2929.27                                130.99
2929.28                                130.99
2929.31                                130.99
2929.37                                30.14
2929.41                                130.19
2929.43(D)                             34.05
2935.01                                34.15,
                                       91.09
2935.031                               Ch. 34
2935.041                               131.22
2935.081                               34.15
2935.10(B)                             33.21
2935.11                                33.21
2935.28                                70.08
2935.36                                92.13
2935.36(E)                             130.02
2937.08                                33.01
2938.04                                33.01
2941.1413                              73.01
2941.25                                72.131
2951.02                                36.01,
                                       36.03
2953.52                                92.13
2981.07                                131.30
2981.11                                130.17
2981.11 to 2981.13                     91.09
2981.12                                130.17
2981.13(A)                             130.17
3109.051                               33.23
3109.11                                33.23
3109.12                                33.23
3109.19                                33.21
3111.41                                33.21
3111.81                                33.21
3123.54                                33.23
3125.01                                33.23
3303.07                                35.02,
                                       35.13
3313.75 through 3313.78                151.005,
                                       151.060
Ch. 3314                               36.01
3314.07                                36.02,
                                       36.03
3319.301                               36.01
3345.32                                90.32
3501.28                                97.02
3501.36                                97.02
Ch. 3701                               154.051
3701.07                                151.005
3701.81                                135.27
3701.82                                91.40
3701.99(B)                             91.40
3701.99(C)                             135.27
3704.03                                91.55
3704.11                                91.57
3715.05                                138.18
3715.06                                138.18
3716.11                                135.24
3716.99(C)                             135.24
3719.01                                91.01
3719.011                               92.13
3719.08(A), (E)                        138.14
3719.172(A), (B)                       138.15
3719.19                                138.09
3719.99(C)                             138.14
3719.99(E)                             138.15
Ch. 3721                               151.005
3731.01                                92.01,
                                       92.13
3731.03                                92.01
                                       50.24,
Ch. 3734                               93.042,
                                       93.056,
                                       154.034
3734.01                                36.01
3734.12                                36.01
3735.67 to 3735.70                     30.09
Ch. 3737                               Ch. 91
3737.14(A)                             35.09
3737.14(B)                             35.10
3737.14(C)                             35.10
3737.14(D)                             35.10
3737.24                                35.08
3737.41 et seq.                        91.36
3737.51(B) through (H)                 91.99
3737.61                                91.37
3737.62                                91.38
3737.63                                91.39
3737.64                                35.11
3737.65                                35.12
3737.65(A), (B)                        35.12
3737.66                                35.13
                                       91.01,
3737.82                                91.10,
                                       91.40
3737.99(C)                             91.37
3737.99(D)                             35.11,
                                       91.38
3737.99(E)                             35.12,
                                       91.39
3737.99(G)                             35.13
                                       Ch. 91,
Ch. 3743                               91.01,
                                       91.03
3743.01                                91.01,
                                       91.07
3743.01(B)(1)                          91.04
3743.02 through 3743.08                91.01,
                                       91.02
3743.03                                91.07
3743.04(I)                             91.01
3743.05                                91.04
3743.06                                91.04
3743.06(C)                             91.04
3743.07                                91.04
3743.08                                91.04
3743.08(B)(2)                          91.04
3743.15 through 3743.21                91.01,
                                       91.02
3743.16                                91.07
3743.17(G)                             91.01
3743.18                                91.04
3743.19                                91.04
3743.19(D)                             91.04
3743.20                                91.04
3743.21                                91.04
3743.21(B)(1)                          91.04
3743.21(B)(2)                          91.04
3743.25                                91.10
3743.40                                91.02,
                                       91.07
3743.44                                91.02,
                                       91.05
3743.45                                91.02,
                                       91.05
3743.50 through 3743.55                91.01—
                                       91.03
3743.51                                91.07,
                                       91.10
3743.53(B) and (E)                     91.03,
                                       91.06
3743.53(C) and (D)                     91.06
3743.54                                91.06,
                                       91.10
3743.54(B) through (F)                 91.03
3743.541                               91.03,
                                       91.06
3743.55                                91.06
3743.56                                91.06
3743.58                                91.07
3743.60(A)                             91.04
3743.60(E) through (L)                 91.04
3743.60(I)                             91.99
3743.61(E) through (L)                 91.04
3743.61(I)                             91.99
3743.63                                91.05
3743.64(A), (B), and (H)               91.06
3743.64(C) through (G)                 91.06
3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H)             91.02
3743.65(F)                             91.02
3743.66                                91.07
3743.68                                91.09
3743.68(D)                             91.09
                                       91.01,
3743.80                                91.02,
                                       91.08
3743.99(C), (D), (F) through (H)       91.99
3746.24                                36.02,
                                       36.03
3750.01                                36.01
3750.03                                36.01
3767.01                                92.27,
                                       93.002
3767.01 through 3767.11                93.003
3767.02                                93.003
3767.03                                93.003
3767.03 through 3767.11                93.003
3767.04                                93.003
3767.05                                93.003
3767.05(D) or (E)                      92.27
3767.06                                93.003
3767.07                                93.003
3767.13                                93.004
3767.16                                93.038
3767.18                                93.039
3767.201                               70.09
3767.29                                93.041
3767.32                                93.042
3767.99(A)                             93.003
3767.99(B)                             93.041
3767.99(C)                             93.004,
                                       93.042
                                       70.09,
3767.99(D)                             93.038,
                                       93.039
Chapter 3770                           97.02
3770.21                                97.02
3772.01                                97.02
3773.06                                137.09
3773.99(A)                             137.09
3780.36                                138.02
3780.99                                138.02
Ch. 3781                               91.10
3781.031                               Ch. 93
3781.10                                91.35,
                                       91.40
3781.107                               91.34
3781.108(A), (B)                       91.35
3781.55                                133.04
3791.02                                91.34,
                                       91.35
3791.03                                91.34,
                                       91.35
3791.031                               135.26
3791.04                                91.10
4115.02                                35.07
4115.31 through 4115.35                32.25
Ch. 4123                               36.03
                                       92.03—
                                       92.05,
Ch. 4301                               92.08,
                                       92.11—
                                       92.13,
                                       92.19
                                       91.01,
                                       92.01,
                                       92.04,
4301.01                                92.15,
                                       92.21,
                                       92.23,
                                       95.05
4301.01(B)(3)                          92.01
4301.10(A)(6)                          92.03
4301.17                                92.04
4301.171                               92.07
4301.20                                92.02
4301.21                                92.01,
                                       92.03
4301.22                                92.03,
                                       92.04
4301.22(A)                             92.04,
                                       93.002
4301.22(A)(1)                          92.13
4301.22(A)(1) or (A)(2)                92.29
4301.244                               92.01
4301.251                               92.04
4301.32                                Ch. 92
4301.351                               92.04
4301.58                                92.05
4301.60                                92.06
4301.61                                92.15,
                                       92.28
4301.61(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b)         92.28
4301.611                               92.28,
                                       92.29
4301.62                                92.07
4301.62(D)                             92.16
4301.63                                92.08,
                                       92.13
4301.63 to 4301.636                    92.29
4301.631                               92.09
4301.633                               92.11,
                                       92.13
4301.633 through 4301.637              92.04,
                                       92.13
4301.634                               92.12,
                                       92.13
4301.637                               92.14
4301.638                               92.04,
                                       92.13
4301.639                               92.29
4301.639(A), (C)                       92.15
4301.64                                92.16
4301.65                                92.10
4301.66                                92.18
4301.67                                92.19
4301.68                                92.20
4301.69                                92.13,
                                       92.29
4301.69(A)                             93.002
                                       92.13,
4301.691                               92.14,
                                       92.29
4301.70                                92.99
4301.74                                92.27
4301.80                                92.01
4301.82                                92.07
                                       92.07,
4301.99(A)                             92.10,
                                       92.99
                                       92.04,
4301.99(B)                             92.09,
                                       92.16,
                                       92.19
                                       92.03,
                                       92.05,
                                       92.06,
4301.99(C)                             92.11,
                                       92.13,
                                       92.18,
                                       92.20,
                                       92.27
4301.99(D), (H)                        92.04
4301.99(E)                             92.08,
                                       92.09
4301.99(F)                             92.12
4301.99(I)                             92.13
4301.99(J)                             92.10
4301.991                               92.99
                                       Ch. 92,
                                       92.05,
                                       92.14,
Ch. 4303                               92.19,
                                       92.21,
                                       92.26,
                                       92.28
4303.201                               92.07
4303.202(D)(2)                         92.17
4303.208(C)                            92.17
4303.25                                92.01,
                                       92.05
4303.26                                92.03
4303.27                                92.03
4303.271                               92.03
4303.40                                92.26
4303.99(D)                             92.17
4313.02                                97.02
4399.09                                92.21
4399.10                                92.22
4399.14                                92.23
4399.15                                92.24
4399.16                                92.25
4399.99(A)                             92.25
4399.99(B)                             92.21
4399.99(C)                             92.22
4399.99(D)                             92.23
4399.99(E)                             92.24
4501.01                                151.090
4501.01(LL)                            70.01
4501.01(TT)                            72.061
4503.05                                71.02
4503.11(A)                             71.01
4503.11(D)                             71.01
4503.111(A), (C)                       71.01
4503.111(B)                            71.01
4503.12(A), (D)                        71.01
4503.13                                Ch. 33
4503.21(A)                             71.01
4503.21(B)                             71.01
4503.236                               71.03
4503.24                                92.07
4505.101                               94.01
4505.101(B)                            94.01
4505.18                                71.04
Ch. 4506                               36.02
4506.01                                71.45
4506.011                               71.46
4506.03(A) - (C)                       71.48
4506.04(A), (B)                        71.47
4506.04(C)                             71.47
4506.05(D)                             71.48
4506.10(A), (E)                        71.49
4506.12(I)                             71.47
4506.12(J)                             71.47
4506.15(A)                             71.50
4506.15(B)                             71.50
4506.15(C)                             71.50
4506.17(H)                             71.50
4506.17(N)                             71.50
4506.19                                71.51
4506.20                                71.51
4506.23                                71.50
4506.99                                71.99
Ch. 4507                               36.02
4507.02(A)                             71.22
4507.03                                71.22
4507.04                                71.22
4507.05(F)                             71.21
4507.05(I)                             71.21
4507.071(B) - (I)                      71.21
4507.071(J)                            71.21
4507.091                               Ch. 33
4507.213                               71.22
4507.30                                71.20
4507.31(A)                             71.21
4507.31(B)                             71.21
4507.321                               71.23
4507.35                                71.26
4507.36                                71.27
4507.50 to 4507.52                     92.29
4507.50 through 4507.52                92.28
4507.99                                71.99
4509.102                               136.02
4509.74                                73.33
4510.02(A)(6)                          92.12
4510.02(A)(7)                          92.12
4510.021                               33.23
4510.037(J)                            71.28
                                       71.28,
4510.04                                71.30—
                                       71.32
4510.05                                71.25
4510.11                                71.28
4510.111                               71.28
4510.12                                71.29
4510.14                                71.30
4510.14(A)                             33.01
4510.15                                71.25
4510.16                                33.01,
                                       71.31
4510.21                                71.32
4510.036                               72.131
4510.33                                Ch. 92
4510.44                                73.08
                                       36.01,
4511.01                                70.01,
                                       92.07
4511.03                                36.02,
                                       70.03
4511.031                               70.38
4511.04                                70.04
4511.041                               70.04
4511.042                               70.04
4511.05                                70.05
4511.051                               70.06
4511.08                                70.07
4511.13                                70.31
4511.131                               70.32
4511.132                               70.33
4511.14                                70.34
4511.16                                70.35
4511.17                                70.36
4511.18                                70.37
4511.181                               33.04,
                                       73.01
4511.19                                33.01,
                                       33.04
4511.19(A) through (M)                 73.01
4511.191(A)                            73.02
4511.191(D)                            73.02
4511.192                               73.02
4511.194                               73.03
4511.20                                73.05
4511.201                               73.06
4511.202                               73.07
4511.203                               71.24
4511.204                               70.99,
                                       72.131
4511.205                               72.132
4511.21(A) through (G)                 73.10
4511.21(O)                             73.10
4511.21(P)                             73.10
4511.211(A) through (E)                73.10
4511.211(F)                            73.10
4511.213                               72.120
4511.214                               73.16
4511.215                               73.16
4511.216                               73.16
4511.22                                73.11
4511.23                                73.13
4511.24                                73.12
4511.25                                72.001
4511.251                               73.09
4511.26                                72.003
4511.27                                72.004
4511.28                                72.005
4511.29                                72.006
4511.30                                72.007
4511.31                                72.008
4511.32                                72.009
4511.33                                72.010
4511.34                                72.011
4511.35                                72.012
4511.36                                72.013
4511.37                                72.014
4511.38                                72.015
4511.39                                72.016
4511.40                                72.017
4511.41                                72.030
4511.42                                72.031
4511.43                                72.032
4511.431(A)                            72.033
4511.431(B)                            72.033
4511.432(A) through (C), (E)           72.033
4511.432(D)                            72.033
4511.44                                72.034
4511.441                               72.035
4511.45                                72.036
4511.451                               72.037
4511.452                               72.038
4511.454                               72.036
4511.46                                72.039
4511.47                                72.040
4511.48                                72.041
4511.481                               72.060
4511.49                                72.055
4511.491                               72.059
4511.50                                72.056
4511.51                                72.056
4511.511                               72.058
4511.512                               72.061
4511.513                               72.062
4511.514                               72.063
4511.52                                75.01
4511.521                               75.02
4511.522                               75.10
4511.53                                75.03
4511.54                                75.04
4511.55                                75.04
4511.56                                75.06
4511.60                                72.001
4511.61                                72.075
4511.62                                72.076
4511.63                                72.077
4511.64                                72.078
4511.65                                70.10
4511.66                                76.01
4511.661                               76.02
4511.67                                76.03
4511.68                                76.04
4511.681                               76.06
4511.69                                76.05
4511.70                                72.115
4511.701                               72.116
4511.71(A)                             72.117
4511.71(B)                             72.117
4511.711(A)                            72.118
4511.711(B)                            72.118
4511.712                               72.119
4511.713(A)                            72.118
4511.713(B)                            72.118
4511.714(A), (B)                       72.117
4511.714(C)                            72.117
4511.714(D)                            72.117
4511.72(A)                             72.120
4511.72(B)                             72.120
4511.73                                72.121
4511.74(A), (B)                        72.122
4511.74(C)                             72.122
4511.75                                72.090
4511.751                               72.091
4511.76(C), (H), (I)                   72.092
4511.761                               72.093
4511.762                               72.094
4511.763                               72.095
4511.764                               72.096
4511.77                                72.097
4511.771                               72.098
4511.772                               72.099
4511.79                                73.04
4511.81                                72.116
4511.81(A) through (H), (K), (L)       72.123
4511.82(A), (B), (D)                   72.122
4511.82(C)                             72.122
4511.84                                72.126
4511.85                                72.127
4511.98                                72.131
4511.99                                70.99
4511.991                               70.99,
                                       72.131
4513.02(A), (H)                        74.01
4513.021                               74.02
4513.03                                74.03
4513.04                                74.04
4513.05                                74.05
4513.06                                74.06
4513.07                                74.07
4513.071                               74.08
4513.08                                74.09
4513.09                                74.10
4513.10                                74.11
4513.11                                74.12
4513.11(I)                             74.12
4513.111                               74.12
4513.111(E)                            74.12
4513.112                               74.12
4513.113                               74.12
4513.114                               74.12
4513.115                               74.12
4513.12                                74.13
4513.13                                74.14
4513.14                                74.15
4513.15                                74.16
4513.16                                74.17
4513.17                                74.18
4513.17(F)                             74.18
4513.171                               74.18
4513.171(B)                            74.18
4513.18                                74.19
4513.181                               74.20
4513.182                               74.21
4513.19                                74.22
4513.20                                74.23
4513.201                               74.24
4513.202                               74.25
4513.21                                74.26
4513.22                                74.27
4513.23                                74.28
4513.24                                74.29
4513.241(C) through (J)                74.31
4513.241(K)                            74.31
4513.25                                74.30
4513.26                                74.31
4513.261                               74.32
4513.262                               74.33
4513.263                               72.124
4513.27                                74.34
4513.28                                74.35
4513.29                                74.36
4513.29(A), (B)                        77.06
4513.30                                74.51
4513.31                                74.52,
                                       77.08
4513.32                                74.53,
                                       77.07
4513.33                                74.54
4513.34                                74.50
4513.36                                73.15
4513.361                               73.14
4513.50                                74.37
4513.51(A), (B)                        74.37
4513.51(D)                             74.37
4513.60                                94.01,
                                       94.05
4513.601                               94.01
                                       94.01,
4513.61                                94.02,
                                       94.05
4513.61 to 4513.65                     94.01
                                       94.01,
4513.62                                94.02,
                                       94.03
4513.63                                94.04
4513.64                                94.05
4513.65                                94.06
4513.66                                70.12,
                                       94.02
4513.68                                70.12
                                       74.11,
                                       74.21,
                                       74.23—
                                       74.25,
                                       74.30,
4513.99                                74.31,
                                       74.34,
                                       74.36,
                                       74.50—
                                       74.53,
                                       77.07
4519.01                                36.01,
                                       75.25
4519.02                                75.34
4519.20(A), (B)                        75.26
4519.20(C)                             75.26
4519.22(A)                             75.26
4519.22(B)                             75.26
4519.40                                75.27
4519.401                               73.16
4519.41                                75.28
4519.44                                75.29
4519.45                                75.30
4519.46                                75.31
4519.47                                75.32
4519.48                                75.33
4519.66                                75.35
Ch. 4521                               33.01
4549.02                                73.30
4549.021                               73.31
4549.03                                73.32
4549.05                                70.11
4549.08                                71.06
4549.10                                71.07
4549.11(A)                             71.01
4549.11(B)                             71.01
4549.12(A)                             71.01
4549.12(B)                             71.01
4549.18                                71.05
4549.20                                74.38
4582.02                                36.01
4582.26                                36.01
4703.01 to 4703.19                     154.010
4729.01                                92.01,
                                       92.13
4729.27                                92.01
Ch. 4715                               151.063
Ch. 4725                               151.063
Ch. 4731                               151.063
4731.481                               138.17
4731.99(F)                             138.17
Ch. 4733                               154.010
4734.161                               138.17
4734.99(B)                             138.17
4737.05                                94.03
4737.05 through 4737.12                94.06
4737.05 to 4737.12                     93.056
4738.01                                94.03
Ch. 4741                               90.23
4741.01                                90.23
4765.55                                35.02,
                                       35.13
4765.55(C)(1)                          35.02
4765.55(C)(2)                          35.02
4765.55(C)(3)                          35.02
Ch. 4781                               154.010
4905.03(A), (C) to (E), (G)            72.131
Ch. 4906                               154.034
4921.32                                77.12
4927.01                                97.05
4933.18                                131.32
4933.19                                131.32
5101.37                                33.21
5104.01                                151.005
Ch. 5119.70 et seq.                    151.005
5160.37                                36.05
5301.252                               93.005
5321.04                                93.020
5321.05                                93.020
Ch. 5502                               31.027
5502.13 to 5502.19                     92.03
5513.01                                32.25
5577.02                                74.55
5577.03                                74.56
5577.04                                74.56
5577.041                               74.56
5577.042                               74.61
5577.043                               74.61
5577.044                               74.61
5577.045                               74.61
5577.05                                74.57,
                                       77.03
5577.06                                74.57,
                                       77.03
5577.07                                77.13
5577.10                                74.58,
                                       77.16
5577.11                                74.59,
                                       77.05
5577.12                                74.60,
                                       77.17
5577.14                                77.18
5577.15                                74.53,
                                       77.07
5577.99(A)                             74.55
                                       74.56,
5577.99(C)                             74.57,
                                       77.03
5577.99(D)                             74.58,
                                       77.16
5577.99(E)                             74.59
5589.08                                72.128
5589.081                               77.11
5589.12                                131.10
5589.99(B)                             72.128,
                                       131.10
5591.37                                36.02
Chapter 5701                           97.02
5703.056                               97.02,
                                       97.14
5703.056(B)(3)                         97.02
5705.08                                36.06
5705.12                                33.07,
                                       36.08
5705.14                                36.08
5705.15                                36.08
5705.16                                36.08
5709.40 to 5709.43                     30.09
5709.61 to 5709.69                     30.09
5709.73 to 5709.75                     30.09
5709.77 to 5709.81                     30.09
5717.011                               97.02,
                                       97.21
5717.03                                97.02
Ch. 5721                               93.005
Ch. 5722                               36.01
5722.01                                93.005
5722.10                                93.005
Ch. 5723                               93.005
5727.01                                97.05
5727.24                                97.02
5727.30                                97.02
5728.04                                77.20
5728.99(D)                             77.20
5733.46                                92.02
5739.01(M)                             91.34
5739.09(G)                             91.34
Chapter 5745                           97.02,
                                       97.03
5747.01                                97.02
5747.08(G)                             97.05
                                       50.24,
Ch. 6111                               93.042,
                                       93.056
6115.01                                30.09
6115.10                                30.09
                                       
 
REFERENCES TO OHIO ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
O.A.C. Code Section
O.A.C.                  Code Section
120-1-09                Ch. 33
Ch. 109:2-1             Ch. 34
Ch. 109:2-7             Ch. 34
Ch. 109:4-3             Ch. 131
Ch. 117-9               Ch. 30,
                        Ch. 32
901:5-27-06             93.055
901:5-37-01             93.055
Ch. 1301:7-7            Ch. 91,
                        91.36
Ch. 1301:7-7-01 et seq. Ch. 35
1301:7-7-01 et seq.     35.12
1501:31-15-03           Ch. 90
3301-35-08              73.10
Ch. 3301-83             72.092
3701-3-28 et seq.       Ch. 90
3745-17-09              91.55
3745-17-10              91.55
                        Ch. 91,
Ch. 3745-19             91.56,
                        91.58
3745-19-01              91.55
3745-19-02              91.56
3745-19-03              91.57
3745-19-04(C)(2)        91.58
3745-19-05              91.58
3745-20-03              91.58
Ch. 3745-25             91.56
Ch. 3745-31             91.55
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d)     91.57
Ch. 3745-77             91.55
4101:1-1                Ch. 93
4101:1-7-709.4          53.12
4101:2-1-09             Ch. 93
4301:1-1-49             92.17
4501:3-3-01             31.028
Ch. 4501-15             Ch. 74
4501-17-01              Ch. 74,
                        Ch. 75
4501-29-01              Ch. 74
Ch. 4501-37             74.33
Ch. 4501-41             74.31
Ch. 4501-43             74.02
4781-12                 154.034
4781-12-01(K)           154.010
Ch. 5501:2-1            74.50
                        
 
REFERENCES TO 1967 CODE
1967 Code Code Section
1967 Code Code Section
30.02     30.10
Ch. 31    32.13
32.01     31.002
32.02     31.075
32.05     31.028
33.01     31.077
33.03     31.079
33.08     33.06
33.10     31.002
33.11     31.003
33.16     35.02
33.17     35.15
33.18     35.14
34.01     37.01
35.03     30.11
35.04     37.02
50.01     50.01
50.02     50.02
50.03     50.03
50.04     50.04
50.05     50.05
50.06     50.06
50.07     50.07
50.08     50.08
50.09     50.09
50.10     50.10
50.11     50.11
50.12     50.12
50.13     50.13
50.14     50.14
50.15     50.15
50.16     50.16
50.17     50.17
50.18     50.18
50.19     50.19
50.20     50.20
50.21     50.21
50.22     50.22
50.23     50.23
50.24     50.24
50.25     50.25
50.26     50.26
50.27     50.27
50.28     50.28
50.29     50.29
50.30     50.30
51.01     51.01,
          95.25
51.02     51.02
51.03     51.03
51.04     51.04 
51.05     51.05
51.06     51.06,
          95.26
51.07     51.07,
          95.27
51.08     51.08
51.09     51.09
51.10     51.10
51.11     51.11
51.12     51.12
51.13     51.13
51.14     51.14
51.15     51.15
51.16     51.16
73.01     Ch. 78, Sch. VII
73.06     72.133
75.12     75.07
75.20     75.08
75.21     75.09
76.01     78.01,
          Ch. 79, Sch. I
76.02     Ch. 79, Sch. I
76.03     Ch. 78, Sch. I
76.04     Ch. 78, Sch. I
76.05     Ch. 78, Sch. II
76.06     Ch. 78, Sch. III
76.07     Ch. 78, Sch. IV
76.08     Ch. 78, Sch. V
76.09     Ch. 78, Sch. VI
76.10     Ch. 78, Sch. VI
76.11     Ch. 78, Sch. VII
76.12     Ch. 78, Sch. VIII
92.01     96.01
92.02     96.02
92.03     96.03
92.04     96.04
92.05     96.05
92.06     96.06
92.07     96.07
92.13     95.10
92.14     93.059
92.15     93.071
92.16     93.072
92.17     93.073
93.01     95.01
93.02     95.02
93.04     95.03
93.05     95.04
93.06     95.05
93.07     95.06
93.08     95.07
93.09     95.08
93.10     95.09
93.99     95.28
110.01    111.01
110.02    111.02
110.99    111.99
111.01    110.01
111.02    110.02
111.03    110.03
111.04    110.04
111.05    110.05
111.06    110.06
111.07    110.07
111.08    110.08
111.09    110.09
111.10    110.10
111.11    110.11
111.99    110.99
112.01    112.01
112.02    112.02
112.03    112.03
112.04    112.04
112.05    112.05
112.06    112.06
112.07    112.07
112.08    112.08
112.09    112.09
112.10    112.10
112.11    112.11
112.12    112.12
112.13    112.13
112.14    112.14
112.15    112.15
112.16    112.16
112.17    112.17
112.18    112.18
112.19    112.19
112.20    112.20
112.21    112.21
112.22    112.22
112.23    112.23
112.24    112.24
112.25    112.25
112.26    112.26
112.27    112.27
112.28    112.28
112.30    112.29
112.32    112.30
112.33    112.31
112.34    112.32
112.35    112.33
112.36    112.34
112.37    112.35
112.38    112.36
112.39    112.37
112.40    112.38
112.99    112.99
130.21    130.22
133.14    132.15
136.03    137.15
136.06    90.09
136.16    31.029
136.17    31.029
136.18    31.029
136.19    31.029
136.99(B) 31.029
          
 
REFERENCES TO 2000 CODE
2000 Code Code Section
2000 Code Code Section
10.01     10.01
10.02     10.02
10.03     10.03
10.04     10.04
10.05     10.05
10.06     10.06
10.07     10.07
10.08     10.08
10.09     10.09
10.10     10.10
10.11     10.11
10.12     10.12
10.13     10.13
10.14     10.14
10.15     10.15
10.16     10.16
10.17     10.17
10.18     10.18
10.99     10.99
30.01     30.01
30.02     30.02
30.03     30.03
30.04     30.04
30.05     30.05
30.06     30.06
30.07     30.07
30.08     30.08
30.09     30.09
30.12     30.12
30.13     30.13
30.14     30.14
30.15     30.15
31.01     31.001
31.04     31.004
31.10     31.020
31.11     31.021
31.12     31.022
31.13     31.022
31.14     31.024
31.15     31.025
31.16     31.026
31.17     31.027
31.50     31.060
31.51     31.061
31.52     31.062
31.61     31.076
32.01     32.01
32.02     32.02
32.03     32.03
32.04     32.04
32.05     32.05
32.06     32.06
32.07     32.07
32.08     32.08
32.09     32.09
32.10     32.10
32.11     32.11
32.12     32.12
32.25     32.25
32.26     32.26
32.27     32.27
32.28     32.28
32.29     32.29
33.01     33.01
33.02     33.02
33.03     33.03
33.04     33.04
33.05     33.04
33.06     33.07
33.20     33.20
33.21     33.21
33.22     33.22
33.24     33.24
33.25     33.25,
          33.99
33.26     33.26
33.27     33.27
33.28     33.28
33.29     33.29
33.30     33.30
33.35     33.23
34.01     34.01,
          34.02
34.03     34.03
34.04     34.04
34.05     34.05
34.06     34.06
34.07     34.07
34.08     34.08
34.09     34.09
34.10     34.10
34.11     34.11
34.12     34.12
34.13     34.13
34.14     34.14
34.15     34.15
35.01     35.01
35.02     35.02
35.03     35.03
35.04     35.04
35.05     35.05
35.06     35.06
35.07     35.07
35.08     35.08
35.09     35.09
35.10     35.10
35.11     35.11
35.12     35.12
35.13     35.13
36.01     36.01
36.02     36.02
36.03     36.03
36.04     36.04
36.05     36.05
36.06     36.06
36.07     36.07
36.08     36.08
36.09     36.09
37.20     31.005
37.25     37.03
37.30     37.04
51.17     51.17
53.01     52.01
53.02     52.02
53.03     52.03
54.01     53.01
54.02     53.02
54.03     53.03
54.04     53.04
54.05     53.05
54.06     53.06
54.07     53.07
54.08     53.08
54.09     53.09
54.10     53.10
54.11     53.11
54.12     53.12
55.01     54.01
55.02     54.02
55.03     54.03
55.04     54.04
55.05     54.05
55.06     54.06
55.07     54.07
55.08     54.08
55.09     54.09
55.10     54.10
55.11     54.11
55.12     54.12
55.13     54.13
55.14     54.14
55.15     54.15
55.16     54.16
55.17     54.17
55.18     54.18
55.19     54.19
55.20     54.20
55.21     54.21
55.22     54.22
55.23     54.23
55.24     54.24
55.25     54.25
55.26     54.26
55.27     54.27
55.28     54.28
55.29     54.29
55.30     54.30
55.31     54.31
55.32     54.32
55.33     54.33
55.34     54.34
55.35     54.35
55.36     54.36
55.37     54.37
55.38     54.38
55.39     54.39
55.40     54.40
55.41     54.41
55.42     54.42
55.43     54.43
55.44     54.44
55.45     54.45
56.01     55.01
56.02     55.02
56.03     55.03
56.04     55.04
56.05     55.05
56.06     55.06
56.07     55.07
56.08     55.08
56.09     55.09
56.10     55.10
56.11     55.11
56.12     55.12
56.13     55.13
56.14     55.14
56.15     55.15
56.16     55.16
56.17     55.17
56.18     55.18
56.19     55.19
56.20     55.20
56.21     55.21
56.22     55.22
56.23     55.23
56.24     55.24
56.25     55.25
56.26     55.26
56.27     55.27
56.28     55.28
56.29     55.29
56.30     55.30
56.31     55.31
56.32     55.32
56.33     55.33
56.34     55.34
56.35     55.35
56.36     55.36
56.37     55.37
56.38     55.38
56.39     55.39
56.40     55.40
56.41     55.41
56.42     55.42
56.43     55.43
56.44     55.44
56.45     55.45
70.01     70.01
70.02     70.02
70.03     70.03
70.04     70.04
70.05     70.05
70.06     70.06
70.07     70.07
70.08     70.08
70.09     70.09
70.10     70.10
70.11     70.11
70.20     70.30
70.21     70.31
70.22     70.32
70.23     70.33
70.24     70.34
70.26     70.35
70.27     70.36
70.28     70.37
70.29     70.38
70.99     70.99
71.01     71.01
71.02     71.02
71.03     71.03
71.04     71.04
71.05     71.05
71.06     71.06
71.07     71.07
71.10     71.20
71.11     71.21
71.12     71.22
71.13     71.23
71.14     71.24
71.15     71.25
71.16     71.26
71.17     71.27
71.18     71.28
71.19     71.29
71.20     71.30
71.21     71.31
71.22     71.32
71.25     71.45
71.26     71.46
71.27     71.47
71.28     71.48
71.29     71.49
71.30     71.50
71.31     71.51
71.32     71.52
71.99     71.99
72.01     72.001
72.02     72.002
72.03     72.003
72.04     72.004
72.05     72.005
72.06     72.006
72.07     72.007
72.08     72.008
72.09     72.009
72.10     72.010
72.11     72.011
72.12     72.012
72.13     72.013
72.14     72.014
72.15     72.015
72.16     72.016
72.17     72.017
72.20     72.030
72.21     72.031
72.22     72.032
72.23     72.033
72.24     72.034
72.25     72.035
72.26     72.036
72.27     72.037
72.28     72.038
72.29     72.039
72.30     72.040
72.31     72.041
72.35     72.055
72.36     72.056
72.37     72.057
72.38     72.058
72.39     72.059
72.40     72.060
72.41     72.061
72.45     72.075
72.46     72.076
72.47     72.077
72.48     72.078
72.55     72.115
72.56     72.116
72.57     72.117
72.58     72.118
72.59     72.119
72.60     72.120
72.61     72.121
72.62     72.122
72.63     72.123
72.64     72.124
72.65     72.125
72.66     72.126
72.67     72.127
72.68     72.128
72.80     72.090
72.81     72.091
72.82     72.092
72.83     72.093
72.84     72.094
72.85     72.095
72.86     72.096
72.87     72.097
72.88     72.098
72.89     72.099
73.01     73.01
73.011    73.02
73.012    73.03
73.02     73.04
73.03     73.08
73.05     73.05
73.06     73.06
73.07     73.07
73.10     73.10
73.11     73.11
73.12     73.12
73.13     73.09
73.14     73.13
73.15     73.15
73.16     73.14
73.20     73.30
73.21     73.31
73.22     73.32
73.23     73.33
74.01     74.01
74.02     74.02
74.03     74.03
74.04     74.04
74.05     74.05
74.06     74.06
74.07     74.07
74.08     74.08
74.09     74.09
74.10     74.10
74.11     74.11
74.12     74.12
74.13     74.13
74.14     74.14
74.15     74.15
74.16     74.16
74.17     74.17
74.18     74.18
74.19     74.19
74.20     74.20
74.21     74.21
74.22     74.22,
          74.32
74.23     74.23
74.24     74.24
74.25     74.25
74.26     74.26
74.27     74.27
74.28     74.28
74.29     74.29
74.30     74.30
74.31     74.31
74.33     74.33
74.34     74.34
74.35     74.35
74.36     74.38
75.01     75.01
75.02     75.02
75.03     75.03
75.04     75.04
75.05     75.05
75.06     75.06
75.25     75.25
75.26     75.26
75.27     75.27
75.28     75.28
75.29     75.29
75.30     75.30
75.31     75.31
75.32     75.32
75.33     75.33
75.34     75.34
75.36     75.35
76.01     76.01
76.02     76.02
76.03     76.03
76.04     76.04
76.05     76.05
76.06     76.06
76.07     76.14
76.08     76.13
76.09     76.15
77.01     77.01
77.02     77.02
77.03     77.03
77.04     77.03
77.05     77.05
77.06     77.06
77.07     77.07
77.08     77.08
77.09     77.09
77.10     77.10
77.11     77.11
77.13     77.12
77.14     77.13
77.15     77.14
77.16     77.15
77.17     77.16
77.18     77.17
77.19     77.18
77.20     77.18
77.21     77.20
77.22     77.21
77.23     77.22
77.40     77.40
77.41     77.41
77.42     77.42
77.43     77.43
77.44     77.44
77.45     77.45
77.46     77.46
77.47     77.47
77.48     77.48
77.49     77.49
77.99     77.99
90.01     90.01
90.02     90.02
90.03     90.03
90.04     90.04
90.05     90.05
90.06     90.06
90.07     90.07
90.08     90.08
90.10     90.20
90.11     90.21
90.12     90.22
90.13     90.23
90.14     90.24
90.15     90.24
90.16     90.26
90.17     90.27
90.18     90.28
90.19     90.29
90.20     90.30
90.21     90.31
90.22     90.32
90.23     90.33
90.24     90.34
90.25     90.35
90.99     90.99
91.01     91.01
91.02     91.02
91.03     91.03
91.04     91.04
91.05     91.05
91.06     91.06
91.07     91.07
91.08     91.08
91.09     91.09
91.10     91.10
91.20     91.11
91.21     91.12
91.30     91.30
91.31     91.31
91.32     91.32
91.33     91.33
91.34     91.34
91.35     91.35
91.36     91.36
91.37     91.37
91.38     91.38
91.39     91.39
91.40     91.40
91.55     91.55
91.56     91.56
91.57     91.57
91.58     91.58
91.99     91.99
92.01     92.01
92.02     92.02
92.03     92.03
92.04     92.04
92.05     92.05
92.06     92.06
92.07     92.07
92.08     92.08
92.09     92.09
92.10     92.10
92.11     92.11
92.12     92.12
92.13     92.13
92.14     92.14
92.15     92.15
92.16     92.16
92.17     92.17
92.18     92.18
92.19     92.19
92.20     92.20
92.21     92.21
92.22     92.22
92.23     92.23
92.24     92.24
92.25     92.25
92.26     92.26
92.27     92.27
92.28     92.28
92.29     92.29
92.99     92.99
93.01     93.001
93.02     93.002
93.03     93.003
93.04     93.004
93.05     93.005
93.06     93.006
93.10     93.020
93.11     93.021
93.12     93.022
93.13     93.023
93.14     93.024
93.20     93.035
93.21     93.036
93.22     93.037
93.23     93.038
93.24     93.039
93.25     93.040
93.26     93.041
93.27     93.042
93.28     93.043
93.40     93.055
93.41     93.056
93.42     93.057
93.43     93.058
93.44     93.059
93.99     93.999
95.01     94.01
95.02     94.02
95.03     94.03
95.04     94.04
95.05     94.05
95.06     94.06
96.12     95.11
96.13     95.12
96.14     95.13
97.20     96.20
97.21     96.21
97.22     96.22
97.23     96.23
97.24     96.24
97.25     96.25
97.26     96.26,
          96.99
113.45    112.45
130.01    130.01
130.02    130.02
130.03    130.03
130.04    130.04
130.05    130.05
130.06    130.06
130.07    130.07
130.08    130.08
130.09    130.09
130.10    130.10
130.11    130.11
130.12    130.12
130.13    130.13
130.14    130.14
130.15    130.15
130.16    130.16
130.17    130.17
130.18    130.18
130.19    130.19
130.99    130.99
131.01    131.01
131.02    131.02
131.03    131.03
131.04    131.04
131.05    131.05
131.06    131.06
131.07    131.07
131.08    131.08
131.09    131.09
131.10    131.10
131.11    131.11
131.12    131.12
131.13    131.13
131.14    131.14
131.15    131.15
131.16    131.16
131.17    131.17
131.18    131.18
131.19    131.19
131.20    131.20
131.21    131.21
131.22    131.22
131.23    131.23
131.24    131.24
131.25    131.25
131.26    131.26
131.27    131.27
131.28    131.28
131.29    131.29
131.31    131.34
131.32    131.33
132.01    132.01
132.02    132.02
132.03    132.03
132.04    132.04
132.05    132.05
132.06    132.06
132.07    132.07
132.08    132.08
132.09    132.09
132.10    132.10
132.11    132.11
132.12    132.12
132.13    132.13
133.01    133.01
133.02    133.02
133.03    133.03
133.05    133.05
133.06    133.04
133.07    133.07
133.08    133.08
133.09    133.09
133.10    133.10
133.11    133.11
133.12    133.12
133.13    133.13
133.14    133.14
133.15    133.15
133.16    133.20
133.17    133.16
133.18    133.17
133.99    133.99
134.01    134.01
134.02    134.02
134.03    134.03
134.04    134.04
134.05    134.05
134.06    134.06
134.07    134.07
134.08    134.08
134.09    134.09
134.10    134.10
134.11    134.11
134.12    134.12
134.13    134.13
135.01    135.01
135.02    135.02
135.03    135.03
135.04    135.04
135.05    135.05
135.06    135.06
135.07    135.07
135.09    135.09
135.10    135.10
135.13    135.13
135.14    135.14
135.15    135.15
135.16    135.16
135.17    135.17
135.18    135.18
135.19    135.19
135.20    135.20
135.21    135.21
135.22    135.22
135.23    135.23
135.24    135.24
135.25    135.25
135.26    135.26
135.27    135.27
135.28    135.28
136.01    136.01
136.02    136.02
136.03    136.03
136.04    136.04
136.05    136.05
136.06    136.06
136.07    136.07
136.08    136.08
136.09    136.09
136.10    136.10
136.11    136.11
136.12    136.12
136.13    136.13
136.14    136.14
136.15    136.15
136.16    136.16
136.17    136.17
136.18    136.18
136.19    136.19
136.20    136.20
136.21    136.21
137.01    137.01
137.02    137.02
137.03    137.03
137.04    137.04
137.05    137.05
137.06    137.06
137.07    137.07
137.08    137.08
137.09    137.09
137.10    137.10
137.12    137.11
137.13    137.12
137.14    137.13
137.15    137.14
138.01    138.01
138.02    138.02
138.03    138.03
138.04    138.04
138.05    138.05
138.06    138.06
138.07    138.07
138.08    138.08
138.09    138.09
138.10    138.10
138.11    138.11
138.12    138.12
138.13    138.13
138.14    138.14
138.15    138.15
138.16    138.16
138.17    138.17
138.18    138.18
150.01    150.15
150.02    150.16
151.001   151.001
151.002   151.002
151.003   151.003
151.004   151.004
151.005   151.005
151.006   151.006
151.020   151.020
151.021   151.021
151.022   151.022
151.023   151.023
151.024   151.999
151.025   151.024
151.026   151.025
151.027   151.026
151.040   151.040
151.041   151.041
151.050   151.050
151.051   151.051
151.060   151.060
151.061   151.061
151.062   151.062
151.063   151.063
151.064   151.064
151.075   151.075
151.076   151.076
151.077   151.077
151.078   151.078
151.086   151.086
151.087   151.087
151.088   151.088
151.089   151.089
151.090   151.090
151.091   151.092
151.100   151.100
151.101   151.101
151.102   151.102
151.103   151.103
151.104   151.104
151.105   151.105
151.106   151.106
151.125   151.125
151.126   151.126
151.127   151.127
151.128   151.128
151.129   151.129
151.130   151.130
151.131   151.131
151.132   151.132
151.133   151.133
151.185   151.085
153.01    153.01
153.02    153.02
153.03    153.03
153.04    153.04
153.05    153.05
153.06    153.06
153.07    153.07
153.08    153.08
153.09    153.09
153.10    153.10
153.11    153.11
153.12    153.12
153.13    153.13
153.14    153.14
153.15    153.15
153.16    153.16
153.17    153.17
153.18    153.18
153.19    153.19
153.20    153.20
153.21    153.21
          
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date      Code Section
7-47     8-18-1941 37.01
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
O-7-22    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-8-42    - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                      Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-13-43   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-18-48   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-28-48   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-8-51    - -         Ch. 78, Sch. II
O-11-51   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. IV
O-5-52    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-13-59   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-20-59   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-12-60   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-19-60   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-22-60   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. II
O-26-60   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-27-60   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. III
O-5-61    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-9-61    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-17-62   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. III
O-35-62   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-3-63    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-19-63   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. V
O-4-64    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-25-64   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. VII
O-18-65   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. II
O-20-65   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-22-65   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-9-66    - -         Ch. 78, Sch. V,
                      Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-3-67    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-5-67    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-7-67    - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-17-67   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-21-67   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-13-68   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                      Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-16-68   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-20-68   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-2-69    - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-3-69    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-10-69   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-11-69   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-10-70   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-31-71   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. VIII
O-25-71   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-29-71   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-7-72    - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-8-72    - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                      Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-4-73    - -         Ch. 78, Sch. V
O-10-75   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-13-75   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-15-75   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-18-75   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-17-77   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-3-78    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-7-78    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-18-78   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-5-79    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-15-79   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-11-80   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-23-80   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-36-80   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-4-81    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-24-81   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-28-82   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-30-82   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-31-82   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-37-82   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-8-83    - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-16-84   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-13-86   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-2-87    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-4-87    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-7-87    - -         150.15
O-19-87   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-18-96   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-8-00    - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-19-01   - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-22-01   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-15-05   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-16-05   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-17-05   - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-3-06    - -         Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-6-41    10-27-1941  51.01—
                      51.16
                      130.22,
O-10-41   12-8-1941   132.15,
                      137.15
                      110.01—
O-22-42   6-8-1942    110.10,
                      110.99
                      112.01—
O-23-42   6-8-1942    112.38,
                      112.99
                      111.01,
O-27-42   8-24-1942   111.02,
                      111.99
O-14-43   6-14-1943   35.14,
                      35.15
O-28-43   12-13-1943  75.07—
                      75.09
O-15-45   9-10-1945   35.14,
                      35.15
O-25-46   10-14-1946  96.01—
                      96.07
O-6-49    3-28-1949   90.09
O-14-58   9-22-1958   90.09
O-15-60   6-15-1960   76.13
O-23-60   9-12-1960   35.02
O-24-60   9-26-1960   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-25-60   10-24-1960  Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-15-63   10-28-1963  31.002,
                      31.077
O-23-64   12-14-1964  112.09
O-4-65    3-22-1965   37.02
O-8-65    5-10-1965   95.25—
                      95.26
O-15-65   9-27-1965   95.10
O-25-65   12-13-1965  30.11
O-8-1966  2-28-1966   95.25
O-9-66    4-11-1966   Ch. 78, Sch. VI
O-4-68    3-11-1968   72.133
O-5-69    4-14-1969   112.02
                      93.059,
O-5-70    2-23-1970   93.071—
                      93.073
O-11-70   5-25-1970   31.028
                      95.01—
O-2-71    1-11-1971   95.09,
                      95.28
O-6-71    1-25-1971   Ch. 78, Sch. VI
O-4-72    2-14-1972   50.01—
                      50.30
O-16-73   11-26-1973  31.003
O-13-74   5-13-1974   95.27
O-28-74   11-25-1974  33.06
O-11-75   6-2-1975    Ch. 78, Sch. VI
O-16-75   8-25-1975   31.003
O-19-75   10-13-1975  112.15
O-2-76    1-12-1976   31.075
O-3-76    1-26-1976   37.02
O-6-76    4-12-1976   32.13
O-7-76    4-26-1976   30.10
O-2-77    1-3-1977    31.028
O-12-77   7-9-1977    96.06
O-15-77   7-22-1977   32.13
O-16-77   7-25-1977   31.003
O-21-77   12-27-1977  112.15
O-6-78    4-10-1978   37.01
O-19-78   10-9-1978   32.13
O-17-79   12-10-1979  31.003
O-14-80   4-14-1980   31.079
O-16-80   4-28-1980   37.02
O-18-80   5-12-1980   37.02
O-29-80   10-27-1980  90.09
O-2-81    1-12-1981   112.45
O-7-81    4-13-1981   95.11
O-11-81   5-11-1981   51.16
O-15-81   6-22-1981   30.11
O-17-81   9-28-1981   51.16
O-19-81   10-12-1981  150.15
                      153.01—
                      153.21,
                      Ch. 153, App. A, § I,
O-23-81   10-26-1981  Ch. 153, App. A, § II,
                      Ch. 153, App. A, § III,
                      Ch. 153, App. A, § IV,
                      Ch. 153, App. B, § I,
                      Ch. 153, App. B, § II
O-27-81   12-14-1981  31.004
O-2-82    1-11-1982   150.15
O-3-82    1-25-1982   150.15
O-4-82    2-22-1982   150.15
O-6-82    3-22-1982   30.12
O-9-82    4-12-1982   150.15
O-19-82   6-28-1982   30.11
O-21-82   7-12-1982   Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-33-82   10-25-1982  30.11
O-35-1982 11-8-1982   150.15
O-4-83    1-24-1983   Ch. 78, Sch. VI
O-9-83    3-14-1983   33.06
O-11-83   3-28-1983   31.005
O-18-83   4-11-1983   95.11
O-20-83   5-9-1983    Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-24-83   6-27-1983   30.11
O-39-83   11-14-1983  Ch. 79, Sch. I,
                      Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-42-83   11-28-1983  31.079
O-43-83   11-28-1983  32.13
O-9-84    4-9-1984    33.04
O-18-84   6-25-1984   30.11
O-24-84   11-12-1984  32.13
O-2-85    1-28-1985   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-4-85    2-25-1985   76.14
O-5-85    3-25-1985   95.05
O-11-85   6-24-1985   30.11
O-13-85   7-22-1985   33.06
O-15-85   8-12-1985   90.09
O-23-85   12-9-1985   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-24-85   12-9-1985   31.079
O-5-86    3-24-1986   150.15
O-8-86    5-12-1986   37.02
O-9-1986  5-27-1986   150.15
O-10-86   6-9-1986    76.15
O-26-87   12-14-1987  31.079
O-29-87   12-28-1987  51.03,
                      51.16
O-30-87   12-28-1987  150.16
O-4-88    4-11-1988   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-6-88    5-9-1988    76.13
O-12-88   8-8-1988    150.15
O-14-88   9-12-1988   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-10-89   4-10-1989   37.02
O-12-89   5-22-1989   32.13
O-14-89   6-19-1989   30.11
O-2-90    1-22-1990   150.15
O-4-90    1-22-1990   Ch. 79, Sch. I,
                      Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-6-90    2-26-1990   30.11
O-9-90    4-23-1990   150.15
O-12-90   5-29-1990   37.02
O-19-90   9-10-1990   77.01—
                      77.22
O-6-91    3-11-1991   33.06
O-7-91    4-8-1991    150.16
O-6-92    1-27-1992   31.005
O-9-92    2-24-1992   95.12
O-28-92   8-10-1992   30.11
O-30-92   9-14-1992   150.15
                      53.01—
                      53.12,
O-31-92   9-14-1992   54.01—
                      54.45,
                      55.01—
                      55.45
O-42-92   12-14-1992  30.11
O-2-93    1-11-1993   Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-11-93   3-25-1993   30.11
O-16-93   5-10-1993   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-19-93   5-24-1993   51.17
O-20-93   5-24-1993   37.02
O-41-93   11-22-1993  31.003
O-46-93   12-27-1993  Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-47-93   12-27-1993  51.17
O-6-94    3-14-1994   37.03,
                      151.076
O-10-95   4-10-1995   30.11
                      151.001—
                      151.006,
                      151.020—
                      151.026,
                      151.040,
                      151.041,
                      151.050,
                      151.051,
                      151.060—
                      151.064,
O-4-96    3-25-1996   151.075—
                      151.077,
                      151.085—
                      151.090,
                      151.092,
                      151.093,
                      151.100—
                      151.106,
                      151.125—
                      151.133,
                      151.999,
                      Ch. 151, App. E
O-5-96    5-13-1996   32.13
O-9-96    6-10-1996   31.005
O-11-96   6-24-1996   37.03,
                      151.076
O-17-96   10-28-1996  30.13
O-3-97    2-10-1997   151.075
O- --97   4-14-1997   30.11
O-13-97   5-12-1997   30.14
O-14-97   5-12-1997   51.17
O-16-97   5-12-1997   37.02
O-23-97   7-14-1997   151.093
O- -97    12- -1997   151.093
O-2-98    1-12-1998   151.060
O-3-98    1-12-1998   95.05
O-4-98    1-12-1998   151.021
O-5-98    1-12-1998   151.025
O-6-98    1-12-1998   151.061
O-7-98    1-12-1998   151.076
O-8-98    1-12-1998   151.087
O-9-98    1-12-1998   151.127
O-10-98   1-12-1998   151.130
O-11-98   1-12-1998   151.005
O-12-98   1-12-1998   151.075
O-13-98   1-12-1998   151.093
O-15-98   2-3-1998    52.03
O-15-98   2-23-1998   52.01
O-15-1998 2-23-1998   52.02
O-22-98   6-8-1998    37.02
O-23-98   6-22-1998   151.063
O-27-98   8-10-1998   55.29
O-32-98   11-9-1998   33.07
O-35-98   12-28-1998  32.13
O-3-99    3-8-1999    76.15
O-5-99    4-12-1999   95.25—
                      95.26
O-9-99    4-26-1999   30.11
                      77.40—
O-11-99   5-10-1999   77.49,
                      77.99
O-12-99   5-10-1999   30.11
O-22-99   11-8-1999   31.004
O-1-00    1-10-2000   30.11
O-5-00    3-27-2000   37.04
O-13-00   9-11-2000   131.34
O-20-00   12-20-2000  151.126
                      78.01,
                      Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                      Ch. 78, Sch. II,
                      Ch. 78, Sch. IV,
O-7-01    3-12-2001   Ch. 78, Sch. V,
                      Ch. 78, Sch. VI,
                      Ch. 78, Sch. VII,
                      Ch. 78, Sch. VIII,
                      Ch. 79, Sch. I,
                      Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-9-01    3-26-2001   30.11
O-12-01   4-23-2001   30.11
O-16-01   5-14-2001   95.13
O-2-02    1-28-2002   30.11
O-3-02    3-1-2002    150.15
O-6-02    3-25-2002   37.02
O-10-02   7-22-2002   30.11
O-12-02   8-26-2002   133.20
O-14-02   9-23-2002   150.16
O-17-02   12-9-2002   51.17
O-5-03    3-24-2003   30.11
O-6-03    5-12-2003   150.15
O-8-03    5-12-2003   151.006,
                      151.078
                      90.01,
O-11-03   7-28-2003   90.03,
                      90.04
                      151.024,
O-16-03   11-24-2003  151.060,
                      151.085
O-17-03   11-24-2003  Ch. 97
O-18-03   11-24-2003  30.11
O-2-04    1-12-2004   30.11
O-4-04    2-9-2004    31.002
O-5-04    3-22-2004   37.03
O-7-04    4-12-2004   30.11
O-8-04    4-12-2004   37.02
                      96.20—
O-3-05    1-10-2005   96.26,
                      96.99
O-6-05    4-25-2005   31.077
O-7-05    4-25-2005   30.11
O-11-05   7-25-2005   131.34
O-7-06    8-14-2006   Ch. 78, Sch. VI,
                      Ch. 79, Sch. I
                      151.005,
                      151.006,
                      151.021,
                      151.024,
                      151.060,
                      151.085,
                      151.087,
O-12-06   12-26-2006  151.089,
                      151.093,
                      151.101,
                      151.104,
                      151.105,
                      151.125,
                      151.126,
                      151.131
O-2-07    2-12-2007   152.01—
                      152.11
O-3-07    2-26-2007   32.13
O-9-07    5-14-2007   76.16
O-16-07   11-26-2007  TSO I
O-3-08    2-25-2008   151.125,
                      151.126
O-11-08   5-12-2008   TSO I
O-15-08   6-9-2008    Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-16-08   7-28-2008   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-06-09   7-13-2009   151.065
O-10-09   8-10-2009   Ch. 78, Sch. VII
O-12-09   9-28-2009   137.09
O-2-10    2-22-2010   30.30
O-10-14   3-24-2010   32.13
O-20-10   10-11-2010  Ch. 151, App. A
                      51.03,
O-21-10   10-11-2010  51.04,
                      51.17
O-22-10   10-11-2010  Ch. 78, Sch. I
                      154.001—
                      154.010,
                      154.025—
                      154.033,
                      154.035,
                      154.036,
O-26-10   11-8-2010   154.038,
                      154.050—
                      154.059,
                      154.070—
                      154.075,
                      154.090,
                      154.091,
                      154.999
O-28-10   12-13-2010  32.13
O-29-10   12-13-2010  Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-3-11    2-14-2011   150.16
O-15-11   6-13-2011   Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-16-11   7-11-2011   150.17
O-17-11   9-12-2011   51.18
O-19-11   10-24-2011  70.13
O-2-13    1-14-2012   91.36
O-2-12    2-13-2012   37.05
O-3-12    2-13-2012   37.03
O-5-12    3-12-2012   Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-8-12    4-23-2012   Ch. 78, Sch. V
O-14-12   6-25-2012   Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-20-12   11-26-2012  Ch. 78, Sch. VI
O-24-12   12-26-2012  Ch. 78, Sch. IV
O-3-13    1-28-2013   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-5-13    2-25-2013   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-6-13    3-11-2013   Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-9-13    4-8-2013    37.02
O-14-13   6-10-2013   150.01
O-16-13   7-8-2013    Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-19-13   10-14-2013  Ch. 151, App. A
O-20-13   10-14-2013  151.006
O-23-13   10-28-2013  Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-25-13   11-11-2013  37.03
O-26-13   11-25-2013  31.005
O-3-14    2-10-2014   90.01
O-4-14    2-10-2014   31.040—
                      31.049
O-9-14    3-24-2014   32.13
O-11-14   3-24-2014   151.025
O-16-14   5-27-2014   Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-18-14   7-14-2014   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-19-14   8-11-2014   151.091
O-23-14   9-8-2014    TSO II
O-24-14   9-8-2014    Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-25-14   9-22-2014   Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-29-14   11-24-2014  Ch. 78, Sch. I
O-30-14   11-24-2014  Ch. 78, Sch. IV
O-8-15    4-13-2015   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-14-15   5-26-2015   37.02
O-15-15   5-26-2015   32.13
                      113.01—
O-17-15   7-22-2015   113.11,
                      113.99
O-19-15   8-24-2015   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-21-15   10-12-2015  Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-23-15   10-12-2015  Ch. 78, Sch. I
                      97.01—
O-26-15   11-23-2015  97.24,
                      97.99
O-2-16    1-11-2016   132.16
O-3-16    1-11-2016   76.04
O-5-16    2-8-2016    Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-7-16    2-8-2016    Adopting Ordinance
O-11-16   4-11-2016   90.36
O-13-16   5-9-2016    Ch. 79, Sch. I
                      31.077,
O-14-16   7-18-2016   151.021,
                      151.025
O-19-16   10-10-2016  151.006,
                      TSO I
O-20-16   10-24-2016  37.01
O-21-16   10-24-2016  90.01
O-2-17    1-23-2017   TSO II
O-3-17    1-23-2017   54.13
O-8-17    4-24-2017   Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-9-17    4-24-2017   32.13
O-16-17   9-11-2017   95.10
O-17-17   10-9-2017   31.077
O-18-17   10-9-2017   138.19
O-23-17   10-23-2017  151.025
O-2-18    1-8-2018    151.126
O-3-18    1-8-2018    Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-4-18    1-8-2018    Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-6-18    2-12-2018   151.060
O-7-18    2-12-2018   Ch. 79, Sch. I
                      98.01—
O-8-18    2-12-2018   98.26,
                      98.99
O-13-18   3-26-2018   37.07
O-18-18   6-25-2018   31.030
O-21-18   7-23-2018   34.05
O-13-19   4-22-2019   31.075
O-14-19   4-22-2019   51.17
O-15-19   5-13-2019   32.13
O-19-19   10-28-2019  90.28
O-23-19   11-11-2019  30.31
O-2-20    2-10-2020   151.124—
                      151.126
O-3-20    2-10-2020   37.03
O-4-20    2-10-2020   54.11
O-5-20    2-10-2020   37.05
O-6-20    2-24-2020   151.025
O-7-20    2-24-2020   151.024
                      98.01—
O-8-20    2-24-2020   98.26,
                      98.99
O-9-20    2-24-2020   151.076
O-13-20   5-11-2020   110.12
O-14-20   5-11-2020   110.13
                      56.01,
                      56.02,
                      56.10—
                      56.16,
                      56.25—
O-15-20   6-8-2020    56.32,
                      56.40—
                      56.47,
                      56.60,
                      56.61,
                      56.70—
                      56.73
O-18-20   7-13-2020   32.13
                      57.01—
O-20-20   10-26-2020  57.19,
                      57.99
O-21-20   11-23-2020  31.077
O-22-20   11-23-2020  Ch. 79, Sch. I
O-23-20   11-23-2020  32.13
O-24-20   11-23-2020  32.13
O-25-20   11-23-2020  Repeals 31.078
O-26-20   11-23-2020  90.01
O-27-20   11-23-2020  32.13
O-28-20   11-23-2020  151.126
O-29-20   11-23-2020  70.30
O-31-20   12-21-2020  91.36
O-2-21    1-25-2021   151.025
O-4-21    2-8-2021    Repeals Ch. 79, Sch. II(B)(1), (B)(2), (C)
O-5-21    2-8-2021    Ch. 79, Sch. I,
                      Ch. 79, Sch. II
O-6-21    2-8-2021    75.09
O-7-21    2-8-2021    Repeals 37.20, 37.21, 37.22
                      31.040—
O-8-21    2-8-2021    31.049,
                      37.04
O-9-21    2-8-2021    37.06
O-10-21   2-8-2021    32.13
O-12-21   3-1-2021    95.25—
                      95.28
O-13-21   3-8-2021    34.02
O-14-21   3-8-2021    31.076
O-15-21   3-8-2021    31.004
O-16-21   3-8-2021    31.060
O-18-21   3-8-2021    37.02
O-19-21   3-22-2021   51.17
O-20-21   3-22-2021   37.06
O-22-21   5-10-2021   33.07
O-23-21   6-14-2021   31.078
O-27-21   10-28-2021  51.17
O-29-21   10-28-2021  38.01—
                      38.03
O-32-21   12-20-2021  150.16
O-2-22    1-10-2022   Ch. 79, Sch. VI
O-3-22    2-28-2022   151.115—
                      151.121
O-4-22    2-28-2022   151.105
O-5-22    2-28-2022   151.091,
                      151.0911
O-10-22   3-28-2022   150.01
O-13-22   5-9-2022    37.06
O-14-22   5-23-2022   151.100—
                      151.106
O-15-22   5-23-2022   152.01—
                      152.11
O-16-22   5-23-2022   151.087
O-18-22   7-11-2022   151.094
O-19-22   7-25-2022   Ch. 79, Sch. VI
O-23-22   11-14-2022  151.021
O-24-22   11-14-2022  151.085
O-25-22   11-14-2022  151.026
O-26-22   11-14-2022  151.025
O-27-22   11-14-2022  151.005,
                      151.087
O-28-22   12-19-2022  37.05
O-1-23    2-13-2023   Repeals 150.18
O-3-23    3-13-2023   150.01,
                      151.075
O-4-23    3-13-2023   151.075
O-7-23    3-13-2023   Ch. 78, Sch. VI
                      154.001—
                      154.010,
                      154.025—
                      154.038,
                      154.050—
O-9-23    4-10-2023   154.059,
                      154.070—
                      154.075,
                      154.090,
                      154.091,
                      154.999
O-11-23   4-24-2023   150.16
O-16-23   10-23-2023  51.17
                      98.01—
O-17-23   12-18-2023  98.26,
                      98.99
O-5-24    3-11-2024   37.08
                      151.087,
O-7-24    4-8-2024    151.140—
                      151.146
O-10-24   6-10-2024   151.119
O-17-24   11-11-2024  Ch. 78, Sch. I
                      151.005,
O-1-25    1-13-2025   151.025,
                      151.060,
                      151.085
O-2-25    1-27-2025   32.25
O-3-25    1-27-2025   51.17
                     
 
