MT. HEALTHY, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-18 Supplement current through
Ordinance 25-2063, passed November 18, 2025 and includes
Ohio legislation enacted through June 5, 2025
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS OF MT. HEALTHY, OHIO
2023
MAYOR - James Wolf
LAW DIRECTOR - Scott Sollmann
FINANCE DIRECTOR - Melanie Branditz
CITY MANAGER - Scott Bauer
PRESIDENT OF COUNCIL - Ross Bittner
Council at Large
Kisha Dosa
Cordel George
Denise Lingo
Robert Parsons
Peggy Rissel
Joseph Roetting
Paul Young III
Clerk of Council - Kathleen Schmidt
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 99-1300
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, OHIO, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 1999 S-1 supplement contains all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Mt. Healthy; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Ohio; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY,
STATE OF OHIO:
   Section 1.   That the 1999 S-1 supplement of Mt. Healthy as submitted by
American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached
hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its
entirety.
   Section 2.   The 1999 S-1 supplement shall be deemed published as of the day
of its adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
City of Mt. Healthy is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
Passed this 1st day of February, 2000.
                                                                       
                        President of Council
Attest:
                                                   
Clerk of Council
Approved this 1st day of February, 2000.
                                                                 
                        Mayor
Approved as to form:
                                              
Law Director
ORDINANCE NO. 04-1452
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, OHIO
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2004 S-3 supplement containing all ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances
of the City of Mt. Healthy; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Ohio; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY,
STATE OF OHIO
   Section 1.   That the 2004 S-3 supplement of Mt. Healthy as submitted by
American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached
hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if set out in its
entirety.
   Section 2.   The 2004 S-3 supplement shall be deemed published as of the day
of its adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the
City of Mt. Healthy is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement
into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the
Clerk.
   Section 3.   That this ordinance shall take effect and be in force
immediately upon its passage.
Passed this 19 day of October, 2004.
      Sylvia Lawson /s/
      President of Council
Attest:      Margaret A. Roulier /s/
      Clerk of Council
Approved this 19 day of October, 2004.
   George W. Rouse /s/
   Mayor
Approved as to form:
   Stephen G. Wolf /s/
   Law Director
ORDINANCE NO. 05-1468
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
FOR THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2005 S-4 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt.
Healthy, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City
of Mt. Healthy; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Legislative Authority to accept these updated
sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Ohio; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, OHIO,
STATE OF OHIO
   Section 1.   That the 2005 S-4 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Mt. Healthy as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the City of
Mt. Healthy is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the
copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
Passed the 20 day of September, 2005.
Sylvia L. Lawson /s/
President of Council
Attest:
Margaret A. Roulier /s/
Clerk of Council
Approved this 20 day of September, 2005.
George W. Rouse /s/
Mayor
Approved as to form:   Stephen G. Wolf /s/
         Law Director
ORDINANCE NO. 06-1488
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2006 S-5 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt.
Healthy, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City
of Mt. Healthy; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Mt. Healthy City Council to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Ohio; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, OHIO,
STATE OF OHIO
   Section 1.   That the 2006 S-5 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Mt. Healthy as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Council of the City of Mt. Healthy and the Clerk
of the City of Mt. Healthy is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
Passed the  day of , 2006.
President of Council
Attest:
Clerk of Council
Approved this 29th day ofAugust , 2006.
Mayor
Approved as to form:   Stephen G. Wolf /s/
         Law Director
ORDINANCE NO.
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR
THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, AND DECLARING AN EMERGENCY
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2012 S-10 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Mt.
Healthy, which supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent
nature enacted since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City
of Mt. Healthy; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Mt. Healthy City Council to accept these
updated sections in accordance with the changes of the law of the State of
Ohio; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, OHIO,
STATE OF OHIO
   Section 1.   That the 2012 S-10 supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the
City of Mt. Healthy as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of
Cincinnati, Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by
reference as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Council of the City of Mt. Healthy and the Clerk
of the City of Mt. Healthy is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
supplement into the copy of the Code of Ordinances kept on file in the Office
of the Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
Passed the              day of                    , 20___
                                                           
President of Council
Attest:
                                                          
Clerk of Council
Approved this                  day of               , 20___
Mayor
Approved as to form:   Stephen G. Wolf /s/
         Law Director
ORDINANCE NO. 14-1705
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING SUPPLEMENT 2014 S-11 TO THE MT. HEALTHY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2014 S-11 supplement to the Mt. Healthy Code of Ordinances, which
supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted
since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances; and
WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision or
addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio Revised Code; and
WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Ohio;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, STATE
OF OHIO;
   Section 1.   That the 2014 S-11 supplement to the Mt. Healthy Code of
Ordinances as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as
if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Council and the Clerk of Council is hereby
authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of
Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section 3.   This ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and after
the first date provided by law.
Passed this 17 day of June, 2014.
Ross Bittner /s/
President of Council
Attest: Melanie Evenson /s/  
Clerk of Council
Approved this 17 day of June, 2014
Joseph T. Roetting /s/
Mayor
Approved as to form
Steven G. Wolf /s/
Law Director
ORDINANCE NO. 15-1766
   AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING SUPPLEMENT 2015 S-12 TO THE MT. HEALTHY
CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2015 S-12 supplement to the Mt. Healthy Code of Ordinances, which
supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted
since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio Revised Code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Ohio;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, STATE
OF OHIO;
   Section 1.   That the 2015 S-12 supplement to the Mt. Healthy Code of
Ordinances as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as
if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Council and the Clerk of Council is hereby
authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of
Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section 3.   That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and
after the first date provided by law.
Passed this 15 day of December, 2015.
Ross Bittner /s/
President of Council
Attest: Melanie Evenson /s/  
Clerk of Council
Approved this 15 day of December, 2015
Joseph T. Roetting /s/
Mayor
Approved as to form
Steven G. Wolf /s/
Law Director
ORDINANCE NO. 21-1977
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING AND ADOPTING SUPPLEMENT 2021 S-16 TO THE MT. HEALTHY CODE
OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has
completed the 2021 S-16 supplement to the Mt. Healthy Code of Ordinances, which
supplement contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted
since the prior supplement to the Code of Ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has recommended the revision
or addition of certain sections of the Code of Ordinances which are based on or
make reference to sections of the Ohio Revised Code; and
   WHEREAS, it is the intent of the Council to accept these updated sections in
accordance with the changes of the law of the State of Ohio;
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF MT. HEALTHY, STATE
OF OHIO;
   Section 1.   That the 2021 S-16 supplement to the Mt. Healthy Code of
Ordinances as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation of Cincinnati,
Ohio, and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as
if set out in its entirety.
   Section 2.   Such supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Council and the Clerk of Council is hereby
authorized and ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of
Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the Clerk.
   Section 3.   That Council finds and determines that all formal actions
relative to the passage of this Ordinance were taken in an open meeting and
that all deliberations of Council which resulted in the passage of this
Ordinance were taken in meetings open to the public, in full compliance with
all legal requirements including Section 121.22 of the Ohio Revised Code.
   Section 4.   That this ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and
after the first date provided by law.
Passed this 21st day of December, 2021.
Denise Lingo /s/
President of Council
Attest:
Clerk of Council
Approved this 21st day of December, 2021
James Wolf /s/
Mayor
Approved as to form
Scott Sollmann /s/
Scott A. Sollman (0081476)
5300 Socialville Foster Rd., Suite 200
Mason, OH 45040
(513) 707-4249
City of Mt. Health Law Director
CHARTER
TABLE OF CONTENTS
   
Preamble
Article I—Incorporation, Powers, and Form of Government
   
Section 1.01   Incorporation
   
Section 1.02   Powers
   
Section 1.03   Form of Government
Article II—Council
   
Section 2.01   Number, Terms, and Qualifications of Council
   
Section 2.02   Compensation of Council
   
Section 2.03   Meetings of Council
   
Section 2.04   Role of the Mayor and Veto Power
   
Section 2.05   Powers of Council
   
Section 2.06   Ordinances and Resolutions of Council
   
Section 2.07   Officers of Council
   
Section 2.08   Organization, Rules, and Clerk of Council
   
Section 2.09   Amending Legislation
Article III—Mayor
   
Section 3.01   Term
   
Section 3.02   Legislative Powers
   
Section 3.03   Judicial Powers and Clerk of Courts
   
Section 3.04   Other Duties
   
Section 3.05   Compensation
   
Section 3.06   Qualifications
Article IV—Manager
   
Section 4.01   City Manager
   
Section 4.02   Qualifications
   
Section 4.03   Acting Manager
   
Section 4.04   Mayor and Council Relation to the Manager
   
Section 4.05   Powers and Duties
Article V—Administrative Officials and Departments
   
Section 5.01   Conflict of Interest
   
Section 5.02   Department of Police
   
Section 5.03   Department of Public Works
   
Section 5.04   Department of Fire and E.M.S.
   
Section 5.05   Department of Law
   
Section 5.06   Department of Finance
   
Section 5.07   City Engineer
   
Section 5.08   Building Inspector
Article VI—Boards and Commissions
   
Section 6.01   Effect of Charter
   
Section 6.02   Planning Commission
   
Section 6.03   Civil Service Commission
   
Section 6.04   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
Section 6.05   Income Tax Board of Review
   
Section 6.06   Recreation Commission
   
Section 6.07   Charter Review Commission
   
Section 6.08   Board of Health
   
Section 6.09   Volunteer Firefighter's Dependency Fund Board
   
Section 6.10   Urban Tree Commission
   
Section 6.11   General Provisions
   
Section 6.12   Vacancies
Article VII—Taxation and Borrowing
   
Section 7.01   Fiscal Year
   
Section 7.02   Budget
   
Section 7.03   Appropriation Ordinance
   
Section 7.04   Tax Levy
   
Section 7.05   City Earnings Tax Limitations
   
Section 7.06   Power to Incur Indebtedness
   
Section 7.07   Purchases and Contracts
   
Section 7.08   Expenditures
   
Section 7.09   Annual Audits
Article VIII—Nominations, Elections, and Qualifications
   
Section 8.01   Effect of State Law
   
Section 8.02   Vacancies
   
Section 8.03   Initiative, Referendum and Recall
Article IX—Merit System
   
Section 9.01   Civil Service—Classified and Unclassified
Article X—General Provisions
   
Section 10.01   Separability
   
Section 10.02   Transitional Procedure
Article XI—Enumeration of Powers
   
Section 11.01   Enumeration of Powers
PREAMBLE
We, the people of the City of Mt. Healthy, in order to fully secure and
exercise the benefits of self-government under the Constitution and Laws of the
State of Ohio, do hereby adopt this Charter for the Government of the City of
Mt. Healthy.
ARTICLE I
INCORPORATION, POWERS, AND FORM OF GOVERNMENT
SECTION 1.01 INCORPORATION
The City presently known as the City of Mt. Healthy, in the County of Hamilton,
State of Ohio, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate with all the
privileges and powers pertaining thereto. The City shall have the boundaries
that now exist and shall have the authority to change its boundaries by
annexation, detachment, and other proceedings authorized by the general laws of
the State of Ohio. Territory added to the City shall immediately become subject
to the provisions of this Charter.
SECTION 1.02 POWERS
The City of Mt. Healthy shall have all the powers of local self-government and
the benefits of City home rule that may now or hereafter be lawfully possessed
or exercised by municipal corporations under the Constitution of the State of
Ohio. All such powers shall be exercised in the manner prescribed in this
Charter, or, to the extent not prescribed herein, in such manner as shall be
provided by ordinance or resolution of Council. Any such ordinance or rule
shall supersede and override state statutes.
SECTION 1.03   FORM OF GOVERNMENT
The form of government shall be known as the “Mayor-Council-Manager Plan.” The
powers of the City government shall be distributed among the City, the
electorate, the various elected and appointed officials, and the boards and
commissions as provided under the provisions of this Charter. In the event of a
change in the status of the City to a village, it is the intent of the electors
of the City that the form of government expressed in this Charter shall apply
whether Mt. Healthy is a city or a village.
ARTICLE II
COUNCIL
SECTION 2.01 NUMBER, TERMS, AND QUALIFICATIONS OF COUNCIL
Council shall consist of seven (7) members to be elected at large by popular
vote of the electors of the City for staggered four (4) year terms. There shall
be a partisan Council election held every two (2) years in odd numbered years
and Council shall be sworn into office at the first meeting in January of the
year following their election.
Members of Council shall be qualified electors and shall have resided in the
City for at least one year next preceding their election. Each member of
Council shall be an elector of the City, shall not hold any other public office
except that of notary public or a member of the state militia, shall not be
interested in any contract with the City, and may not hold employment with said
City. A member who ceases to possess any such qualifications or moves from the
City shall forfeit the office. Failure to maintain qualifications or removal
from office shall not render void nor invalidate any action of Council in which
such member participated.
SECTION 2.02 COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL
Ordinances presently in force establishing salaries shall remain in effect for
the first Charter Council, and thereafter be established by Council according
to its rules of organization.
SECTION 2.03 MEETINGS OF COUNCIL
Council shall meet at such times as set by its rules, but not less than once a
month. A majority of all the members elected shall constitute a quorum to do
business, but a lesser number may adjourn by majority vote of those in
attendance from day to day, and compel the attendance of absent members in such
manner as provided by the rules of Council. Except in case of emergency
declared by the Mayor, no special meeting may be called unless notice as
provided by rules of Council be given thereof at least twelve (12) hours in
advance of such meeting.
All meetings of Council shall be open to the public, except as otherwise
provided in the Ohio Revised Code.
SECTION 2.04 ROLE OF THE MAYOR AND VETO POWER
The Mayor has the right to propose or address legislation and shall have veto
power over resolutions and ordinances.
SECTION 2.05 POWERS OF COUNCIL
All legislative power of the City shall be vested in Council, except as
otherwise provided by this Charter and the Constitution of the State of Ohio.
Without limitation of the foregoing, Council shall have the power:
   A.   to levy taxes and incur debts subject to the limitation imposed hereon
by the Charter and the Constitution of the State of Ohio;
   B.   to adopt and provide for the enforcement of local police, sanitary, and
other similar regulations;
   C.   to provide for the exercise of all powers of local self-government
granted to the City by the Constitution of the State of Ohio;
   D.   to fix the rates of compensation, including fringe benefits for all
employees;
   E.   to require such bonds as in the opinion of Council are necessary for
the faithful discharge of the duties of the officers and employees of the City;
   F.   to create offices, departments, divisions, bureaus and commissions: and
the power to combine, change and abolish any office, department, division,
bureau, board or commission. Council shall not abolish the offices of Manager,
Mayor, Clerk of Council, Council Members, Director of Finance, or Law Director.
The Manager may hold such other offices and positions with the City as are
provided by this Charter or as Council may authorize by a vote of majority of
its members;
   G.   to control the development of use of land within the corporate limits
and regulate construction thereon;
   H.   to provide, without competitive bidding, for an annual or special
independent audit(s) of any or all City funds. Such audit(s) may be in addition
to an audit by representatives of the State Auditor or other official or agency
required under the Constitution of the State of Ohio;
   I.   to acquire title to or interests in real and/or personal property,
whether such property is acquired by the exercise of power of eminent domain,
purchase, gift, lease with option to purchase, devise, bequest, in trust, or
otherwise. The power to sell or otherwise convey, lease, lease with option to
purchase, or grant any interest in real or personal property shall be vested in
Council. Such sale, conveyance, lease, lease with option to purchase, or grant
shall be in the manner as provided by the ordinance authorizing the same. Title
to all real property shall be taken in the name of the City;
   J.   to adopt an annual budget and appropriation measures of the City;
   K.   to accept gifts and grants on behalf of the City;
   L.   to inquire into the conduct of any officer, employee, agent, or
independent contractor in the exercise of their powers, duties, or functions,
or in their performance of work or service or provision of equipment,
materials, or supplies to or on behalf of the City; and to inquire into and
investigate any and all City affairs. In the exercise of this power Council
shall have the power to subpoena witnesses and require the production of
records and other evidence in the manner provided in the rules, regulations, or
by-laws of Council, and in the absence of such provisions, the President of
Council shall have the power to issue subpoenas for witnesses and the
production of records and other evidence;
   M.   to override the Mayor's veto of an ordinance or resolution in
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the laws of Ohio now or
hereafter in effect;
   N.   to exercise or provide for the exercise of all other powers granted to
legislative authorities of cities by the Constitution of the State of Ohio and
to exercise all other powers granted to Council by and under this Charter.
SECTION 2.06 ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS OF COUNCIL
Action of Council shall be by ordinance, resolution, or motion. Motions shall
be used to conduct the business of Council, in procedural matters, for
elections conducted among Council members, and as otherwise provided in this
Charter. All other action shall be taken by ordinance or resolution. No action
of Council shall be invalidated merely because the form thereof fails to comply
with the provision of this section.
Any member of Council or the Mayor may propose an ordinance or resolution, in
written form and with a concise title, at a regular or special meeting.
The form and style of ordinances and resolutions shall be determined by
Council.
Each ordinance or resolution shall be read on two separate meeting days, unless
this requirement is dispensed with by a vote of at least three-fourths (3/4) of
the members of Council. The readings may be by title only, unless a reading in
full is requested by any member of Council.
The vote on the question of passage of each resolution, ordinance, or motion
shall be taken by “yea” or “nay” and the vote entered into the minutes. No
measure shall be passed without a concurrence of a majority of the members of
Council.
Emergency ordinances or resolutions shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of
Council for enactment. If any emergency ordinance or resolution shall fail to
receive the required two-thirds (2/3) affirmative vote, but receives the
necessary majority for passage as non-emergency legislation, it shall become
effective as non-emergency legislation.
Council, before enacting, shall determine that the ordinance or resolution is
necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety,
or welfare of the citizens of Mt. Healthy, Ohio, and the ordinance or
resolution shall contain a statement of the necessity of declaring the
emergency.
Each ordinance or resolution shall be authenticated by the Clerk. Failure to
sign shall not invalidate an otherwise properly enacted resolution or
ordinance.
The Clerk shall cause each ordinance and resolution adopted to be made
available by posting a concise summary of the provisions of the ordinance/
resolution on the homepage of the City of Mt. Healthy's website, and posting
copies at both the community center and City Hall for no fewer than 14 days.
Failure to post or to maintain such posting shall not invalidate or delay the
effective date of an ordinance or resolution, and in such events the Clerk
shall post at a later date.
Notwithstanding the other sections of this Charter, Council may adopt by
resolution or ordinance all or part of any technical codes issued by State or
Federal agencies, boards, or any other public or private agency. These codes
may be adopted by reference but shall include the title and source of the code
adopted by reference.
Each resolution or ordinance providing for the appropriation of money, or for
improvements petitioned for by the owners of a majority of the adjacent
property to be benefited and specially assessed, or an emergency measure for
the preservation of the public peace, health, welfare, or safety, shall take
effect upon its approval, unless a later date be specified therein. No other
resolution or ordinance shall become effective until thirty (30) days after its
approval.
SECTION 2.07 OFFICERS OF COUNCIL
The President of Council shall be elected by popular vote of the electors of
the City on a partisan ballot for a four (4) year term, to begin on the first
day of January following the election. The President of Council shall be an
elector of the City and shall preside at all regular and special meetings of
the Council, but shall have no vote therein except in case of a tie.
At the first meeting in January of each year following the Council election,
the Council shall immediately proceed to elect a President Pro-Tempore from its
own, who shall serve until the first meeting in January following the next
election of Council members.
When the Mayor is absent from the City or is unable, for any cause as
determined by majority vote of Council, to perform his duties, the President of
Council shall be the acting Mayor, and shall have all the powers and perform
the same duties as the Mayor.
When both the Mayor and President of Council are absent from the city or are
unable to perform their duties, for any cause as determined by majority vote of
Council, the President Pro-Tempore shall be the acting Mayor and shall have all
the powers and perform the same duties as the Mayor.
SECTION 2.08 ORGANIZATION, RULES, AND CLERK OF COUNCIL
Council shall be a continuing body, but shall at its first meeting in January
of each year following its election adopt by majority vote rules of
organization which shall not conflict with this Charter, and which shall remain
in effect until amended, changed, or repealed by a majority vote of Council.
These rules shall be effective immediately. On any point not covered by rules
of Council, Robert's Rules of Order, as revised, shall apply.
The Clerk of Council shall be appointed by Council. Council shall establish the
salary of the Clerk of Council by ordinance. The Clerk of Council may hold
another office or position of employment in the City. The Clerk of Council
shall have those powers, duties, and functions as are provided in this Charter,
by Rules of Council, or by ordinance or resolution. Included in the duties of
the Clerk of Council shall be the maintenance of a record of proceedings of
Council and a record of all ordinances and resolutions adopted by Council. The
Clerk of Council shall give notice of regular and special meetings of Council
to its members and to the public as may be provided by this Charter, by the
Rules of Council, or by ordinance or resolution. Council may appoint any person
as an Acting Clerk of Council to serve in the event of a vacancy in the office,
temporary absence, or disability of the Clerk of Council.
SECTION 2.09 AMENDING LEGISLATION
No ordinance or resolution, or section or subsection thereof, shall be revised
or amended unless the ordinance or resolution superseding it contains a
restatement of the entire resolution or ordinance, or a restatement of the
section or subsection thereof to be revised or amended. Upon being revised or
amended, the portions of the original legislation which are in conflict with
the revised or amended legislation shall be superseded and repealed.
ARTICLE III
MAYOR
SECTION 3.01 TERM OF THE MAYOR
The Mayor shall be elected by popular vote of the electors of the City on a
partisan ballot for a four (4) year term to begin on the first day of January
following election.
SECTION 3.02 LEGISLATIVE POWERS
The Mayor may propose ordinances and resolutions, and may take part in
discussion on all matters coming before the Council, but shall have no vote.
SECTION 3.03 JUDICIAL POWERS AND CLERK OF COURTS
The Mayor shall have all the judicial powers granted generally by the laws of
Ohio to the Mayor's of Ohio Cities. The Mayor shall exercise all or any such
powers in accordance with the procedure established by law governing Mayor's
Court. The Mayor may appoint a Magistrate or other permitted official to
preside at Mayor's Court.
The Mayor shall appoint the Clerk of Courts. The Clerk of Courts may hold
another office or position of employment in the City. The Clerk of Courts shall
perform all clerical duties related to Mayor's Court, collection and receipt of
fines and cost assessed by the Court, keeping of records thereto, and other
clerical duties as assigned. The Mayor may appoint any person as Acting Clerk
of Courts to serve in the event of vacancy, temporary absence, or disability of
the Clerk of Courts. Council shall establish the salary of the Clerk of Courts
and Acting Clerk of Courts by ordinance.
SECTION 3.04 OTHER DUTIES
The Mayor shall be recognized as the official and ceremonial head of the City
and by the Governor for military purposes. The Mayor shall have all powers and
duties imposed upon the Mayor by ordinance, resolution, and the Ohio Revised
Code which do not conflict with other provisions in this Charter.
SECTION 3.05 COMPENSATION
Council shall establish the salary of the Mayor by ordinance.
SECTION 3.06 QUALIFICATIONS
The Mayor shall be a resident and elector of the City for at least twelve (12)
consecutive months prior to election and shall continue to be a qualified
elector of the City during the elective term of office. The Mayor shall hold no
other elective public office. The Mayor shall not be otherwise employed by, nor
shall hold any other office in this City, except as provided by this Charter.
ARTICLE IV
MANAGER
SECTION 4.01 CITY MANAGER
A City Manager shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council. A
majority vote of the members elected to Council shall be required for the
approval of the City Manager (hereinafter referred to as Manager). The Manager
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
SECTION 4.02 QUALIFICATIONS OF THE MANAGER
The Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and
administrative qualifications.
SECTION 4.03 ACTING MANAGER
In the event of a temporary vacancy in the office of Manager, the Mayor shall
designate a person as Acting Manager, who shall, with the approval of Council,
exercise all powers, duties, and functions of the Manager until such time as a
Manager is appointed.
SECTION 4.04 MAYOR AND COUNCIL RELATION TO MANAGER
Except as provided by this Charter, neither the Mayor, nor Council, nor any
member or committee thereof shall give orders to any employees of the Manager,
either publicly or privately, unless that employee is assigned said duties, and
such orders are approved in writing by the Manager, or noted in a job
description.
SECTION 4.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE MANAGER
The Manager shall be the Chief Executive and Administrative Officer of the
City. The Manager shall be responsible to the Mayor for the administration of
the City. The Manager shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   to appoint and, when the Manager deems it necessary, suspend, remove or
otherwise discipline all City employees and supervisors appointed by the
Manager, except as provided by, or pursuant to this Charter. The Manager may
authorize any supervisor who is appointed by the Manager to exercise these
powers with respect to subordinates in that supervisor's department, office or
agency;
   B.   to direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices,
and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided in this Charter;
   C.   to attend all Council meetings and take part in discussions, but may
not vote;
   D.   to see that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and ordinances and
resolutions of Council, imposing duties on the Manager or employees subject to
the Manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed;
   E.   to prepare and submit to Council the annual budget and capital program;
   F.   to submit to Council and make available to the public a complete report
on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each
fiscal year;
   G.   to make such other reports as Council may require concerning the
operations of City departments, offices, boards, commissions, and agencies
subject to the Manager's direction and supervision;
   H.   to appoint, with the approval of Council, special citizen advisory
committees, and discharge such when, in the Manager's judgment and with
Council's approval, their function has been served;
   I.   to serve as an ex-officio member of all boards and commissions which
are authorized under this Charter or subsequently created by the Mayor and/or
Council;
   J.   to keep Council fully advised as to the financial condition and future
operating and capital needs of the City and make such recommendations to
Council concerning the affairs of the City as the Manager deems desirable, or
as requested by Council;
   K.   to require reports and information of subordinate officers and
employees of the City as the Manager deems necessary in the orderly operation
of the City, or when required to do so by Council or any board or commission of
the City;
   L.   to be the contracting officer of the City and award and execute
contracts and agreements on behalf of the City in the manner and under the
procedures required by this Charter;
   M.   to perform the duties and have the powers as conferred or required by
this Charter, by any ordinance or resolution of Council, or by the laws of the
State of Ohio;
   N.   to appoint a person as City Clerk to perform the day-to-day duties
required for efficient and on-going operation of the Manager's office.
ARTICLE V
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICIALS AND DEPARTMENTS
SECTION 5.01 CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The laws of the State of Ohio pertaining to interests of municipal officials in
contracts and the expenditure of money on behalf of the City shall apply to the
officials of the City.
SECTION 5.02 DEPARTMENT OF POLICE
There shall be a Department of Police, the head of which shall be the Police
Chief. The Police Chief shall be appointed by and report to the Manager and be
a certified police officer in the State of Ohio or become certified within a
reasonable period determined by City Council. The operating rules and
procedures of the Police Department shall be established by the Police Chief
with the approval of the Manager. Disciplinary action shall be taken by the
Police Chief with the right of appeal to the Manager. The appointment,
promotion, and removal of members of the Police Department, including the
Police Chief, shall be made by the Manager in accordance with this Charter.
SECTION 5.03 DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the
Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall be appointed by and
report to the Manager. The Department of Public Works shall have custody, care
and maintenance of the public buildings, grounds, streets, sewers, and
municipal utilities owned by the City. The Public Works Director shall perform
such functions and duties with reference to the Public Works Department as may
be assigned by ordinance or by order of the Manager.
SECTION 5.04 DEPARTMENT OF FIRE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE (E.M.S.)
There shall be a Department of Fire and E.M.S., the head of which shall be the
Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by and report to the Manager. The
Department of Fire and E.M.S. shall provide all fire protection and life squad
services within the City. The appointment, promotion and removal of members of
the Department of Fire and E.M.S. including the Fire Chief shall be made by the
Manager in accordance with this Charter.
SECTION 5.05 DEPARTMENT OF LAW
There shall be a Department of Law, the head of which shall be the Law
Director. The Law Director shall be appointed by and report to the Manager. The
Law Director must be an attorney at law admitted to practice in the State of
Ohio. The Law Director's compensation shall be established by ordinance or
contract. The Law Director shall be the legal counsel for the City and for all
the officials and departments thereof, and shall, when requested, give legal
opinions in writing. The Law Director shall represent the City in all
litigations to which it may be a party and shall perform all other legal duties
as may be assigned by the Manager as well as those imposed by this Charter. The
Law Director shall prepare all contracts, bonds, and other instruments in
writing in which the City is concerned. The Manager shall have the right to
appoint additional legal counsel, including a Prosecutor for Mayor's Court.
SECTION 5.06 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the Finance
Director. The Finance Director shall be appointed by and report to the Manager.
The Manager shall consider all relevant factors including education and
experience in the fields of accounting, taxation, budgeting, and finance in
making the appointment. In such case where there is a vacancy in the office of
the Finance Director, the Manager shall occupy the position until such time as
someone is appointed to fill such vacancy, but will receive no additional
compensation.
The Finance Director shall be the chief fiscal officer of the City. The Finance
Director shall have the authority over, and shall be required to keep, the
financial records of the City, exhibiting accurate statements of all monies
received, expended, and encumbered, of all property owned by the City, and of
all taxes and assessments. The Finance Director shall advise the Manager
concerning the financial condition of the City and shall examine all payrolls,
bills, and other claims against the City and shall issue no warrant unless the
Finance Director finds that the claim is in proper form, correctly computed,
duly approved, and that an appropriation has been made therefore. The Finance
Director shall collect all monies due and payable to the City and shall be
custodian of all public money of the City and shall disburse the same as may be
required by law or ordinance. The Finance Director shall examine and audit the
accounts of all other officers, employees, departments, boards and commissions,
and shall assist the Manager in the preparation and submission of appropriation
measures, estimates, budgets, and other financial matters. The Finance Director
shall coordinate all other duties now or hereafter imposed on Auditors,
Treasurers, and Tax Commissioners under the laws of the State of Ohio. The
Finance Director shall also perform such other duties consistent with his or
her office as may be required by this Charter, by the State statutes, by
ordinance or resolution of Council, or as directed by the Manager.
SECTION 5.07 CITY ENGINEER
The Manager shall appoint or contract with an Engineer. The Engineer must be a
registered engineer licensed to practice in the State of Ohio. Council shall
establish the compensation of the Engineer by ordinance. The Engineer may be
removed by the Manager. The Engineer shall, on request, prepare specifications
and drawings for material, equipment, and any other such items which the City
is concerned with procuring. The Engineer shall review drawings as required.
The Manager shall have the right to employ or contract with additional
engineering personnel or services.
SECTION 5.08 BUILDING INSPECTOR
The Manager shall provide for a Building Inspector adequate to meet the needs
of the City.
ARTICLE VI
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
SECTION 6.01 EFFECT OF CHARTER ACTION ON PRE-EXISTING BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
All official opinions, rulings, decisions, and other prior action of
preexisting Boards, Commissions, and/or Committees shall remain in effect,
unimpaired and in full force until changed, modified, rescinded, or repealed
according to this Charter's provision by any new Boards, Commissions, and/or
Committees or until superseded by Council action.
SECTION 6.02 PLANNING COMMISSION
A Planning Commission consisting of five (5) members shall be established.
Members shall be the Mayor and four (4) others appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of Council. The Planning Commission shall have the powers conferred on
it by the Ohio Revised Code, this Charter, and by ordinances of Council. The
members shall have terms of four (4) years on a staggered basis. The Planning
Commission shall be responsible for maintaining, planning, and advising of City
development, and other requests of Council. The Planning Commission shall adopt
its own rules of procedure.
SECTION 6.03 CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
A Civil Service Commission consisting of three (3) members shall be
established. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
Council. The members shall have terms of six (6) years on a staggered basis.
Not more than two Commissioners shall be of the same political party. The
Commission shall enforce the local Civil Service regulations as approved by
Council as well as its own rules. Such regulations and rules shall provide for
appointments and promotions according to merit and fitness.
The Civil Service Commission shall be responsible for the conduct of entrance
and promotional examinations, the classification of all City positions, and the
review of such personnel transactions as transfers, reinstatements, and
exceptional appointments. In addition, it may hear appeals from suspensions,
demotions, or dismissals from service with the City.
SECTION 6.04 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
A Board of Zoning Appeals consisting of five (5) members shall be established.
The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council. The
members shall have terms of three (3) years on a staggered basis. The board
shall adopt its own rules of procedure. These members may not serve on the
Planning Commission.
SECTION 6.05 INCOME TAX BOARD OF REVIEW
An Income Tax Board of Review consisting of three (3) members shall be
established. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
Council. The term of office of each Board member shall be four (4) years.
Hearings by the Income Tax Board of Review shall be conducted privately unless
otherwise requested by the involved taxpayer.
SECTION 6.06 PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
A Recreation Commission consisting of three (3) to five (5) members shall be
established. The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
Council. The members shall have terms of three (3) years on a staggered basis.
The Commission shall serve as an advisory board regarding the recreation needs
of the City. The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
SECTION 6.07 CHARTER REVIEW COMMISSION
A Charter Review Commission consisting of five (5) members shall be
established. The members shall be qualified electors of the City and shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council. The members shall have
terms of three (3) years on a staggered basis. The Commission shall review the
Charter, or any part thereof, when deemed necessary by the Mayor or Council.
The Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure.
SECTION 6.08 BOARD OF HEALTH
Council may, by ordinance, determine to establish a local Board of Health. In
the absence of such determination and establishment Council shall, by
ordinance, make adequate provision for health service by contract or otherwise.
SECTION 6.09 VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER'S DEPENDENCY FUND BOARD
A Volunteer Firefighter's Dependency Fund Board shall be established. The board
shall consist of such members and perform such duties as provided by the Ohio
Revised Code.
SECTION 6.10 URBAN TREE COMMISSION
An Urban Tree Commission consisting of five (5) members shall be established.
The members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council. The
members shall have terms of three (3) years on a staggered basis. The
Commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure. The purposes, objectives and
other procedures of the Commission shall be as provided by Ordinance of
Council.
SECTION 6.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Members of all boards or commissions shall serve without compensation unless
provided by ordinance and can be removed by Mayor for cause.
A majority of all of the members of each board or commission shall constitute a
quorum for meetings of such board and commission for the transaction of
business. A majority vote of all the attending quorum shall be necessary for
the taking of any action or the passage of any measures by such board or
commission.
All meetings of each board or commission shall comply with all rules for
notification of meetings to the public. All meetings of any board or commission
at which a majority of its members are present shall be meetings open to the
public. Any rules adopted by said boards or commissions shall supersede and
override state statutes to the extent provided by law.
At the first meeting in each calendar year, each board or commission shall
elect a chairperson and a secretary by a majority vote of all members appointed
thereto. The chairperson shall be a member of the respective body, but the
secretary need not be a member of the board or commission and may hold other
office or employment with the City. It shall be the duty of the chairperson to
attend all meetings of the board or commission. The secretary shall keep
accurate record of the proceedings of such board or commission.
SECTION 6.12 VACANCIES IN BOARDS OR COMMISSIONS
Unless otherwise provided by this Charter, a vacancy during the term of any
member of a board or commission established by this Charter or by an ordinance
passed by Council, shall be filled in the manner and by the appointing
authority authorized to make the original appointment, for the remainder of the
unexpired term of the member whose death, resignation, or removal created the
vacancy.
ARTICLE VII
FINANCE, TAXATION AND BORROWING
SECTION 7.01 FISCAL YEAR
The fiscal, budget and accounting year of the City shall be the calendar year
from January 1 through December 31.
SECTION 7.02 BUDGET
The Budget procedure of the City shall operate according to the laws of the
State of Ohio.
SECTION 7.03 APPROPRIATION ORDINANCE
Prior to the first day of the fiscal year, the Manager shall prepare and submit
to Council, an Appropriation Ordinance containing a financial plan for
conducting the affairs of the City during the ensuing fiscal or calendar year.
Council may provide for a public hearing upon such ordinance at any time.
Council may pass a temporary Appropriation Ordinance for meeting ordinary
expenses of the City but must charge all appropriations therein to the annual
Appropriation Ordinance which will be approved not later than April 1 of the
fiscal year concerned.
Council may pass such supplemental appropriation ordinances as it deems
necessary, adjusting appropriations between the various funds. This is subject
to the limitation that the total appropriation for any fiscal year cannot
exceed total balances carried forward from previous years plus estimated
revenue for the current fiscal year.
SECTION 7.04 TAX LEVY
Council shall not have authority to levy any tax on real or personal property
without a vote of the people except as provided by the Constitution and/or
general laws of the State of Ohio.
SECTION 7.05 CITY EARNINGS TAX LIMITATIONS
Council may not increase the City Income Tax without a vote of the people
except as provided by the Constitution and/or general laws of the State of
Ohio.
SECTION 7.06 POWER TO INCUR INDEBTEDNESS
Council may borrow funds for any purpose valid under the Constitution of the
State of Ohio, and authorized by ordinance, provided that such borrowing does
not exceed debt limitations as imposed from time to time by state statutes.
SECTION 7.07 PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS
No contract involving purchase orders or the expenditure of money shall be made
unless there is attached thereto the certificate of the Finance Director that
the amount required to meet the obligation has been appropriated for such
purchase and is available or in the process of collection. Notwithstanding the
above provision, however, provisions of general law regarding appropriations
and availability of funds shall govern as to contracts running beyond the
fiscal year in which they are made and contracts paid in whole or in part by
special assessment for improvements.
All purchases and contracts shall comply with general statutory law in regard
to the necessity of advertising and bids in relation to purchases and contracts
above the authorized limits unless provided by ordinance.
SECTION 7.08 EXPENDITURES
All expenditures of City funds shall be made by proper warrant drawn against an
appropriate fund. Any such warrant shall show upon its face the appropriation
against which such expenditure is made and the fund against the warrant is
drawn. All such warrants shall be signed as Council may direct.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, the Finance Director may establish a
petty cash fund or funds as directed by Council. The fund may be established,
as necessary, by the Finance Director who shall keep an account of all such
expenditures in accordance with established accounting practice.
SECTION 7.09 ANNUAL AUDITS
Council may, at its discretion, authorize a general financial audit of the
City. This may be in addition to, or in place of, audits by the State of Ohio
and shall be made by a certified public accountant who is not in the employ of
the City or financially interested in any transaction to be audited. Council
may, in addition, cause other audits of specific funds to be made at any time.
ARTICLE VIII
NOMINATIONS, ELECTIONS, AND QUALIFICATIONS
SECTION 8.01 EFFECT OF STATE LAW
Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the laws of the State of Ohio or
amendments thereto, shall govern the nominations and election of elective
officers of the City.
SECTION 8.02 VACANCIES
Vacancies in any elected office shall be filled as provided by laws of the
State of Ohio.
SECTION 8.03 INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
   A.   INITIATIVE. The electors of the City shall have the power to propose
ordinances and other measures by initiative petition in accordance with the
provisions of the Constitution and laws of Ohio now or hereafter in effect.
   B.   REFERENDUM. The electors of the City shall have the power to approve or
reject, at the polls, any ordinance or other measure enacted by Council in
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and laws of Ohio now or
hereafter in effect.
   C.   RECALL. The electors of the City shall have the power to remove from
office by recall election any elected official of the City, in accordance with
the provision of the Constitution and laws of Ohio now or hereafter in effect.
ARTICLE IX
MERIT SYSTEM
SECTION 9.01   CIVIL SERVICE—CLASSIFIED AND UNCLASSIFIED
Appointments and promotions in the service of the City shall be made according
to merit and fitness, pursuant to rules provided by Council. The classified
service of the City shall include all offices and positions of the City, except
the following, which constitute unclassified offices and positions:
   A.   Members of Council
   B.   City Clerk, Clerk of Council, and Clerk of Court
   C.   Mayor
   D.   Manager
   E.   Department Heads
   F.   Members of Boards or Commissions
   G.   Other positions as recommended by the Manager with the approval of
Council or as provided in the City Civil Service rules.
All rules and procedures provided by Council shall supersede and override State
statutes including State Civil Service statutes and rules.
ARTICLE X
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 10.01 SEPARABILITY
If any provision, section, or part of a section of this Charter is held invalid
by a court, the other provisions of this Charter, section, or part of a section
shall not be invalidated thereby.
SECTION 10.02 TRANSITIONAL PROCEDURE
This Charter shall be submitted to the electors at the general election of
November 6, 2012. If approved, it shall become effective upon passage. All
elected officials shall hold office until the expiration of their terms, when
the next elected officials shall serve as indicated in the separate sections of
this Charter. All other employees of the City as of the effective date of this
Charter shall continue in such employment, and thereafter, shall be subject in
all respects to the provisions of this Charter, and ordinances, resolutions,
rules, or regulations enacted or established thereunder.
At the November 2013 general election the four (4) Council candidates that
receive the highest vote totals shall serve terms of four (4) years. The
Council candidates receiving the next three (3) highest vote totals shall serve
terms of two (2) years. At the November 2015 general election the three (3)
Council candidates who receive the highest vote totals shall serve terms of
four (4) years. Thereafter Council candidates shall be elected to four (4) year
terms and the number to be elected will be based upon the number of expiring
Council positions, four (4) in one election and three (3) the next election.
(See also
Section 2.01)
The Police Chief in office upon the adoption of this charter may only be
removed in compliance with Civil Service. (See also
Section 5.02)
ARTICLE XI
ENUMERATION OF POWERS
SECTION 11.01 ENUMERATION OF POWERS
Any enumeration of powers contained herein shall not limit the scope of a
general grant of power to the same body or office.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.05   Construction of section references
   
10.06   Conflicting provisions
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Ordinances repealed
   
10.11   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.12   Ordinances saved
   
10.13   Application to future ordinances
   
10.14   Interpretation
   
10.15   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.16   Statutory references
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Electronically monitored house arrest
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the municipality,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and designated as the
“Mt. Healthy Code,” for which designation “code of ordinances,” “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Code title, chapter, and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
(R.C. § 1.01)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “Traffic Code.” Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01.” Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter,
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND may be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   CITY. The City of Mt. Healthy, Ohio.
   COUNCIL. The Legislative Authority of the municipality.
   COUNTY. Hamilton County, Ohio.
   FIRE CHIEF. Shall include the Chief of a fire department if such fire
department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the Fire
Prevention Officer if no fire department has been established in the
municipality.
   IMPRISONED. Shall have the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.
   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-federal
interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork
known as the world wide web.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent, or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The Legislative Authority of the municipality.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   MUNICIPALITY, CITY, TOWN, VILLAGE, or  MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. When used in
this code, shall denote the City of Mt. Healthy irrespective of its population
or legal classification.
   O.A.C. Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   OATH. Includes affirmation; and SWEAR includes affirm.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, and association.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real property.
   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER, and SEWERS. Includes sewers,
sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations,
together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state, or federal government, its officers, or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   R.C. or REVISED CODE. Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail; and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITING. Includes printing.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. The terms include any representation of words,
letters, symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating
to signatures.
   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Common and technical usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
   (B)   Singular and plural; gender; tenses. As used in this code, unless the
context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(R.C. § 1.43)
   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   LEGAL HOLIDAY, as used in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this
section, means the following days:
         (a)   The first day of January, known as New Year’s day;
         (b)   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King day;
         (c)   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln day;
         (d)   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968,” 82 Stat. 250,
5 U.S.C. 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial day;
         (e)   The nineteenth day of June, known as Juneteenth day;
         (f)   The fourth day of July, known as Independence day;
         (g)   The first Monday in September, known as Labor day;
         (h)   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus day;
         (i)   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s day;
         (j)   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving day;
         (k)   The twenty- fifth day of December, known as Christmas day;
         (l)   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, such priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
      (7)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or notice
shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of
such duty or compliance with such notice.
   (D)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (E)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority, or it is
inconsistent with state law or municipal charter provisions.
   (F)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when the subject
matter or context of such law is repugnant thereto.
§ 10.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
(R.C. § 1.57)
   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does not, except
as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder.
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder.
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
§ 10.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
(R.C. § 1.23)
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(R.C. § 1.55)
§ 10.06 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If the provisions of different codes, titles, chapters, or sections of this
code and other ordinances of the municipality conflict with or contravene each
other, the provisions bearing the latest passage date shall prevail. If the
conflicting provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be so
construed as to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions
of the subject matter taken as a whole.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of this code or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions are severable.
(R.C. § 1.50)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the municipality exercising the powers, duties,
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any words necessary to express the intention of the
provisions affected, the use of words to which no meaning can be attached, or
the use of a word when another word was clearly intended to express the
intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and the words supplied, omitted, or
substituted shall conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall
have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as
originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of such error.
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   With the exception of any ordinances specifically saved by the municipality,
this code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
and all ordinances specifically saved by the municipality shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intention of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature
serving the purpose, effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent
thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.13 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.14 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.15 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and need not be inserted in
this code, but shall be treated as if printed for inclusion herein.
   (B)   The following language should be used by the municipality to amend,
add, or repeal a chapter, section, or division:
      (1)   To amend a section: “Section                 of the Municipal Code
of Ordinances is amended to read as follows: . . . .”
      (2)   To add a section: “Section                 of the Municipal Code of
Ordinances, which is to be added to and amends the Municipal Code of
Ordinances, reads as follows: . . . .”
      (3)   To repeal a section: “Section                 of the Municipal Code
of Ordinances, which reads as follows, is repealed: . . . .”
Cross-reference:
   Adoption, form, and publication of ordinances, see §
31.07
§ 10.16 STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, located in parenthesis
immediately following a division or section of this code, this indicates that
the text of the division or section reads substantially the same as the
statutory provision. Example: (R.C. § 4511.02)
   (B)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following
the text of a section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information. Example:
   § 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      Unless otherwise exempted by state law, all public records shall be
promptly prepared and made available for inspection to any person.
   (R.C. § 149.43(B))
   Statutory reference:
      Public records, see R.C. § 149.43
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties
incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The
liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties, or
forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted.
In particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-
way, contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance,
establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate
officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had not been
enacted.
§ 10.18 ELECTRONICALLY MONITORED HOUSE ARREST.
   (A)   Any or all of the term of imprisonment authorized under the ordinances
of the city may be served by means of electronically monitored house arrest, in
the sole discretion of the Mayor. In such case, the Mayor shall determine the
number of days of actual imprisonment, the number of days of electronically
monitored house arrest, and whether any of the days of actual imprisonment
shall be suspended on the condition of successful completion of the
incarceration by electronically monitored house arrest. The sum of the days of
actual imprisonment plus the days of electronically monitored house arrest
shall not exceed the stated maximum number of days of imprisonment for that
particular offense.
   (B)   No individual may serve a term of imprisonment by electronically
monitored house arrest unless he or she first executes an appropriate agreement
made available to all such defendants, whereby the defendant agrees to pay the
cost of the system (or, in the sole discretion of the Mayor, such portion of
the cost as he or she can afford to pay) and agrees to abide by all of the
rules and regulations of the electronically monitored house arrest procedure.
The agreement shall provide that no credit for suspended days of actual
incarceration shall be granted unless the defendant successfully completes all
of the days of the electronically monitored house arrest.
   (C)   No person, knowing that he or she is under the restrictions of
electronically monitored house arrest, shall purposely break or attempt to
break such detention, or purposely violate any of the requirements of the
detention. Whoever violates this section is guilty of escape, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
('74 Code, § 10.13) (Ord. 90-957, passed 11-20-90)
Statutory reference:
   Electronically monitored house arrest or detention; funds, see R.C. §
2929.23
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which
a violation continues or occurs.
   (B)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for such failure.
Cross-reference:
   Misdemeanor classifications, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see R.C. § 715.67
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
         
30.   EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY
         
31.   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
         
32.   JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
         
33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
         
34.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
         
35.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
         
36.   CIVIL ACTIONS AGAINST THE MUNICIPALITY
         
37.   PERSONNEL POLICIES
         
38.   PUBLIC MEETINGS
         
39.   MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX REGULATIONS EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
         
39A.   MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX REGULATIONS EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
         
40.   PUBLIC EMERGENCIES
         
41.   CITY POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: EXECUTIVE AUTHORITY
Section
   
30.01   City Manager
   
30.02   City Clerk
   
30.03   Finance Director
   
30.04   Clerk of Council
   
30.05   Clerk of Courts
   
30.06   Administrative Assistant to the Council
   
30.07   Assistant Director of Law
   
30.08   Assistant City Clerk
   
30.09   Coordinator of Volunteer Services
   
30.10   Deputy Finance Director
   
30.11   Assistant City Manager/Finance Director
§ 30.01 CITY MANAGER.
   Provisions regarding the City Manager are contained in City Charter
Article IV.
§ 30.02 CITY CLERK.
   (A)   There is established the office of City Clerk. The City Clerk shall be
appointed by the Mayor. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to be in
attendance at the Municipal Building five days per week, Monday through Friday
from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. with one hour per day for lunch. The Clerk shall be
available during the hours aforesaid to answer the telephone and do the
necessary typing, filing, and clerical work required by the various officers of
the city.
   (B)   Compensation for the City Clerk shall be as set per legislative
authority.
(‘74 Code, § 31.07) (Ord. 403-A, passed 1-4-72)
§ 30.03 FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   Provisions regarding the Finance Director are contained in City Charter §
5.06.
§ 30.04 CLERK OF COUNCIL.
   Provisions regarding the Clerk of Council are contained in City Charter §
2.08.
§ 30.05 CLERK OF COURTS.
   Provisions regarding the Clerk of Courts are contained in City Charter §
3.03.
§ 30.06 ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT TO THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   There is created the office of Administrative Assistant to the
Council. The Administrative Assistant shall be elected by the Council and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Council.
   (B)   The duties of the Administrative Assistant shall be to assist the
Council in the performance of its legislative functions by making those
inquiries and conducting the research as the Council or any of its committees
may from time to time, by majority vote, direct. The direction shall be made
through the President of Council.
   (C)   Compensation for the Administrative Assistant shall be as set by
Council.
(‘74 Code, § 31.15) (Ord. 567-A, passed 7-18-78)
§ 30.07 ASSISTANT DIRECTOR OF LAW.
   (A)   There is established the position of Assistant Director of Law.
   (B)   The duties of the Assistant Director of Law shall include
representation of the city before courts and governmental agencies in judicial
and quasi- judicial proceedings, the prosecution of cases before the Mayor’s
Court, and such other duties as may be determined by the Director of Law.
   (C)   The compensation of the Assistant Director of Law shall be as set by
Council.
(‘74 Code, § 31.16) (Ord. 81-667, passed 1-20-81)
Statutory reference:
   City Director of Law, see R.C. § 733.49 et seq.
§ 30.08 ASSISTANT CITY CLERK.
   (A)   There is established the position of Assistant City Clerk.
   (B)   The Assistant City Clerk shall be appointed by the Mayor. It shall be
the duty of the Assistant City Clerk to be in attendance at the Municipal
Building five days per week, Monday through Friday, from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., with one hour per day for lunch. The Assistant City Clerk shall be
available during the hours aforesaid to answer the telephone and do the
necessary typing, filing, and clerical work required by the various officers of
the city. The Assistant City Clerk shall be under the supervision of the City
Clerk.
   (C)   Compensation for the Assistant City Clerk shall be as set by the
collective bargaining agreement between the city and the Mt. Healthy Clerical
Worker’s Association.
(‘74 Code, § 31.17) (Ord. 88-877, passed 12-20-88)
§ 30.09 COORDINATOR OF VOLUNTEER SERVICES.
   (A)   The position of Coordinator of Volunteer Services is hereby
established. The Coordinator of Volunteer Services shall be appointed by and
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
   (B)   The duties of the Coordinator of Volunteer Services shall be to
recruit, organize and train individuals to serve as volunteer workers for civic
events and in various city departments and such other duties as shall be
assigned by the Mayor.
   (C)   The Coordinator of Volunteer Services shall be compensated as provided
by Council. The Coordinator of Volunteer Services shall not be compensated for
more than 20 hours of work per week.
(‘74 Code, § 31.18) (Ord. 90-952, passed 11-6-90)
§ 30.10 DEPUTY FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The full-time position of Deputy Finance Director has been created.
   (B)   This position shall be a minimum of 35 hours per week, payable under
the city’s regular pay periods.
   (C)   The following benefits shall be provided by the city:
      (1)   Medical insurance. The city shall provide hospitalization and major
medical insurance under the current health care policy. Should the full- time
employee desire hospitalization and major medical insurance for his or her
spouse and dependent children, the city shall pay 75% of the additional premium
for the employee’s policy. The employee shall, through regular payroll
deductions, contribute 25% of the additional premium.
      (2)   The city shall provide dental insurance for all full-time
employees, paid in full by the city.
      (3)   The city shall provide a group life insurance policy to a surviving
spouse, other designated beneficiary, or the estate of the full-time employee
in the amount of $20,000.
      (4)   Holidays and sick time shall be accumulated under the current
policy manual of the city.
(‘74 Code, § 35.12) (Ord. 89-900, passed 10-3-89; Am. Ord. 93-1059, passed 3-
16-93; Am. Ord. 94-1094, passed 3-15-94; Am. Ord. 95-1134, passed 1-3-95; Am.
Ord. 06-1478, passed 2-7-06)
§ 30.11 ASSISTANT CITY MANAGER/ FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   City Council, by a majority vote, hereby creates the new position of
Assistant City Manager/Finance Director effective July 1, 2022.
   (B)   The new position of Assistant City Manager/Finance Director will
receive an annual salary of $80,000 paid evenly throughout every two weeks in a
bi-weekly manner along with four weeks of vacation (20 business days) per year
and $75 per month in cell phone reimbursement.
(Ord. 22-1987, passed 6-28-22)
CHAPTER 31: LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
Section
   
31.01   Council meetings
   
31.02   Members of legislative authority
   
31.03   Qualifications of members
   
31.04   Election and term of members
   
31.05   Officers
   
31.06   (Reserved)
   
31.07   Adoption, form and publication of ordinances
§ 31.01 COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   The regular meetings of Council shall be held in the council chamber,
commencing at 7:30 p.m. on the first and third Tuesday of each month; provided
that whenever Tuesday shall be a legal holiday the regular meeting shall be
held on Wednesday at the same time; provided further that Council may, on
motion, adopt a different day or hour for its regular meeting. The Mayor or any
three members may call special meetings upon at least 24 hours’ notice to each
member, served personally, left at his usual place of residence.
(‘74 Code, § 30.01) (Ord. 77A, passed 1-15-52)
Statutory reference:
   Meetings of legislative authority, see R.C. § 731.46
§ 31.02 MEMBERS OF LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
   The legislative power of the city shall be vested in, and exercised by, the
legislative authority, composed of not fewer than seven members elected by
electors of the city at large.
(R.C. § 731.01) (‘74 Code, § 30.02)
§ 31.03 QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   Members of the legislative authority at large shall have resided in
the city for at least one year immediately preceding their election. Each
member of the legislative authority shall be an elector of the city, shall not
hold any other public office, except that of notary public or member of the
state militia, and shall not be interested in any contract with the city, and
no such member may hold employment with the city. A member who ceases to
possess any of such qualifications, or removes from his ward, if elected from a
ward, or from the city, if elected from the city at large, shall forthwith
forfeit his office.
   (B)   The purpose of establishing a one-year residency requirement in this
section is to recognize that the state has a substantial and compelling
interest in encouraging qualified candidacies for election to the office of
member of the legislative authority of a city by ensuring that a candidate for
such office has every opportunity to become knowledgeable with and concerned
about the problems and needs of the area he seeks to represent. In enacting
this requirement, the general assembly finds that the one-year period is
reasonably related to this purpose, while leaving unimpaired a person’s right
to travel, to vote, and to be a candidate for public office.
(R.C. § 731.02) (‘74 Code, § 30.03)
§ 31.04 ELECTION AND TERM OF MEMBERS.
   Provisions regarding the elections and terms of members of the City Council
are contained in City Charter §
2.01.
§ 31.05 OFFICERS.
   Provisions regarding the officers of City Council are contained in City
Charter §
2.07.
§ 31.06 (RESERVED)
§ 31.07 ADOPTION, FORM AND PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   Provisions regarding the Ordinances and Resolutions of Council are contained
in City Charter §
2.06.
CHAPTER 32: JUDICIAL AUTHORITY
Section
General Provisions
   
32.001   Application of chapter
   
32.002   Definitions
   
32.003   Right to trial by jury
   
32.004   Fees of witnesses
   
32.005   Contempt of court; rules
   
32.006   Recovery of fines and forfeitures
   
32.007   Appeals
   
32.008   Transfer of cases from Mayor’s Court to other appropriate court
   
32.009   Waiving of court costs by court prohibited; exception
Jurisdiction of Mayor
   
32.020   Powers of Mayor in criminal matters
   
32.021   Duties; fees; office; seal
   
32.022   Mayor’s Court Magistrate
   
32.023   Jurisdiction in ordinance cases and traffic violations
   
32.024   Powers to suspend driver’s license in OVI cases
Arrest of Accused
   
32.035   Officer may arrest on view
   
32.036   Affidavit filed in case of arrest without warrant
   
32.037   Duty of private person making arrest
   
32.038   Duty to inform person arrested of cause thereof
   
32.039   Issuance of warrant
   
32.040   Accusation by affidavit to cause arrest or prosecution
   
32.041   Procedure upon filing of affidavit or complaint
   
32.042   Failure of person summoned to appear
   
32.043   Forcible entry in making arrest
   
32.044   Proceedings upon arrest
   
32.045   Rights of person arrested
   
32.046   Amount and disposition of bail
   
32.047   Prisoners held without process
   
32.048   Contents of warrant, summons or notice
   
32.049   Form of affidavit
Preliminary Examination
   
32.060   Announcement of charge and rights of accused in court
   
32.061   Arraignment; counsel; bail
   
32.062   Motion for dismissal; discharge; amendment of complaint
   
32.063   Pleas
Trial
   
32.075   Applicability of subchapter
   
32.076   Setting and continuing cases
   
32.077   Refusal to waive jury trial
   
32.078   Authority of magistrate
   
32.079   Presumption of innocence
   
32.080   Exceptions to rulings
   
32.081   Territorial jurisdiction
   
32.082   Order of proceedings of trial
   
32.083   When accused may be tried in his absence
   
32.084   Responsibility for prosecution
   
32.085   Rules of evidence and procedure
Judgment; Sentence
   
32.095   Offender may be confined until fine paid
   
32.096   Conditional sentence for misdemeanor
Disposition of Fines
   
32.110   Disposition of fines and other moneys
   
32.111   Fines collected from persons arrested by state highway patrolmen
   
32.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.001 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   
Chapter 32 of this code of ordinances consists mainly with the judicial powers
and duties of the Mayor.
(‘74 Code, § 32.01)
§ 32.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FELONY. An offense punishable by death or by incarceration in the
penitentiary; a MISDEMEANOR is any offense which is not so punishable.
   MAGISTRATE. Is defined by R.C. § 2931.01 as including MAYOR. The term
MAGISTRATE, where used in the following sections, may be considered to include
MAYOR.
   JUSTICE OF THE PEACE. R.C. Ch. 1907 to 1921 create in each county a court
known as the county court. The office of justice of the peace, and the justice
of the peace court have been abolished. The term JUSTICE OF THE PEACE or
reference to the justice’s courts in the following sections may be considered
to refer to county judges and county courts.
   VENUE. The territorial limits, within the county or municipality, of the
Mayor’s jurisdiction.
(‘74 Code, § 32.02)
§ 32.003 RIGHT TO TRIAL BY JURY.
   At any trial, in any court, for the violation of any statute of the state of
Ohio, or of any ordinance of any municipality, except in cases where the
penalty involved does not exceed a fine of $100, the accused shall be entitled
to be tried by a jury drawn in the manner prescribed by law for the selection
of jurors. This section does not apply to, and there is no right to a jury
trial for, a person who is the subject of a complaint filed under R.C. §
2151.27 against both a child and the parent, guardian, or other person having
care of the child.
(R.C. § 2945.17) (‘74 Code, § 32.06)
§ 32.004 FEES OF WITNESSES.
   In cases for the violation of ordinances, the fees of witnesses shall be
paid, on the certificate of the officer presiding at the trial, from the
treasury of the municipal corporation.
(R.C. § 1905.26) (‘74 Code, § 32.65)
§ 32.005 CONTEMPT OF COURT; RULES.
   The Mayor or Mayor’s Court Magistrate presiding at any trial may under this
chapter punish contempt, compel the attendance of jurors and witnesses, and
establish rules for the examination and trial of all cases brought before him,
in the same manner as judges of county courts.
(R.C. § 1905.28) (‘74 Code, § 32.67)
§ 32.006 RECOVERY OF FINES AND FORFEITURES.
   Fines, penalties, and forfeitures may, in all cases, and in addition to any
other mode provided, be recovered by action before any judge of a county court,
or other court of competent jurisdiction, in the name of the proper municipal
corporation, and for its use. In any action in which a pleading is necessary,
it is sufficient if the petition sets forth generally the amount claimed to be
due in respect to the violation of the ordinance of the municipal corporation.
Such petition shall refer to the title of such ordinance, state the date of its
adoption or passage, and show, as near as is practicable, the true time of the
alleged violation.
(R.C. § 1905.32) (‘74 Code, § 32.68)
Statutory reference:
   Time within which action must be brought, see R.C. § 2901.13
§ 32.007 APPEALS.
   Appeals from a Mayor’s Court may be taken to the municipal court or county
court having jurisdiction within the municipal corporation.
(R.C. § 1905.22) (‘74 Code, § 32.70)
§ 32.008 TRANSFER OF CASES FROM MAYOR’S COURT TO OTHER APPROPRIATE COURT.
   (A)   If a person who is charged with a violation of a law or an ordinance
is brought before a Mayor’s Court and the violation charged is not within the
jurisdiction of the court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01, the Mayor promptly
shall transfer the case to the municipal court, county court, or Court of
Common Pleas with jurisdiction over the alleged violation and shall require the
person to enter into recognizance to appear before that court. If a person who
is charged with a violation of a law or ordinance is brought before a Mayor’s
Court and the violation charged is within the jurisdiction of the court, as set
forth in R.C. § 1905.01, the Mayor, at any time prior to the final disposition
of the case, may transfer it to the municipal court, county court, or court of
common pleas with concurrent jurisdiction over the alleged violation. If a
Mayor transfers a case under this provision, the Mayor shall require the person
charged to enter into recognizance to appear before the court to which the case
is transferred.
   (B)   Upon the transfer of a case by a Mayor under division (A) of this
section, all of the following apply:
      (1)   The Mayor shall certify all papers filed in the case, together with
a transcript of all proceedings, accrued costs to date, and the recognizance
given, to the court to which the case is transferred;
      (2)   All further proceedings under the charge, complaint, information,
or indictment in the transferred case shall be discontinued in the Mayor’s
Court and shall be conducted in the court to which the case is transferred, in
accordance with the provisions governing proceedings in that court;
      (3)   The case thereafter shall be within the exclusive jurisdiction of
the court to which it is transferred.
(R.C. § 1905.032) (‘74 Code, § 32.71)
§ 32.009 WAIVING OF COURT COSTS BY COURT PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to an offense and the court
specifically is required, pursuant to R.C. §§ 2743.70 or 2949.091 or pursuant
to any other section of the Revised Code, to impose a specified sum of money as
costs in the case in addition to any other costs that the court is required or
permitted by law to impose in the case, the court shall not waive the payment
of the specified additional court costs that the section of the Revised Code
specifically requires the court to impose unless the court determines that the
offender is indigent and the court waives the payment of all court costs
imposed upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2949.092) (‘74 Code, § 32.72)
JURISDICTION OF MAYOR
§ 32.020 POWERS OF MAYOR IN CRIMINAL MATTERS.
   (A)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation has, within the corporate limits,
all the powers conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorder and keep the peace.
   (B)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation shall award and issue all writs
and process that are necessary to enforce the administration of justice
throughout the municipal corporation. The Mayor shall subscribe his name and
affix his official seal to all writs, process, transcripts, and other official
papers. A Mayor’s Court Magistrate, in hearing and determining prosecutions and
criminal causes that are within the scope of his authority under R.C. §
1905.05, has the same powers and duties as are granted to or imposed upon a
mayor under this division.
   (C)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation shall be disqualified in any
criminal case in which he was the arresting officer, assisted in the arrest, or
was present at the time of arrest, and shall not hear the case.
(R.C. § 1905.20)
   (D)   In all criminal cases, including traffic cases, the Mayor shall
include in the sentence a charge as established by ordinance as court costs,
and shall render a judgment against the defendant for such costs.
(Ord. 84-781, passed 12-4-84)
(‘74 Code, § 32.03)
Statutory reference:
   General powers of the Mayor, see R.C. § 733.03
§ 32.021 DUTIES; FEES; OFFICE; SEAL.
   (A)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation and a Mayor’s Court Magistrate
shall keep a docket. Neither the Mayor of a municipal corporation nor a Mayor’s
Court Magistrate shall retain or receive for his own use any of the fines,
forfeitures, fees, or costs he collects. A Mayor’s Court Magistrate shall
account for all such fines, forfeitures, fees, and costs he collects and
transfer them to the Mayor. The Mayor shall account for and dispose of all such
fines, forfeitures, fees, and costs he collects, including all such fines,
forfeitures, fees, and costs that are transferred to him by a Mayor’s Court
Magistrate, as provided in R.C. § 733.40.
   (B)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation shall be paid such fixed annual
salary as the Council provides under R.C. §§ 731.08 and 731.13, and a Mayor’s
Court Magistrate shall receive compensation as provided in R.C. § 1905.05.
   (C)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation shall keep an office, provided by
the Council, at a convenient place in the municipal corporation, and shall be
furnished by the Council with the corporate seal of the municipal corporation.
In the center of such seal shall be the words, “Mayor of the City of Mt.
Healthy”
(R.C. § 1905.21) (‘74 Code, § 32.04)
§ 32.022 MAYOR’S COURT MAGISTRATE.
   (A)   A Mayor of a municipality that has a Mayor’s Court may appoint a
person as Mayor’s Court Magistrate to hear and determine prosecutions and
criminal cases in the Mayor’s Court that are within the jurisdiction of the
Mayor’s Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01. No person shall be appointed as
a Mayor’s Court Magistrate unless the person has been admitted to the practice
of law in this state and, for a total of at least three years preceding his or
her appointment or the commencement of his or her service as magistrate, has
been engaged in the practice of law in this state or served as a judge of a
court of record in any jurisdiction in the United States, or both.
      (1)   A person appointed as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under this
division is entitled to hear and determine prosecutions and criminal cases in
the Mayor’s Court that are within the jurisdiction of the Mayor’s Court, as set
forth in R.C. § 1905.01. If a Mayor is prohibited from hearing or determining a
prosecution or cause that charges a person with a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
or a municipal OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181 due to the operation
of R.C. § 1905.03(C), or is prohibited from hearing or determining any other
prosecution or cause due to the operation of R.C. § 1905.031(C), the
prohibition against the Mayor hearing or determining the prosecution or causes
does not affect and shall not be construed as affecting the jurisdiction or
authority of a person appointed as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under this
division to hear and determine the prosecution or cause in accordance with this
section. In hearing and determining such prosecutions and causes, the
magistrate has the same powers, duties, and authority as does a Mayor who
conducts a Mayor’s Court to hear and determine prosecutions and causes in
general, including, but not limited to, the power and authority to decide the
prosecution or cause, enter judgement, and impose sentence; the powers, duties,
and authority granted to Mayors of Mayor’s Courts by this chapter, in relation
to the hearing and determination of prosecutions and causes in Mayor’s Courts;
and the powers, duties, and authority granted to Mayors of Mayor’s Courts by
any provisions of the Revised Code, in relation to the hearing and
determination of prosecutions and causes in Mayor’s Courts. A judgement entered
and a sentence imposed by a Mayor’s Court Magistrate do not have to be reviewed
or approved by the Mayor who appointed the Magistrate, and have the same force
and effect as if they had been entered or imposed by the Mayor.
      (2)   A person appointed as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under this
division is not entitled to hear or determine any prosecution or criminal cause
other than prosecutions and causes that are within the jurisdiction of the
Mayor’s Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.
      (3)   A municipality that a Mayor’s Court Magistrate serves shall pay the
compensation for the services of the Magistrate, which shall be either a fixed
annual salary set by the Legislative Authority or a fixed annual amount or fees
for services rendered set under a contract the Magistrate and the municipality
enter into.
   (B)   The appointment of a person as a Mayor’s Court Magistrate under
division (A) of this section does not preclude the Mayor that appointed the
Magistrate, subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03 and the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031, from also hearing and determining
prosecutions and criminal causes in the Mayor’s Court that are within the
jurisdiction of the Mayor’s Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.
(R.C. § 1905.05) (‘74 Code, § 32.041)
§ 32.023 JURISDICTION IN ORDINANCE CASES AND TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not being
the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge sits pursuant to R.C. §
1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor
has jurisdiction, except as provided in divisions (B), (C) and (E) of this
section and subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03 and the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031, to hear and determine any prosecution
for the violation of an ordinance of the municipality, to hear and determine
any case involving a violation of a vehicle parking or standing ordinance of
the municipality unless the violation is required to be handled by a parking
violations bureau or joint parking violations bureau pursuant to R.C. Chapter
4521, and to hear and determine all criminal cases involving any moving traffic
violation occurring on a state highway located within the boundaries of the
municipality, subject to the limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04.
   (B)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not
being the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge of a court sits
as required pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021 or by designation of the judges
pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor has jurisdiction, subject to the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03, to hear and determine prosecutions
involving a violation of an ordinance of the municipality relating to operating
a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine, and to hear and determine criminal causes involving a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance that occur on a
state highway located within the boundaries of the municipality, subject to the
limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04, only if the person charged with the
violation, within ten years of the date of the violation charged, has not been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of an ordinance of any municipality relating to
operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine;
         (b)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance;
         (c)   A violation of any ordinance of any municipality or of any
section of the Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the
streets, to which all of the following apply:
            1.   The person, in the case in which the conviction was obtained
or the plea of guilty was entered, had been charged with a violation of an
ordinance of a type described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section, or with a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   The charge of the violation described in division (B)(1)(c)1.
of this section was dismissed or reduced;
            3.   The violation of which the person was convicted or to which he
or she pleaded guilty arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the
same act as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced;
         (d)   A violation of a statute of the United States or any other state
or a municipal ordinance of a municipality located in any other state that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19.
      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in division (B)
(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section, regardless of where the violation
occurred, if the person charged with the violation, within ten years of the
violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
listed in division (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c), or (B)(1)(d) of this
section.
      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a violation of an
ordinance of the municipality he or she serves relating to operating a vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them
or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine, or in hearing a criminal cause
involving a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, determines that the person charged, within ten years of the
violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
listed in division (B)(1)(a), (B)(1)(b), (B)(1)(c), or (B)(1)(d) of this
section, the Mayor immediately shall transfer the case to the county court or
municipal court with jurisdiction over the violation charged, in accordance
with R.C. § 1905.032.
   (C)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more than 200 not
being the site of a municipal court and not being a place where a judge of a
court listed in division (A) of this section sits as required pursuant to R.C.
§ 1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the
Mayor, subject to R.C. §§ 1901.031, 2937.08, and 2938.04, has jurisdiction to
hear and determine prosecutions involving a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16 and to hear
and determine criminal causes that involve a moving traffic violation, that
involve a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16, and that occur on a state
highway located within the boundaries of the municipality only if all of the
following apply regarding the violation and the person charged:
         (a)   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.16 or a violation of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
person charged with the violation, within six years of the date of the
violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the
following:
            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.16;
            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4510.16;
            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or section of the
Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the highways or
streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of a violation
of a type described in division (C)(1)(a)1. or (C)(1)(a)2. of this section was
dismissed or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation that arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act
as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced.
         (b)   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or a violation of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
person charged with the violation, within six years of the date of the
violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the
following:
            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A);
            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4510.14(A);
            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or section of the
Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the highways or
streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of a violation
of a type described in division (C)(1)(b)1. or (C)(1)(b)2. of this section was
dismissed or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation that arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act
as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced.
      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in division (C)
(1)(a)1. or (C)(1)(a)2. of this section if the person charged with the
violation, within six years of the violation charged, has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to any violation listed in division (C)(1)(b)1. through (C)(1)
(b)3. of this section.
      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a violation of an
ordinance of the municipality he or she serves that is substantially equivalent
to R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16 or a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or 4510.16,
determines that, under division (C)(2) of this section, he or she does not have
jurisdiction of the prosecution, the Mayor immediately shall transfer the case
to the county court or municipal court with jurisdiction over the violation in
accordance with R.C. § 1905.032.
   (D)   If the Mayor has jurisdiction pursuant to division (B)(1) of this
section to hear and determine a prosecution or criminal cause involving a
violation described in division (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section, the
authority of the Mayor to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is subject
to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03(C). If the Mayor has jurisdiction
pursuant to division (A) or (C) of this section to hear and determine a
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation other than a violation
described in division (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section, the authority of
the Mayor to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is subject to the
limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031(C).
   (E)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have the
jurisdiction to hear and determine any prosecution or criminal cause involving
any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or 2919.27;
         (b)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.211 or
2911.211 that involves a person who was a family or household member of the
defendant at the time of the violation;
         (c)   A violation a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to an offense described in division (E)(1)(a) or (E)(1)(b) of this
section and that involves a person who was a family or household member of the
defendant at the time of the violation.
      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have the jurisdiction
to hear and determine a motion filed pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or filed
pursuant to a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that
section or to issue a protection order pursuant to that section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (3)   As used in this section, FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2919.25.
   (F)   In keeping his or her docket and files, the Mayor and a Mayor’s Court
Magistrate appointed under R.C. § 1905.05 shall be governed by the laws
pertaining to county courts.
(R.C. § 1905.01) (‘74 Code, § 32.05)
§ 32.024 POWER TO SUSPEND DRIVER’S LICENSE IN OVI CASES.
   (A)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation that has a Mayor’s Court,
and a Mayor’s Court Magistrate, are entitled to suspend, and shall suspend, in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4510.02, 4510.07, and 4511.19, the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege of any
person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them, or of a
municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation that has a Mayor’s Court, and
a Mayor’s Court Magistrate, are entitled to suspend, and shall suspend, in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4510.02, 4510.07, and 4511.19, the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege of any
person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(B)
or of a municipal ordinance relating to the operating of a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine that is substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(B).
   (B)   Suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall
be concurrent with any period of disqualification or suspension under R.C. §
3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a
commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section.
(R.C. § 1905.201)
Cross-reference:
   Driving while intoxicated or drugged, see §
73.01
ARREST OF ACCUSED
§ 32.035 OFFICER MAY ARREST ON VIEW.
   (A)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal or municipal police
officer shall arrest and detain a person found violating a law of this state,
or any ordinance of this city until a warrant can be obtained.
(R.C. § 2935.03(A))
   (B)   When there is reasonable ground to believe that an offense of
violence, the offense of criminal child enticement as defined in R.C. §
2905.05, the offense of public indecency as defined in § 2907.09, the offense
of domestic violence as defined in R.C. § 2919.25, the offense of violating a
protection order or consent agreement as defined in R.C. § 2919.27, the offense
of menacing by stalking as defined in R.C. § 2903.211, the offense of
aggravated trespass as defined in R.C. § 2911.211, a theft offense as defined
in R.C. § 2913.01, or a felony drug abuse as defined in R.C.§ 2925.01, has been
committed within the limits of the city in which the peace officer is
appointed, employed, or elected, or within the limits of the territorial
jurisdiction of the peace officer, a peace officer described in division (A) of
this section may arrest and detain until a warrant can be obtained any person
who the peace officer has reasonable cause to believe is guilty of a violation.
(R.C. § 2935.03(B)(1))
   (C)   When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of R.C. §§
4506.15 (A), (B), or (C) or 4511.19 (A) has been committed by a person
operating a motor vehicle subject to regulation by the Public Utilities
Commission of Ohio under Title XLIX of the Revised Code, a peace officer with
authority to enforce such provision of law may stop or detain the person whom
he has reasonable cause to believe was operating the motor vehicle in violation
of the division or section and, after investigating the circumstances
surrounding the operation of the vehicle, may arrest and detain such person.
(R.C. § 2935.03(C))
(‘74 Code, § 32.08)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest and detention until warrant can be obtained, see R.C. § 2935.03
§ 32.036 AFFIDAVIT FILED IN CASE OF ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT.
   When a person named in R.C. § 2935.03 has arrested a person without a
warrant, he shall, without unnecessary delay, take the person arrested before a
court or magistrate having jurisdiction of the offense, and shall file or cause
to be filed an affidavit describing the offense for which the person was
arrested. Such affidavit shall be filed either with the court or magistrate, or
with the prosecuting attorney or other attorney charged by law with prosecution
of crimes before such court or magistrate and if filed with such attorney he
shall forthwith file with such court or magistrate a complaint, based on such
affidavit.
(R.C. § 2935.05) (‘74 Code, § 32.09)
§ 32.037 DUTY OF PRIVATE PERSON MAKING ARREST.
   A private person who has made an arrest pursuant to R.C. § 2935.04 or
detention pursuant to R.C. § 2935.041 shall forthwith take the person arrested
before the most convenient judge or clerk of a court of record or before a
magistrate, or deliver such person to an officer authorized to execute criminal
warrants who shall, without unnecessary delay, take such person before the
court or magistrate having jurisdiction of the offense. The officer may, but if
he does not, the private person shall file or cause to be filed in such court
or before such magistrate an affidavit stating the offense for which the person
was arrested.
(R.C. § 2935.06) (‘74 Code, § 32.10)
Statutory reference:
   Right to make arrest, R.C. § 2935.04
§ 32.038 DUTY TO INFORM PERSON ARRESTED OF CAUSE THEREOF.
   When an arrest is made without a warrant by an officer, he shall inform the
person arrested of his authority and cause of the arrest; and when the arrest
is made by a private person, he shall, before making the arrest, inform the
person to be arrested of the intention to arrest him and the cause of arrest;
except that when a person is engaged in the commission of a criminal offense,
it shall not be necessary to inform him of the cause of his arrest.
(R.C. § 2935.07) (‘74 Code, § 32.11)
§ 32.039 ISSUANCE OF WARRANT.
   Upon the filing of an affidavit or complaint as provided in R.C. §§ 2935.05
or 2935.06 (§
32.036 and
32.037 herein) such judge, clerk, or magistrate shall forthwith issue a warrant
to the peace officer making the arrest, or if made by a private person, to the
most convenient peace officer who shall receive custody of the person arrested.
All further detention and further proceedings shall be pursuant to such
affidavit or complaint and warrant.
(R.C. § 2935.08) (‘74 Code, § 32.12)
§ 32.040 ACCUSATION BY AFFIDAVIT TO CAUSE ARREST OR PROSECUTION.
   In all cases not provided by R.C. §§ 2935.02 to 2935.08, inclusive, in order
to cause the arrest or prosecution of a person charged with committing an
offense in this state, a peace officer, or a private citizen having knowledge
of the facts, shall file with the judge or clerk of a court of record, or with
a magistrate, an affidavit charging the offense committed, or shall file such
affidavit with the prosecuting attorney or attorney charged by law with the
prosecution of offenses in court or before such magistrate, for the purpose of
having a complaint filed by such prosecuting or other authorized attorney.
(R.C. § 2935.09) (‘74 Code, § 32.13)
§ 32.041 PROCEDURE UPON FILING OF AFFIDAVIT OR COMPLAINT.
   (A)   Upon the filing of an affidavit or complaint as provided by R.C. §
2935.09 (§
32.040 herein), if it charges the commission of a felony, such judge, clerk or
magistrate, unless he has reason to believe that it was not filed in good
faith, or the claim was not meritorious, shall forthwith issue a warrant for
the arrest of the person charged in the affidavit, and directed to a peace
officer; otherwise he shall forthwith refer the matter to the prosecuting
attorney or other attorney charged by law with prosecution for investigation
prior to the issuance of warrant.
   (B)   If the offense charged is a misdemeanor or violation of a municipal
ordinance, such judge, clerk, or magistrate may:
      (1)   Issue a warrant for the arrest of such person, directed to any
officer named in R.C. § 2935.03 (§
32.035 herein) but in cases of ordinance violation only to a police officer or
marshal or deputy marshal of the municipal corporation;
      (2)   Issue summons, to be served by a peace officer, bailiff, or court
constable, commanding the person against whom the affidavit or complaint was
filed to appear forthwith, or at a fixed time in the future, before such court
or magistrate. Such summons shall be served in the same manner as in civil
cases.
   (C)   If the affidavit is filed by, or the complaint is filed pursuant to an
affidavit executed by, a peace officer who has, at his discretion, at the time
of commission of the alleged offense, notified the person to appear before the
court or magistrate at a specified time set by such officer, no process need be
issued unless the defendant fails to appear at the scheduled time.
   (D)   Any person charged with a misdemeanor or violation of a municipal
ordinance may give bail as provided in R.C. §§ 2937.22 to 2937.46, inclusive,
for his appearance, regardless of whether a warrant, summons, or notice to
appear has been issued.
   (E)   Any warrant, summons, or any notice issued by the peace officer shall
state the substance of the charge against the person arrested or directed to
appear.
   (F)   When the offense charged is a misdemeanor, and the warrant or summons
issued pursuant to this section is not served within two years of the date of
issue, a judge or magistrate may order such summons or warrant withdrawn and
the case closed when it does not appear that the ends of justice require
keeping the case open.
(R.C. § 2935.10) (‘74 Code, § 32.14)
§ 32.042 FAILURE OF PERSON SUMMONED TO APPEAR.
   If the person summoned to appear as provided in division (B) of R.C. §
2935.10 (§
32.041 herein) fails to appear without just cause and personal service of the
summons was had upon him, he may be found guilty of contempt of court and may
be fined not to exceed $20 for such contempt. Upon failure to appear, the court
or magistrate may forthwith issue a warrant for his arrest.
(R.C. § 2935.11) (‘74 Code, § 32.15)
§ 32.043 FORCIBLE ENTRY IN MAKING ARREST.
   (A)   When making an arrest or executing an arrest warrant or summons in
lieu of an arrest warrant, or when executing a search warrant, the peace
officer, law enforcement officer, or other authorized individual making the
arrest or executing the warrant or summons may break down an outer or inner
door or window of a dwelling house or other building if, after notice of his
intention to make the arrest or to execute the warrant or summons, he is
refused admittance, but the law enforcement officer or other authorized
individual executing a search warrant shall not enter a house or building not
described in the warrant.
   (B)   The precondition for nonconsensual, forcible entry established by
division (A) of this section is subject to waiver, as it applies to the
execution of a search warrant, in accordance with R.C. § 2933.231.
(R.C. § 2935.12) (‘74 Code, § 32.16)
§ 32.044 PROCEEDINGS UPON ARREST.
   Upon the arrest of any person pursuant to warrant, he shall forthwith be
taken before the court or magistrate issuing the same, if such court be in
session or such magistrate available, and proceedings had as provided in R.C.
§§ 2937.01 to 2937.46, inclusive. If such court be not in session and a
misdemeanor or ordinance violation is charged, he shall be taken before the
Clerk or Deputy Clerk of the court and let to bail, as provided in R.C. §§
2937.22 to 2937.46, inclusive, if the magistrate is not available, or if the
defendant is arrested in a county other than that of the issuing court or
magistrate he shall forthwith be taken before the most convenient magistrate,
Clerk or Deputy Clerk of a court of record, and there let to bail for his
appearance before the issuing court or magistrate within a reasonable time to
be set by such Clerk.
(R.C. § 2935.13) (‘74 Code, § 32.17)
§ 32.045 RIGHTS OF PERSON ARRESTED.
   After the arrest, detention, or any other taking into custody of a person,
with or without a warrant, such person shall be permitted forthwith facilities
to communicate with an attorney at law of his choice who is entitled to
practice in the courts of this state, or to communicate with any other person
of his choice for the purpose of obtaining counsel. Such communication may be
made by a reasonable number of telephone calls or in any other reasonable
manner. Such person shall have a right to be visited immediately by any
attorney at law so obtained who is entitled to practice in the courts of this
state, and to consult with him privately. No officer or any other agent of this
state shall prevent, attempt to prevent, or advise such person against the
communication, visit, or consultation provided for by this section.
(R.C. § 2935.20; see also R.C. § 2935.14) (‘74 Code, § 32.18)
§ 32.046 AMOUNT AND DISPOSITION OF BAIL.
   Amount of bail and nature of security therefor in misdemeanor cases may be
set by a schedule fixed by the court or magistrate, or it may be endorsed on
the warrant by the magistrate or clerk of the issuing court. If the amount be
not endorsed on the warrant, the schedule set by the court or magistrate before
whom bail is taken shall prevail. All recognizances taken, or cash received
shall be promptly transmitted to the court issuing the warrant, and further
proceedings thereon shall be the same as if taken by the issuing court.
(R.C. § 2935.15) (‘74 Code, § 32.19)
Statutory reference:
   Release on own recognizance, R.C. §§ 2937.29, 2937.99
§ 32.047 PRISONERS HELD WITHOUT PROCESS.
   When it comes to the attention of any judge or magistrate that a prisoner is
being held in any jail or place of custody in his jurisdiction without
commitment from a court or magistrate, he shall forthwith, by summary process,
require the officer or person in charge of such jail or place of custody to
disclose to such court or magistrate, in writing, whether or not he holds the
person described or identified in the process and the court under whose process
the prisoner is being held. If it appears from the disclosure that the prisoner
is held solely under warrant of arrest from any court or magistrate, the judge
or magistrate shall order the custodian to produce the prisoner forthwith
before the court or magistrate issuing the warrant and if such be impossible
for any reason, to produce him before the inquiring judge or magistrate. If it
appears from the disclosure that the prisoner is held without process, such
judge or magistrate shall require the custodian to produce the prisoner
forthwith before him, there to be charged as provided in R.C. § 2935.06. (§
32.037 herein)
(R.C. § 2935.16) (‘74 Code, § 32.20)
§ 32.048 CONTENTS OF WARRANT, SUMMONS OR NOTICE.
   A warrant, summons, or notice of a peace officer shall either contain a copy
of the affidavit, or recite the substance of the accusation. A warrant shall be
directed to a specific officer or to a department designated by its chief, and
shall command such officer or member of department to take the accused and
bring him forthwith before the magistrate or court issuing such warrant, to be
dealt with according to law. A summons shall be directed to the officer or
department, and shall command him to notify the accused by serving a copy of
such summons upon him. The following form of warrant is sufficient:
   The State of Ohio
   ...............County, ss:
   To the Sheriff (other Officer):
   Greetings:
      Whereas there has been filed with me an affidavit of which the following
is a copy (here copy) or the substance, (here set forth the substance, omitting
formal parts). These are therefore to command you to take the said E. F., if he
is found in your county, or if he is not found in your county, that you pursue
after him in any other county in this state and take and safely keep the E. F.
so that you have his body forthwith before me or some other magistrate of said
county to answer the said complaint and be further dealt with according to law.
   Given under my hands this .......day of ......., 19....
         A. B., Judge of ........................Court
         Clerk of ........................Court
   The following form of summons is sufficient:
   The State of Ohio,.............County, ss:
   To the Bailiff or...................Constable:
      Whereas there has been filed before me an Affidavit (Complaint) of which
the following is a copy (copy here) or the substance (here set forth the
substance, omitting formal parts). You are commanded to summons one said E. F.
to appear before me on the .......day of ...., 19...., at .....o’clock, ....M.,
at ..........Building, .........Ohio, to answer said charge.
      You will make due return of this summons forthwith upon service.
            A. B., Judge of ...............Court
            Clerk of ...............Court
(R.C. § 2935.18) (‘74 Code, § 32.21)
§ 32.049 FORM OF AFFIDAVIT.
An affidavit in the form following is sufficient:
      The State of Ohio,
      .............County, ss:
         Before me, A. B., personally came C. D., who being duly sworn
according to law, deposes and says that on or about the ...........day of
.......... at the county of ................ one E. F. (here describe the
offense committed as nearly according to the nature thereof as the case will
admit, in ordinary and concise language.)
      Sworn to and subscribed before me, this ........ day of ...............,
19....
            A. B., Judge
(R.C. § 2935.19; See also R.C. § 2935.17) (‘74 Code, § 32.22)
PRELIMINARY EXAMINATION
§ 32.060 ANNOUNCEMENT OF CHARGE AND RIGHTS OF ACCUSED IN COURT.
   When, after arrest, the accused is taken before a court or magistrate, or
when the accused appears pursuant to terms of summons or notice, the affidavit
or complaint being first filed, the court or magistrate shall, before
proceeding further:
   (A)   Inform the accused of the nature of the charge against him and the
identity of the complainant and permit the accused or his counsel to see and
read the affidavit or complaint or a copy thereof;
   (B)   Inform the accused of his right to have counsel and the right to a
continuance in the proceedings to secure counsel;
   (C)   Inform the accused of the effect of pleas of guilty, not guilty, and
no contest, of his right to trial by jury, and the necessity of making written
demand therefor;
   (D)   If the charge be a felony, inform the accused of the nature and extent
of possible punishment on conviction and of the right to preliminary hearing.
Such information may be given to each accused individually or, if at any time
there exists any substantial number of defendants to be arraigned at the same
session, the judge or magistrate may, by general announcement or by
distribution of printed matter, advise all those accused concerning those
rights general in their nature, and informing as to individual matters at
arraignment.
(R.C. § 2937.02) (‘74 Code, § 32.25)
§ 32.061 ARRAIGNMENT; COUNSEL; BAIL.
   After the announcement, as provided by R.C. § 2937.02 (§
32.060 herein) the accused shall be arraigned by the magistrate, clerk, or
prosecutor of the court reading the affidavit or complaint, or reading its
substance, omitting purely formal parts, to the accused unless the reading of
the affidavit or complaint is waived. The judge or magistrate shall then
inquire of the accused whether the accused understands the nature of the
charge. If the accused does not indicate understanding, the judge or magistrate
shall give explanation in terms of the statute or ordinance claimed violated.
If the accused is not represented by counsel and expresses a desire to consult
with an attorney at law, the judge or magistrate shall continue the case for a
reasonable time to allow the accused to send for or consult with counsel and
shall set bail for the later appearance if the offense is bailable. If the
accused is not able to make bail, bail is denied, or the offense is not
bailable, the court or magistrate shall require the officer having custody of
the accused immediately to take a message to any attorney at law within the
municipal corporation where the accused is detained, or immediately to make
available to accused use of a telephone for calling to arrange for legal
counsel or bail.
(R.C. § 2937.03) (‘74 Code, § 32.26)
§ 32.062 MOTION FOR DISMISSAL; DISCHARGE; AMENDMENT OF COMPLAINT.
   (A)   If accused does not desire counsel or, having engaged counsel, appears
at the end of granted continuance, he may then raise, by motion to dismiss the
affidavit or complaint, any exception thereto which could be asserted against
an indictment or information by motion to quash, plea in abatement, demurrer.
Such motion may be made orally and ruled upon by the court or magistrate at the
time of presentation, with minute of motion and ruling made in the journal (if
a court of record) or on the docket (if a court not of record) or such motion
may be presented in writing and set down for argument at later time. Where the
motion attacks a defect in the record by facts extrinsic thereto, proof may be
offered by testimony or affidavit.
(R.C. § 2937.04) (‘74 Code, § 32.27)
   (B)   If the motion pursuant to R.C. § 2937.04 (division (A) above) be
sustained, accused shall be discharged unless the court or magistrate finds
that the defect can be corrected without changing the nature of the charge, in
which case he may order the complaint amended or a proper affidavit filed
forthwith and require the accused to plead thereto. The discharge of accused
upon the sustaining of a motion to dismiss shall not be considered a bar to
further prosecution either of a felony or misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2937.05) (‘74 Code, § 32.28)
§ 32.063 PLEAS.
   (A)   Pleas; general.
      (1)   After all motions are disposed of or if no motion is presented, the
court or magistrate shall require the accused to plead to the charge. In cases
of misdemeanor the following pleas may be received.
         (a)   Guilty;
         (b)   Not guilty;
         (c)   No contest;
         (d)   Once in jeopardy, which includes the defenses of former
conviction or former acquittal.
      (2)   Prior to accepting a plea of guilty or a plea of no contest under
division (A), the court shall comply with R.C. § 2943.031 and 2943.032.
      (3)   Entry of any plea pursuant to this section shall constitute a
waiver of any objection which could be taken advantage of by motion pursuant to
R.C. § 2937.04 (§
32.062(A) herein).
(R.C. § 2937.06) (‘74 Code, § 32.29)
   (B)   Pleas of “guilty” and “no contest.”
      (1)   If the offense be a misdemeanor and the accused pleads guilty
thereto, the court or magistrate shall receive and enter such plea unless he
believes it made through fraud, collusion; or mistake in which case he shall
enter a plea of not guilty and set the matter for trial pursuant to R.C. Ch.
2938. Upon a plea of guilty being received the court or magistrate shall call
for explanation of circumstances of the offense from the affiant or complainant
or his representatives, and after hearing the same, together with any statement
of accused, shall proceed to pronounce sentence or continue the matter for the
purpose of imposing sentence or admitting the defendant to probation.
      (2)   If the plea be “no contest” or words of similar import in pleading
to a misdemeanor, it shall constitute a stipulation that the judge or
magistrate may make finding of guilty or not guilty from the explanation of
circumstances, and if guilt be found, impose or continue for sentence
accordingly. Such plea shall not be construed to import an admission of any
fact at issue in the criminal charge in any subsequent action or proceeding,
whether civil or criminal.
(R.C. § 2937.07) (‘74 Code, § 32.30)
   (C)   Action on pleas of “not guilty” or “once in jeopardy.”
      (1)   Upon the entry of such pleas to a charge of misdemeanor in a court
not of record, the magistrate shall forthwith set the matter for future trial
or, with the consent of both state and defendant may set trial forthwith, both
pursuant to R.C. Ch. 2938., provided that if the nature of the offense is such
that right to jury trial exists, such matter shall not be tried before him
unless the accused, by writing subscribed by him, waives a jury trial and
consents to be tried by the magistrate.
      (2)   If the defendant in such event does not waive right to jury trial,
then the magistrate shall require the accused to enter into recognizance to
appear before a court of record in the county, set by such magistrate, and the
magistrate shall thereupon certify all papers filed, together with transcript
of proceedings and accrued costs to date, and such recognizance if given, to
such designated court of record. Such transfer shall not require the filing of
indictment or information and trial shall proceed in the transferee court
pursuant to R.C. Ch. 2938.
(R.C. § 2937.08) (‘74 Code, § 32.31)
TRIAL
§ 32.075 APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER.
   The provisions of R.C. Ch. 2938 shall apply to trial on the merits of any
misdemeanor, ordinance offense, prosecution for the violation of any rule or
regulation of any governmental body authorized to adopt penal regulations, or
to complaints to keep the peace, which may be instituted in and retained for
trial on the merits in any court or before any magistrate inferior to the court
of common pleas; provided that in juvenile courts, where the conduct of any
person under the age of 18 years is made the subject of inquiry and for which
special provision is made by R.C. Ch. 2151, such matters shall be tried,
adjusted, or disposed of pursuant to R.C. Ch. 2151.
(R.C. § 2938.02) (‘74 Code, § 32.35)
§ 32.076 SETTING AND CONTINUING CASES.
   The magistrate shall set all criminal cases for a trial at a date not later
than 30 days after plea is received, or in those cases in which the charge has
been reduced on preliminary hearing, then at a date not later than 30 days from
fixing of charge or receipt of transcript as the case may be. Continuances
beyond such date shall be granted only upon notice to the opposing party and
for good cause shown.
(R.C. § 2938.03) (‘74 Code, § 32.36)
§ 32.077 REFUSAL TO WAIVE JURY TRIAL.
   In courts not of record jury trial may not be had, but failure to waive jury
in writing where right to jury trial may be asserted shall require the
magistrate to certify such case to a court of record as provided in R.C. §
2937.08 (§
32.063(C) herein).
(R.C. § 2938.04)
Cross-reference:
Right to trial by jury, §
32.003 herein
§ 32.078 AUTHORITY OF MAGISTRATE.
   The magistrate or judge of the trial court shall control all proceedings
during a criminal trial and shall limit the introduction of evidence and
argument of counsel to relevant and material matters with a view to expeditious
and effective ascertainment of truth regarding the matters in issue.
(R.C. § 2938.07) (‘74 Code, § 32.38)
§ 32.079 PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE.
   (A)   A defendant in a criminal action is presumed to be innocent until he
is proved guilty of the offense charged, and in case of a reasonable doubt
whether his guilt is satisfactorily shown, he shall be acquitted. The
presumption of innocence places upon the state (or the municipality) the burden
of proving him guilty beyond a reasonable doubt.
   (B)   In charging a jury, the trial court shall state the meaning of the
presumption of innocence and of reasonable doubt in each case.
(R.C. § 2938.08) (‘74 Code, § 32.39)
§ 32.080 EXCEPTIONS TO RULINGS.
   In the trial of any criminal case the grounds of an objection to any ruling
or action of the judge or magistrate shall be stated if required by him.
(R.C. § 2938.09) (‘74 Code, § 32.40)
§ 32.081 TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
   The state or municipality in all cases must prove the offense committed
within the territorial jurisdiction of the court, and in ordinance cases within
the municipality, except as to those offenses in which the court has county
wide jurisdiction created by statute and as to those cases in which
certification has been made pursuant to R.C. § 2937.08 (§
32.063(C) herein).
(R.C. § 2938.10) (‘74 Code, § 32.41)
§ 32.082 ORDER OF PROCEEDINGS OF TRIAL.
   The trial of an issue shall proceed before the trial court or jury as
follows:
   (A)   Counsel may state the case for the prosecution including the evidence
by which he expects to sustain it.
   (B)   Counsel for the defendant may state his defense including the evidence
which he expects to offer.
   (C)   The prosecution then shall produce all its evidence, and the defendant
may follow with his evidence, but the court or magistrate, in the furtherance
of justice and for good cause shown may permit evidence to be offered by either
side out of its order and may permit rebuttal evidence to be offered by the
prosecution.
   (D)   When the evidence is concluded, unless the case is submitted without
argument, counsel for the prosecution shall commence, defendant or his counsel
follow and counsel for the prosecution conclude his argument either to the
court or jury. The judge or magistrate may impose reasonable time limit on
argument.
   (E)   The judge, after argument is concluded in a jury case, forthwith shall
charge the jury on the law pertaining to the case and controlling their
deliberations which charge shall not be reduced to writing and taken into jury
room unless the trial judge in his discretion shall so order.
   (F)   Any verdict arrived at by the jury, or finding determined by the judge
or magistrate in trial to the court shall be announced and received only in
open court as soon as it is determined. Any finding by the judge or magistrate
shall be announced in open court not more than 48 hours after submission of the
case to him.
(R.C. § 2938.11) (‘74 Code, § 32.42)
§ 32.083 WHEN ACCUSED MAY BE TRIED IN HIS ABSENCE.
   A person being tried for a misdemeanor, upon request in writing, subscribed
by him, may, with the consent of the magistrate, be tried in his absence, but
no right shall exist in the defendant to be so tried. If after trial commences
a person being tried escapes or departs without leave, the trial shall proceed
and verdict or finding be received and sentence passed as if he were personally
present.
(R.C. § 2938.12) (‘74 Code, § 32.43)
§ 32.084 RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROSECUTION.
   In any case prosecuted for violation of a municipal ordinance the Solicitor
or Law Director, and for a statute, he or the prosecuting attorney, shall
present the case for the municipality and the state respectively, but either
may delegate such responsibility to some other attorney in a proper case, or,
if the defendant be unrepresented by counsel may with leave of court, withdraw
from the case. But the magistrate or judge shall not permit prosecution of any
criminal case by private attorney employed or retained by a complaining
witness.
(R.C. § 2938.13) (‘74 Code, § 32.44)
§ 32.085 RULES OF EVIDENCE AND PROCEDURE.
   The rules of evidence and procedure, including those governing notices,
proof of special matters, depositions, and joinder of defendants and offenses
set forth in R.C. Ch. 2945; which are not, by their nature inapplicable to the
trial of misdemeanors, shall prevail in trials under R.C. Ch. 2938 where no
special provision is made in such chapter, or where no provision is made by
rule of the supreme court adopted pursuant to R.C. § 2937.46.
(R.C. § 2938.15) (‘74 Code, § 32.45)
JUDGMENT; SENTENCE
§ 32.095 OFFENDER MAY BE CONFINED UNTIL FINE PAID.
   When a fine is the whole or part of a sentence, the Mayor’s Court may order
the person sentenced to remain confined in the county jail, workhouse, or
prison of the municipal corporation, until the fine is paid, or secured to be
paid, or the offender is legally discharged. Such confinement shall accrue at a
basis of $30 per day or per fractional day toward satisfying such fine as
assessed.
(R.C. §1905.30) (‘74 Code, § 32.50)
Statutory reference:
   Similar statutory provisions, see R.C. §§ 1905.34, 2947.14
§ 32.096 CONDITIONAL SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   (1)   In determining whether to suspend sentence of imprisonment
imposed upon an offender for a misdemeanor and place the offender on probation
or whether to otherwise suspend a sentence of imprisonment imposed upon an
offender for a misdemeanor pursuant to R.C. § 2929.51 (A), the court shall
consider the risk that the offender will commit another offense and the need
for protecting the public from the risk, the nature and circumstances of the
offense, and the history, character, and condition of the offender.
      (2)   An offender who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
misdemeanor shall not be placed on probation and shall not otherwise have the
sentence of imprisonment imposed upon the offender suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2929.51(A) if any of the following applies:
         (a)   The offender is a repeat or dangerous offender, as defined in
R.C. § 2935.36.
         (b)   The misdemeanor offense involved was not a violation of R.C. §
2923.12 and was committed while the offender was armed with a firearm or
dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
         (c)   Under R.C. § 2903.07(C), the offender is not eligible for
probation.
   (B)   The following do not control the court’s discretion, but the court
shall consider them in favor of placing an offender who has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor on probation in favor of otherwise
suspending the offender’s sentence of imprisonment pursuant to R.C. § 2929.51
(A):
      (1)   The offense neither caused nor threatened serious harm to persons
or property, or the offender did not contemplate that it would do so.
      (2)   The offense was the result of circumstances unlikely to recur.
      (3)   The victim of the offense induced or facilitated it.
      (4)   There are substantial grounds tending to excuse or justify the
offense, though failing to establish a defense.
      (5)   The offender acted under strong provocation.
      (6)   The offender has no history of prior delinquency or criminal
activity, or has led a law- abiding life for a substantial period before
commission of the present offense.
      (7)   The offender is likely to respond affirmatively to probationary or
other court-imposed treatment.
      (8)   The character and attitudes of the offender indicate that the
offender is unlikely to commit another offense.
      (9)   The offender has made or will make restitution or reparation to the
victim of the offender’s offense for the injury, damage, or loss sustained.
      (10)   Imprisonment of the offender will entail undue hardship to the
offender or the offender’s dependents.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   When an offender who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor is placed on probation or the sentence of that type of
offender otherwise is suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2929.51 (A), the probation
or other suspension shall be at least on condition that, during the period of
probation or other suspension, the offender shall abide by the law, including,
but not limited to, complying with the provisions of R.C. Chapter 2923 relating
to the possession, sale, furnishing, transfer, disposition, purchase,
acquisition, carrying, conveying, or use of, or other conduct involving, a
firearm or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and shall not
leave the state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation
officer. In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and
ensuring the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional
requirements on the offender, including, but not limited to, requiring the
offender to make restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.21 for all or part of the
property damage that is caused by the offender’s offense and for all or part of
the value of the property that is the subject of any theft offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2913.01 (K), that the offender committed. Compliance with the
additional requirements shall also be a condition of the offender’s probation
or other suspension.
         (b)   When an offender who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
a felony is sentenced to a nonresidential sanction pursuant to R.C. § 2929.17,
the court shall impose as a condition of the sanction that, during the period
of the nonresidential sanction, the offender shall abide by the law, including
but not limited to, complying with the provisions of R.C. Chapter 2923
identified in division (C)(1)(a) of this section.
      (2)   During the period of a misdemeanor offender’s probation or other
suspension or during the period of a felon’s nonresidential sanction,
authorized probation officers who are engaged within the scope of their
supervisory duties or responsibilities may search, with or without a warrant,
the person of the offender, the place of residence of the offender, and a motor
vehicle, another item of tangible or intangible personal property, or other
real property in which the offender has a right, title, or interest or for
which the offender has the express or implied permission of a person with a
right, title, or interest to use, occupy, or possess if the probation officers
have reasonable grounds to believe that, the offender is not abiding by the law
or otherwise is not complying with the conditions of the offender’s probation
or other suspension or the conditions of the offender’s nonresidential
sanction. If a felon who is sentenced to a nonresidential sanction is under the
general control and supervision of the adult parole authority, as described in
R.C. § 2929.15 (A)(2)(a), adult parole authority field officers with
supervisory responsibilities over the felon shall have the same search
authority relative to the felon during the period of the sanction as is
described under this division for probation officers. The court that places the
offender on probation or suspends the misdemeanor offender’s sentence of
imprisonment pursuant to R.C.§ 2929.51 (D)(2) or (4) or that sentences the
felon to a nonresidential sanction pursuant to R.C. § 2929.17 shall provide the
offender with a written notice that informs the offender that authorized
probation officers or adult parole authority field officers with supervisory
responsibilities over the offender who are engaged within the scope of their
supervisory duties or responsibilities may conduct those types of searches
during the period of probation or other suspension or during the period of the
nonresidential sanction if they have reasonable grounds to believe that the
offender is not abiding by the law or otherwise is not complying with the
conditions of the offender’s probation or other suspension or the conditions of
the offender’s nonresidential sanction.
   (D)   The following do not control the court’s discretion, but the court
shall consider them against placing an offender who has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor on probation and against otherwise suspending
an offender’s sentence of imprisonment pursuant to R.C. § 2929.51 (A);
      (1)   The offender recently violated the conditions of pardon, post-
release control pursuant to R.C. § 2967.28, or a probation or suspension
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.51 (A), previously granted the offender.
      (2)   There is a substantial risk that, while at liberty during the
period of probation or other suspension, the offender will commit another
offense.
      (3)   The offender is in need of correctional or rehabilitative treatment
that can be provided best by the offender’s commitment to a locally governed
and operated residential facility.
      (4)   Regardless of whether the offender knew the age of the victim, the
victim of the offense was 65 years of age or older or permanently and totally
disabled at the time of the commission of the offense.
   (E)   The criteria listed in divisions (B) and (D) of this section shall not
be construed to limit the matters that may be considered in determining whether
to suspend sentence of imprisonment and place an offender who has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor on probation or whether to
otherwise suspend the offender’s sentence of imprisonment pursuant to R.C. §
2929.51 (A).
   (F)   (1)   When an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor, the court may require the offender, as a condition of probation or
as a condition of otherwise suspending the offender’s sentence pursuant to R.C.
§ 2929.51(A), in addition to the conditions of probation or other suspension
imposed pursuant to division (C) of this section, to perform supervised
community service work under the authority of health districts, park districts,
counties, municipal corporations, townships, other political subdivisions of
the state, or agencies of the state or any of its political subdivisions, or
under the authority of charitable organizations that render services to the
community or its citizens, in accordance with this division. Supervised
community service work shall not be required as a condition of probation or
other suspension under this division unless the offender agrees to perform the
work offered as a condition of probation or other suspension by the court. The
court may require an offender who agrees to perform the work to pay to it a
reasonable fee to cover the costs of the offender’s participation in the work,
including, but not limited to, the costs of procuring a policy or policies of
insurance to cover the period during which the offender will perform the work.
A court may permit any offender convicted of a misdemeanor to satisfy the
payment of a fine imposed for the offense by performing supervised community
service work as described in this division if the offender requests an
opportunity to satisfy the payment by this means and if the court determines
the offender is financially unable to pay the fine. The supervised community
service work that may be imposed under this division shall be subject to the
following limitations:
         (a)   The court shall fix the period of the work and, if necessary,
shall distribute it over weekends or over other appropriate times that will
allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or to care for the
offender’s family. The period of the work as fixed by the court shall not
exceed an aggregate of 200 hours.
         (b)   An agency, political subdivision, or charitable organization
must agree to accept the offender for the work before the court requires the
offender to perform the work for the entity. A court shall not require an
offender to perform supervised community service work for an agency, political
subdivision, or charitable organization at a location that is an unreasonable
distance from the offender’s residence or domicile, unless the offender is
provided with transportation to the location where the work is to be performed.
         (c)   A court may enter into an agreement with a county department of
human services for the management, placement, and supervision of offenders
eligible for community service work in work activities, developmental
activities, and alternative work activities under R.C. §§ 5107.40 to 5107.69.
If a court and a county department of human services have entered into an
agreement of that nature, the clerk of that court is authorized to pay directly
to the department of human services all or a portion of the fees collected by
the court pursuant to this division in accordance with the terms of its
agreement.
         (d)   Community service work that a court requires under this division
shall be supervised by an official of the agency, political subdivision, or
charitable organization for which the work is performed or by a person
designated by the agency, political subdivision, or charitable organization.
The official or designated person shall be qualified for the supervision by
education, training, or experience, and periodically shall report, in writing,
to the court and to the offender’s probation officer concerning the conduct of
the offender in performing the work.
      (2)   When an offender is convicted of a felony, the court may impose
pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.15 and 2929.17 a sanction that requires the offender
to perform supervised community service work in accordance with this division
and under the authority of any agency, political subdivision, or charitable
organization as described in division (F)(1) of this section. The court may
require an offender who is ordered to perform the work to pay to it a
reasonable fee to cover the costs of the offender’s participation in the work,
including, but not limited to, the costs of procuring a policy or policies of
liability insurance to cover the period during which the offender will perform
the work. A court may permit an offender convicted of a felony to satisfy the
payment of a fine imposed for the offense pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 by
performing supervised community service work as described in this division if
the court determines that the offender is financially unable to pay the fine.
The supervised community service work that may be imposed under this division
shall be subject to the limitations specified in divisions (F)(1)(a) to (d) of
this section, except that the court is not required to obtain the agreement of
the offender to impose supervised community work as a sanction. Additionally,
the total of any period of supervised community service work imposed on an
offender under this division plus the period of all other sanctions imposed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.15, 2929.16, 2929.17, and 2929.18 shall not exceed
five years.
   (G)   (1)   When an offender is convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19,
a municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence
of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or a municipal
ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of
alcohol in the blood, breath, or urine or of a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §
2903.07 or an equivalent violation of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially similar to R.C. § 2903.07 and that provides for that type of
finding by a jury or judge in a case in which the jury or judge found that the
offender was under the influence of alcohol at the time of the commission of
the offense, the court may require, as a condition of probation in addition to
the required conditions of probation and the discretionary conditions of
probation that may be imposed pursuant to division (C) of this section, any
suspension or revocation of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege, and all other penalties provided by law or
by ordinance, that the offender operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an
ignition interlock device that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 4511.83.
      (2)   When a court requires an offender, as a condition of probation
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section, to operate only a motor vehicle
equipped with an ignition interlock device that is certified pursuant to R.C. §
4511.83, the offender immediately shall surrender the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit to the court. Upon the receipt of the
offender’s license or permit, the court shall issue an order authorizing the
offender to operate a motor vehicle equipped with a certified ignition
interlock device, deliver the offender’s license or permit to the bureau of
motor vehicles, and include in the abstract of the case forwarded to the bureau
pursuant to R.C. § 4507.021 the conditions of probation imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1) of this section. The court shall give the offender a copy, of
its order, and that copy shall be used by the offender in lieu of a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit until the bureau issues a restricted
license to the offender.
      (3)   Upon receipt of an offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit pursuant to division (G)(2) of this section, the bureau of
motor vehicles shall issue a restricted license to the offender. The restricted
license shall be identical to the surrendered license, except that it shall
have printed on its face a statement that the offender is prohibited from
operating a motor vehicle that is not equipped with an ignition interlock
device that is certified pursuant to R.C. § 4511.83. The bureau shall deliver
the offender’s surrendered license or permit to the court upon receipt of a
court order requiring it to do so, or reissue the offender’s license or permit
under R.C. § 4507.54 if the registrar destroyed the offender’s license or
permit under that section. The offender shall surrender the restricted license
to the court upon receipt of the offender’s surrendered license or permit.
      (4)   If an offender violates a requirement of the court imposed under
division (G)(1) of this section, the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege may be suspended as
provided in R.C. § 4507.16.
      (5)   As used in this division, IGNITION INTERLOCK DEVICE has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4511.83.
(R.C. § 2951.02)
   (H)   At the time of sentencing and after sentencing, when imprisonment is
imposed for a misdemeanor, the court may do any of the following:
      (1)   Suspend the sentence and place the offender on probation pursuant
to R.C. § 2951.02;
      (2)   Suspend the sentence pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02 upon any terms that
the court considers appropriate;
      (3)   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, or on weekends, or both, or at any other
time or times that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s
occupation or care for the offender’s family;
      (4)   Require the offender to serve a portion of the offender’s sentence,
which may be served in intermittent confinement, and suspend the balance of the
sentence pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02 upon any terms that the court considers
appropriate, or suspend the balance of the sentence and place the offender on
probation pursuant to that section.
   (I)   At the time of sentencing and after sentencing, when a term of
imprisonment is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2919.25, a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2919.27 involving a protection order issued or
consent agreement approved pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or R.C. § 3113.31, or a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor violation of either of those sections, and when the court has
reason to believe, based on an evaluation performed pursuant to R.C. § 2919.271
or on the advice of a chemical dependency professional, that the offender is a
drug dependent person, is in danger of becoming a drug dependent person, is an
alcoholic, or is suffering from acute alcohol intoxication, as defined in R.C.
§ 2935.33, the court may require the offender to serve a portion of the
offender’s sentence and suspend the balance of the sentence and place the
offender on probation pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02, with one of the conditions of
probation being that the offender enter into an appropriate treatment program
or facility and comply with the treatment prescribed at the program or
facility. The court shall order a person to enter a particular program or
facility under this division only if the court has received evidence that the
program or facility has space available and that the treatment provided by the
program or facility is appropriate. For purposes of this division, an
appropriate treatment program or facility includes a program licensed by the
director of alcohol and drug addiction services pursuant to R.C. § 3793.11, a
program certified by the director of alcohol and drug addiction services
pursuant to R.C. § 3793.06, a public or private hospital, the veterans
administration or other agencies of the federal government, or private care or
treatment rendered by a physician or a psychologist licensed in the state, a
licensed independent social worker, a licensed professional clinical counselor,
or a certified chemical dependency counselor. For purposes of this division,
the fact that an offender is a repeat offender, as defined in R.C. § 2935.36,
shall not conclusively bar the offender from conditional probation under this
division if the previous offenses for which the offender was imprisoned
involved misdemeanor violations of R.C. § 2919.25, misdemeanor violations of
R.C. § 2919.27 involving a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or R.C. § 3113.31, or equivalent
misdemeanor violations of substantially equivalent municipal ordinances or
would have been violations of either of those sections had they been in effect
at the time of the violations.
   (J)   At the time of sentencing and after sentencing, when a fine is imposed
for a misdemeanor, the court may do either of the following:
      (1)   Suspend all or any portion of the fine, upon any conditions that
the court imposes in the interests of justice and the correction and
rehabilitation of the offender;
      (2)   Permit payment of all or any portion of the fine in installments,
or by any other method and in any time and on any terms that the court
considers just, except that the maximum time permitted for payment shall not
exceed two years.
(R.C. § 2929.51) (‘74 Code, § 32.53)
DISPOSITION OF FINES
§ 32.110 DISPOSITION OF FINES AND OTHER MONEYS.
   (A)    Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4511.193, all fines,
forfeitures and costs in ordinance cases and all fees that are collected by the
Mayor, that in any manner come into the Mayor’s hands, or that are due the
Mayor or the Chief of Police or other officer of the municipality, any other
fees and expenses that have been advanced out of the treasury of the
municipality, and all money received by the Mayor for the use of the
municipality shall be paid by the Mayor into the treasury of the municipality
on the first Monday of each month. At the first regular meeting of the
Legislative Authority each month, the Mayor shall submit a full statement of
all money received, from whom and for what purposes received, and when paid
into the treasury. Except as otherwise provided by R.C. § 307.515 or R.C. §
4511.19, all fines and forfeitures collected by the Mayor in state cases,
together with all fees and expenses collected that have been advanced out of
the county treasury, shall be paid by the Mayor to the county treasury on the
first business day of each month. Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §
307.515 or R.C. § 4511.19, the Mayor shall pay all court costs and fees
collected by the Mayor in state cases into the municipal treasury on the first
business day of each month. This section does not apply to fines collected by
the Mayor’s Court for violations of R.C. § 4513.263(B), or any substantially
similar municipal ordinance, all of which shall be forwarded to the Treasurer
of State as provided in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
(R.C. § 733.40) (‘74 Code, § 32.60)
   (B)   (1)   All fines collected under R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.78,
4511.99, and 4513.01 through 4513.37, shall be paid into the county treasury
and, with the exception of that portion distributed under R.C. § 3375.53, shall
be placed to the credit of the fund for the maintenance and repair of the
highways within such county, except that:
         (a)   All fines for violations of R.C. § 4513.263(B) shall be
delivered to the treasurer of state as provided in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
         (b)   All fines collected from, or moneys arising from bonds forfeited
by, persons apprehended or arrested by state highway patrolmen shall be
distributed as provided in R.C. § 5503.04 (§
32.111 herein).
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section or of any other
section of the Ohio Revised Code, all fines collected from, and all moneys
arising from bonds forfeited by, persons arrested under R.C. § 2935.03(E)(3)
are deemed to be collected, and to arise, from arrests made within the
jurisdiction in which the arresting officer is appointed, elected, or employed,
for violations of municipal ordinances that are substantially equivalent to one
of the sections or one of the provisions of one of the chapters of the Revised
Code listed in R.C. § 2935.03(E)(1) and shall be distributed accordingly.
(R.C. § 4513.35(A)(1), (2), (B)(2)) (‘74 Code, § 32.62)
Statutory reference:
   For other provisions relative to disposition of fines and other moneys see
R.C. § 3375.50 et seq.
§ 32.111 FINES COLLECTED FROM PERSONS ARRESTED BY STATE HIGHWAY PATROLMEN.
   (A)   All fines collected from or moneys arising from bail forfeited by
persons apprehended or arrested by state highway patrol troopers shall be paid
45% into the state treasury and 55% to the treasury of the municipal
corporation where the case is prosecuted if in a Mayor’s Court. If the
prosecution is in a trial court outside a municipal corporation or outside the
territorial jurisdiction of a municipal court, the fines and moneys shall be
paid 55% into the county treasury. The fines and moneys paid into the state
treasury shall be credited to the general revenue fund. The fines and moneys
paid into a county treasury and the fines and moneys paid into the treasury of
a municipal corporation shall be deposited one-half to the same fund and
expended in the same manner as is the revenue received from the registration of
motor vehicles, and one-half to the general fund of such county or municipal
corporation.
   (B)   If the prosecution is in a municipal court, 45% of the fines and
moneys shall be paid into the state treasury to be credited to the general
revenue fund, 10% shall be paid into the county treasury to be credited to the
general fund of the county, and 45% shall be paid into the municipal treasury
to be credited to the general fund of the municipal corporation.
   (C)   The trial court shall make remittance of the fines and moneys as
prescribed in this section, and at the same time as the remittance is made of
the state’s portion to the state treasury, the trial court shall notify the
superintendent of the state highway patrol of the case and the amount covered
by the remittance.
   (D)   This section does not apply to fines for violations of R.C. § 4513.263
(B), or for violations of any municipal ordinance that is substantively
comparable to that division, all of which shall be delivered to the treasurer
of state as provided in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
(R.C. § 5503.04)
Statutory reference:
   The enactment of G.C. § 1183-4 (now R.C. § 5503.04) did not repeal by
implication G.C. §§ 3056 to 3056-3 (R.C. § 3375.50 et seq.).
    Van Wert County Law Library Assn. v. Stuckey, 42 00 1 (C.D.)
§ 32.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates §
32.045 shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 or imprisoned not
more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 2935.20) (‘74 Code, § 32.18)
   (B)   Whoever, being the person in temporary or permanent charge of any jail
or place of confinement, violates §
32.047 shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 or imprisoned not
more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 2935.16) (‘74 Code, § 32.20)
CHAPTER 33: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
   
33.01   General Boards
   
33.02   Urban Tree Commission
   
33.03   Records Commission
Cross-reference:
   Recreation Committee, see §
96.01
§ 33.01 GENERAL BOARDS.
   Provisions regarding Boards and Commissions are contained in City Charter
Article VI.
§ 33.02 URBAN TREE COMMISSION
   There is hereby created and established the Urban Tree Commission of the
City of Mt. Healthy.
   (A)   Purposes and objectives. The primary purposes and objectives of the
Urban Tree Commission shall include the following:
      (1)   The Commission, when requested by City Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or
question regarding the street or park trees.
      (2)   To hold regular and special meetings at which the subject of trees
insofar as it relates to the municipality may be discussed by the members of
the Commission, officers, personnel, and Council committees of the municipality
and all others interested in the tree program.
      (3)   To disseminate news and information regarding the selection,
planting and maintenance of trees within the corporate limits, whether the same
be on private or public property.
      (4)   To establish the recommended species and varieties of trees to be
planted in the boulevards.
      (5)   To implement an Arbor Day observance on an annual basis.
      (6)   To establish and maintain, on an annual basis, an inventory of City
street trees.
   (B)   Membership and terms.
      (1)   The Commission shall consist of five members. Additionally, one
member of Council and the Mayor shall act as advisory members of the
Commission.
      (2)   The Mayor, subject to approval of the City Council shall appoint
all members of the Commission.
      (3)   The Chairperson of the Commission shall preside over all meetings
of the Commission and act as parliamentarian. The Vice-Chairperson shall assume
the duties of the Chairperson in his or her absence.
      (4)   Appointments to the Commission shall be for three-year terms,
provided that the term for one of the members appointed to the first Commission
shall be for year and two of the members appointed to the first Commission
shall be for two years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term
of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired
portion of said term.
      (5)   The Commission members shall serve without compensation.
      (6)   Any Commission member who has unexcused absences from three
consecutive meetings or more than 50% of the regular meetings on an annual
basis may be removed by the Tree Commission.
   (C)   Meetings and procedures. The Commission shall choose its own officers,
make its own rules and regulations and keep journals of its proceedings. A
simple majority of the members shall be a quorum for transaction of business.
All plans, findings, advice, reports, and recommendations of the Commission
shall be in writing.
(Ord. 11-1622, passed 12-6-11)
§ 33.03 RECORDS COMMISSION.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Mt. Healthy Records Commission consisting of
the City Manager or the City Manager's designee, as chairperson; the Finance
Director or the Finance Director's designee; the Law Director or the Law
Director's designee; and one citizen of Mt. Healthy appointed by the City
Manager.
   (B)   The Commission may elect a Secretary, who may or may not be a member
of the commission and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission. The
Commission may employ an Archivist or Records Manager to serve under its
direction.
   (C)   The Commission shall conduct a meeting at least once every six months
or more frequently upon the call of the Chairperson.
   (D)   The duties of the Records Commission shall be to provide rules for
retention, maintenance, storage, and disposal of records of the city, and
review applications for one-time disposal of obsolete records and schedules of
records retention and disposition submitted by the city offices.
   (E)   The Commission, at any time, may review any schedule it has previously
approved and, may revise that schedule under the procedure outlined in that
section.
   (F)   All elected officials or their appropriate designees shall attend
training approved by the Ohio Attorney General as provided in R.C. § 109.43.
For purposes of this section, the Clerk of Council will serve as the designee
for the training.
(Ord. 17-1831, passed 11-21-17)
CHAPTER 34: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   (Reserved)
   
34.02   (Reserved)
   
34.03   Eligible age for appointment
   
34.04   Physical examination required
   
34.05   Duties of police
   
34.06   Auxiliary police units
   
34.07   Salary and benefits for part-time patrolmen
   
34.08   Longevity pay
Employment Policies
   
34.20   Time off for officers working on legal holidays
   
34.21   Organization of officers and Department
   
34.22   Mandatory contribution to pension fund picked up by city
Seized Property and Funds
   
34.35   Written Internal Control Policy adopted
   
34.36   Property recovered by police: record and inventory
   
34.37   Disposition to claimant
   
34.38   Sale of unclaimed property
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 (RESERVED)
§ 34.02 (RESERVED)
§ 34.03 ELIGIBLE AGE FOR APPOINTMENT.
   The eligible age for an original appointment for full-time police to be
appointed to the Police Department from the list certified by the Civil Service
Commission is 21 years of age to 36 years of age, both inclusive.
(‘74 Code, § 33.04) (Ord. 402-A, passed 11-16-71)
Statutory reference:
   Age requirements for original appointment of police, see R.C. § 124.41
§ 34.04 PHYSICAL EXAMINATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall be appointed as a full-time police officer without
having first passed a physical examination. The provision also applies to part-
time police officers being appointed to full-time duty.
   (B)   The doctor giving the physical examination shall be selected by the
Mayor and City Manager. The extent of the examination shall be determined by
the Mayor and City Manager and the cost of this examination shall be paid by
the city.
(‘74 Code, § 33.05) (Ord. 256-A, passed 9-4-62)
Statutory reference:
   Physical examination requirements for police, see R.C. § 124.41
§ 34.05 DUTIES OF POLICE.
   (A)   The police force shall preserve the peace, protect persons and
property, and obey and enforce all ordinances of the Council, all criminal laws
of the state and the United States, all court orders issued and consent
agreements approved pursuant to R.C. §§ 2919.26 and 3113.31, and all protection
orders issued pursuant to R.C. §§ 2903.213 or 2903.214, and protection orders
issued by courts of another state, as defined in R.C. § 2919.27. The Police
Department shall be maintained under the civil service system.
   (B)   An officer of the police force may participate, as the director of an
organized crime task force established under R.C. § 177.02 or as a member of
the investigatory staff of such a task force, in an investigation of organized
criminal activity in any county or counties in this state under R.C. §§ 177.01
through 177.03.
(R.C. § 737.11)
§ 34.06 AUXILIARY POLICE UNITS.
   (A)   There is established an Auxiliary Police Unit for the city.
   (B)   The City Manager shall be the executive head of the Auxiliary Police
Unit with the Chief of Police, they shall make all appointments and removals of
auxiliary police officers, subject to general regulations prescribed by
Council, and shall prescribe rules and regulations for the organization,
training, administration, control and conduct of the Auxiliary Police Unit.
   (C)   Each officer in the Auxiliary Police Unit shall have the same police
powers as a full-time patrol officers of the city’s Police Department.
   (D)   Auxiliary police officers performing traffic duty at and for the
benefit of private business locations shall be deemed independent contractors
and shall be under the control and compensation of the private business being
served.
   (E)   When performing regular police duties at the direction of the City
Manager or the Chief of Police, the auxiliary police officers shall be paid a
rate of compensation as set by legislative authority, payable semi-monthly.
   (F)   No one shall be appointed as an auxiliary police officer without first
being certified by the Director of the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council as
provided by R.C. § 109.77.
(‘74 Code, § 33.06) (Ord. 395-A, passed 9-7-71; Am. Ord. 93-1078, passed 9-7-
93)
Statutory reference:
   City auxiliary police, see R.C. § 124.41
§ 34.07 SALARY AND BENEFITS FOR PART- TIME PATROLMEN.
   (A)   Wages. Each part-time police officer will be assigned a pay rate on
the date of hire by the Chief of Police. Part-time officers will be eligible
for a pay rate adjustment on January 1 of each year, by the Chief of Police, if
they were hired prior to October 1 of the previous year. See “Part-time Patrol
Officers Wage Schedule” attached to Ordinance 04-1451.
   (B)   Court and training. For court appearances and training, part-time
officers shall be paid one and one-half times their regular hourly rate and
guaranteed a minimum of two hours pay.
   (C)   Overtime/holiday pay.
      (1)   Part-time officers shall be paid one and one-half times their
regular hourly rate for hours worked over eight hours per day.
      (2)   Part-time officers scheduled to work Christmas and Thanksgiving
shall be paid one and one-half times their regular hourly rate.
   (D)   Uniforms.
      (1)   The city shall furnish uniforms as needed. Should a part-time
officer fail to complete one year of service with the city, said part-time
officer shall reimburse the city the cost of all uniforms and equipment
supplied to the officer.
      (2)   Each part-time officer shall receive a uniform cleaning allowance
of $100 per year, paid twice a year, in June and in December.
   (E)   Insurance.
      (1)   For each part-time officer, the city shall provide short-term
disability insurance, having provisions to compensate the officer in the amount
of $500 per week for no more than 12 weeks if injured/ disabled on duty for the
city.
      (2)   The city shall provide a death benefit in the amount of $20,000 for
any officer that is killed in the line of duty while working for the city.
   (F)   Retirement benefit. Upon retirement, with a minimum of 15 years with
the Police Department, the city shall offer to sell the retiring employee the
duty weapon issued to the officer for the sum of $1. The employee’s final
annual earning statement (Form W-2) shall include the fair market value of the
weapon as untaxed income.
(Ord. 1451, passed 8-17-04)
§ 34.08 LONGEVITY PAY.
   (A)   The Police Chief shall qualify for longevity pay in the same manner as
patrol officers and sergeants.
   (B)   Longevity compensation shall be calculated at $50 a year starting
after ten years and shall be capped at $500 per year. Longevity shall be paid
to employees upon anniversary date after notifying the Finance Director in
writing as to the request.
(Ord. 06-1484, passed 5-2-06)
EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
§ 34.20 TIME OFF FOR OFFICERS WORKING ON LEGAL HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   All regular members of the Police Department who work on the following
legal holidays: Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day, shall be given time off at
a later date to compensate for the time worked on said legal holiday or be paid
for same 1½ times his pay.
   (B)   The date for taking said time off shall be approved by the Chief of
the Police Department.
(‘74 Code, § 33.10) (Ord. 255-A, passed 6-19-62)
Cross-reference:
   General city personnel policies, see
Chapter 37
§ 34.21 ORGANIZATION OF OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Police Department for the city shall be organized and consist of
16 full-time members as determined by the City Manager and approved by Council.
   (B)   The number of part-time police officers shall not exceed the number of
full-time members.
(‘74 Code, § 33.11) (Ord. 455-A, passed 2-5-74; Am. Ord. 84-762, passed 2-7-84;
Am. Ord. 93-1063, passed 5-18-93; Am. Ord. 00-1320, passed 7-11-00; Am. Ord.
02-1385, passed 3-19-02; Am. Ord. 18-1856, passed 6-19-18; Am. Ord. 20-1917,
passed 9-15-20; Am. Ord. 23-2009, passed 1-17-23)
§ 34.22 MANDATORY CONTRIBUTION TO PENSION FUND PICKED UP BY CITY.
   (A)   City Council shall designate all participating employees’ mandatory
contributions to the Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund as picked
up by the city, although such contributions shall continue to be designated as
employee contributions. The amount of the employee’s income reported by the
city as subject to federal and state income tax shall be the employee’s total
gross income, reduced by the then- current percentage amount of the employee’s
mandatory retirement contribution. No employee’s total salary shall be
increased by such pick up, nor shall the city’s total contribution to the
Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund be increased thereby.
   (B)   This pick up provision shall apply to participating Police and Fire
Department employees of the city. An employee may not be given the option of
choosing to receive the picked-up amounts directly instead of having them paid
by the city to the Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund, and
employee contributions must be paid by the city in lieu of contributions by the
employee.
   (C)   This pick up plan shall be effective with the first payroll date of
1989.
   (D)   In the event that a majority of the employees of the city do not
desire this pick up plan, or if there is an adverse determination from the
Internal Revenue Service affecting the qualifying status of this pick up plan,
it shall be null and void and as if never enacted.
(‘74 Code, § 33.12) (Ord. 88-873, passed 12-20-88; Am. Ord. 89-905, passed 10-
24-89)
Statutory reference:
   Employee contributions to police and firemen’s disability and pension fund,
see § 742.31
SEIZED PROPERTY AND FUNDS
§ 34.35 WRITTEN INTERNAL CONTROL POLICY ADOPTED.
   The Written Internal Control Policy attached to Ordinance 91-735, passed
September 3, 1991, is hereby approved by the city for use by the Mt. Healthy
Police Department.
(‘74 Code, § 33.16) (Ord. 91-735, passed 9-3-90)
§ 34.36 PROPERTY RECOVERED BY POLICE; RECORD AND INVENTORY.
   (A)   Property recovered by police. Stolen or other property recovered by
members of the police force shall be deposited and kept in a place designated
by the Mayor. Each such article shall be entered in a book kept for that
purpose, with the name of the owner, if ascertained, and the person from whom
taken, the place where found with general circumstances, the date of its
receipt and the name of the officer receiving it.
(R.C. § 737.29) (‘74 Code, § 33.17)
   (B)   Inventory to person from whom taken. An inventory of all money or
other property shall be given to the party from whom taken, and in case it is
not claimed by some person within 30 days after such arrest and seizure it
shall unless otherwise ordered by the court be delivered to the person from
whom taken, and to no other person, either attorney, agent, factor, or Clerk,
except by special order of the Mayor.
(R.C. § 737.29) (‘74 Code, § 33.18)
§ 34.37 DISPOSITION TO CLAIMANT.
   If, within 30 days, the money or property recovered under R.C. § 737.29 is
claimed by any other person, it shall be retained by the custodian thereof
until after the discharge or conviction of the person from whom it was taken
and so long as it is required as evidence in any case in court. If such
claimant establishes to the satisfaction of the court that he is the rightful
owner, the money or property shall be restored to him, otherwise, it shall be
returned to the accused person, personally, and not to any attorney, agent,
factor, or clerk of such accused person, except upon special order of the Mayor
after all liens and claims in favor of the municipality have first been
discharged and satisfied.
(R.C. § 737.31) (‘74 Code, § 33.19)
§ 34.38 SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY.
   Property unclaimed for the period of 90 days shall be sold by the Police
Chief or licensed auctioneer at public auction, after giving due notice thereof
by advertisement, published once a week for three successive weeks in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county. The proceeds shall be paid to
the Finance Director, and be credited to the general fund.
(R.C. § 737.32) (‘74 Code, § 33.20)
CHAPTER 35: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
35.01   Fire Chief and Assistant Chief; employment, qualifications of fire
fighters
   
35.02   Schooling of officers and fire fighters
   
35.03   Council may purchase engines and equipment
   
35.04   Buildings for Department
   
35.05   Records
   
35.06   Practice drills
   
35.07   Loss of membership
   
35.08   Compensation
   
35.09   Mandatory contribution to pension fund picked up by city
   
35.10   Civil service rules for examinations and grading for full-time
positions
Volunteer Fire Department; Emergency Medical Service
   
35.20   Volunteer Fireman’s Dependents Fund Board
   
35.21   Emergency medical service: establishment; members; duties
   
35.22   Emergency medical service as unit of Fire Department
User Fees for Public Safety Services
   
35.30   User fees for public safety services
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 35.01 FIRE CHIEF AND ASSISTANT CHIEF; EMPLOYMENT, QUALIFICATIONS OF FIRE
FIGHTERS.
   (A)   The head of the Fire Department shall be the Fire Chief who shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council and who shall
continue in office until removed for the causes and under the powers and
procedure provided for the removal of officers by R.C. §§ 733.35 through
733.39. Council may provide for the employment of such firemen as it deems best
and fix their compensation, or for the services of volunteer firefighters and
such firefighters shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the Council, and after satisfactorily serving a six-month period shall
continue in office until removed for the causes and under the powers and
procedure provided for the removal of officers by R.C. §§ 733.35 through
733.39.
(‘74 Code, § 34.01)
   (B)   The Assistant Chief shall, in the absence or disability of the Chief,
perform all the functions and exercise all of the authority of the Chief.
(‘74 Code, § 34.07)
   (C)   New recruits shall be not less than 18 nor more than 55 years of age
and able-bodied. They shall pass a satisfactory mental and physical examination
and shall become members of the Fire Department only after a six-month
probationary period.
(‘74 Code, § 34.08) (Am. Ord. 81-682, passed 5-5-81)
Statutory reference:
   Age and examination requirements for original appointment of firefighters,
see R.C. § 124.42
§ 35.02 SCHOOLING OF OFFICERS AND FIRE FIGHTERS.
   The Council may send any of the officers and firefighters of its Fire
Department to schools of instruction designed to promote the efficiency of
firefighters and, if duly authorized in advance, pay their necessary expenses
from the funds used for the maintenance and operation of the Fire Department.
(R.C. § 737.23) (‘74 Code, § 34.02)
§ 35.03 COUNCIL MAY PURCHASE ENGINES AND EQUIPMENT.
   The Council may purchase for the use of the Fire Department, necessary fire
engines and such other equipment deemed necessary for the extinguishment of
fires, and establish fire alarm systems within the limits of the municipality.
(‘74 Code, § 34.03) (Am. Ord. 81-682, passed 5-5-81)
§ 35.04 BUILDINGS FOR DEPARTMENT.
   The Council may provide or erect necessary and suitable buildings containing
rooms for fire engines and other equipment, and provide for the meetings of the
Fire Department.
(‘74 Code, § 34.04) (Am. Ord. 81-682, passed 5-5-81)
Statutory reference:
   Fire Departments, see R.C. §§ 737.21 through 737.27
§ 35.05 RECORDS.
   The Fire Chief shall keep in convenient form a complete record of all fires.
Such record shall include the time of the alarm, location of fire, cause of
fire (if known), type of building, name of owner and tenant, purpose for which
occupied, value of building and contents, members of the Department responding
to the alarm, and such other information as he may deem advisable or as may be
required from time to time by Council.
(‘74 Code, § 34.05)
§ 35.06 PRACTICE DRILLS.
   The Fire Department shall hold a monthly practice drill of at least one
hour, when the weather permits, and give the firefighters instructions in
approved methods of firefighting and fire prevention.
(‘74 Code, § 34.06) (Am. Ord. 81-682, passed 5-5-81)
§ 35.07 LOSS OF MEMBERSHIP.
   Firefighters absent without excuse from three drills or calls in any
calendar year shall forfeit membership in the Department.
(‘74 Code, § 34.09) (Am. Ord. 81-682, passed 5-5-81)
§ 35.08 COMPENSATION.
   The members and officers of the Fire Department shall receive compensation
as set by Council.
(‘74 Code, § 34.10) (Am. Ord. 81-682, passed 5-5-81)
§ 35.09 MANDATORY CONTRIBUTION TO PENSION PICKED UP BY CITY.
   (A)   City Council shall designate all participating employees’ mandatory
contributions to the Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund as picked
up by the city, although such contributions shall continue to be designated as
employee contributions. The amount of the employee’s income reported by the
city as subject to federal an state income tax shall be the employee’s total
gross income, reduced by the then- current percentage amount of the employee’s
mandatory retirement contribution. No employee’s total salary shall be
increased by such pick up, nor shall the city’s total contribution to the
Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund be increased thereby.
   (B)   This pick up provision shall apply to participating Police and Fire
Department employees of the city. An employee may not be given the option of
choosing to receive the picked-up amounts directly instead of having them paid
by the city to the Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund, and
employee contributions must be paid by the city in lieu of contributions by the
employee.
   (C)   This pick up shall be effective with the first payroll date of 1989.
   (D)   In the event that a majority of the employees of the city do not
desire this pick up plan, or if there is an adverse determination from the
Internal Revenue Service affecting the qualifying status of this pick up plan,
this pick up plan shall be null and void and as if never enacted.
(‘74 Code, § 34.11) (Ord. 88-873, passes 12-20-88, Am. Ord. 89-905, passed 10-
24-89)
Statutory reference:
   Employee contributions to police and firemen’s disability and pension fund,
see R.C. § 742.31
§ 35.10 CIVIL SERVICE RULES FOR EXAMINATIONS AND GRADING FOR FULL-TIME
POSITIONS.
   (A)   Council hereby adopts, establishes and implements within the City of
Mount Healthy, that examinations for original appointments shall be open to all
individuals who otherwise qualify for appointment to or employment in a
position under the following rules.
   (B)   Examinations may include an evaluation of such factors as education,
training, capacity, knowledge, manual dexterity, and physical or psychological
fitness. Examinations may consist of one test or of more than one test in
combination. Tests may be written, oral, physical, demonstration of ability to
perform essential functions, or an evaluation of training and experience, and
shall be designed to fairly test the relative capacity of the persons examined
to discharge the particular duties of the position or classification for which
appointment is sought. Tests may include structured interviews, assessment
centers, work simulations, examination of knowledge, skills, and abilities, and
any other acceptable testing methods. Where minimum or maximum requirements are
established for any examination, the same shall be specified in the examination
announcement. These minimum or maximum requirements may include, but are not
limited to, creating a maximum number of applicants who can sit to test for an
open or original position(s).
   (C)   The Civil Service Commission shall prescribe the subjects of each
examination(s) and the relative weights to be assigned thereto; provided that
any such determination must have been made prior to the date of such
examination(s). Notices and sites for competitive examinations will comply with
Section 7.07 of the Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service Commission of
the City of Mt. Healthy, Ohio.
   (D)   Applicants for the full-time firefighter original appointment
positions shall have attained the age of 18 years on or before the date of the
written examination and be subject to physical, psychological, medical, or drug
testing as set forth in Section 7.08 of the Rules and Regulations of the Civil
Service Commission of the City of Mt. Healthy, Ohio.
   (E)   Administration of the examination for the full-time firefighter
original appointment positions shall comply with Sections 7.09; 7.10; 7.11;
7.12; 7.13; 7.14; and 7.15 of the Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service
Commission of the City of Mt. Healthy, Ohio.
   (F)   Grading of the examination for the full-time firefighter original
appointment positions shall comply with Section 8.02 of the Rules and
Regulations of the Civil Service Commission of the City of Mt. Healthy, Ohio,
and include the following rules for grading examinations and granting extra
credit:
      (1)   Any applicant for original appointment who is a resident of Ohio,
who has completed service in the uniformed services as described in R.C. §
124.23, who was honorably discharged or transferred to reserve duty with
evidence of satisfactory service, and who otherwise meets the qualifications of
that section, may file with the Commission a certificate of service or
honorable discharge for extra credit for such service. The applicant must
submit proof of by the application deadline. The Commission shall grant
additional credit of 20% of the total grade given in the regular examination to
any applicant who files for the extra credit and qualifies, provided that he or
she has first received a passing grade on the examination.
      (2)   Such requests for uniformed service credit must be submitted to the
Commission along with the application for examination and must, at that time,
be accompanied by proof of uniformed service as described above. Uniformed
service credit requested after the final date for test application will not be
honored.
      (3)   Applicants eligible for veterans' credit on original examination
shall receive a priority in ranking over non-veterans who obtain an identical
grade.
      (4)   Credit for education: for completion of an associate's degree, 10%
additional credit shall be added to the total grade attainable in the
examination. For completion of a bachelor's degree, 20% additional credit shall
be added to the total grade attainable in the examination. The applicant must
submit proof of completed degree by the application deadline.
      (5)   Credit for service as a part-time firefighter with the City of Mt.
Healthy: for each of the first five years of service, 3% additional credit
shall be added to the total grade attainable in the examination.
      (6)   The total amount of combined additional credit for veteran or
uniformed service status, education, and/or service as a part-time patrol
officer with the City of Mt. Healthy may not exceed 25% of the total grade
attainable in the examination.
(Ord. 20-1921, passed 10-6-20)
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT;
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE
§ 35.20 VOLUNTEER FIREMAN’S DEPENDENTS FUND BOARD.
   (A)   There is established a Volunteer Fireman’s Dependents Board which
shall consist of five members who shall be chosen as follows:
      (1)   Two members shall be elected by the Council of the city;
      (2)   Two members shall be elected by the Fire Department of the city;
      (3)   One member shall be elected by the Board members elected in (1) and
(2) above, and such member must be an elector of the city; but such member may
not be a public employee, nor may he be a member of the legislative authority
or of the Fire Department.
(R.C. § 146.03(A))
   (B)   Election of Board members set forth in (A) (1) and (2) shall be held
each year on the first Monday in December and the Board member set forth in (A)
(3) shall be elected on or before the second Monday of December of each year.
Each Board member shall serve for a period of one year commencing on January
first next; provided, that the initial Board shall assume its duties
immediately.
(R.C. § 146.04)
   (C)   Upon election the Board shall elect a Chairperson and Secretary. The
Secretary shall immediately certify to the state fire marshal the names of the
Board member Chairperson and Secretary. He shall also forward a certificates or
statement by the Finance Director of the city of the current assessed valuation
of the city.
(R.C. § 146.05)
   (D)   R.C. §§ 146.01 through 146.19 are adopted and made a part of this
section the same as if fully written herein.
(‘74 Code, § 34.25) (Ord. 163-A, passed 10-15-57)
§ 35.21 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE; ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERS; DUTIES.
   (A)   There is established an Emergency Medical Service of the city.
   (B)   The Emergency Medical Service shall be composed of one captain, three
lieutenants, and a number of squad members to be determined by the Mayor and
City Manager.
   (C)   The members of the Emergency Medical Service as provided by (A) above
shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of Council.
   (D)   The captain of the Emergency Medical Service shall have exclusive
control of the stationing and transferring of all squad members and officers
under his command.
   (E)   The captain shall provide leadership, management, command, technical
information, and current instructions and training in all phases of emergency
medical care and services.
   (F)   The captain may appoint a lieutenant to serve as officer in charge
during any absence of the captain.
   (G)   The three lieutenants shall report directly to the captain. The
lieutenants shall have miscellaneous duties such as training, scheduling of
personnel, equipment maintenance, inventory, payroll, insurance, or whatever
duties are assigned to them to maintain an efficient and orderly operation of
the Emergency Medical Service.
   (H)   The Emergency Medical Service shall function primarily for and in the
city. The Emergency Medical Service shall, when dispatched, respond to other
locations outside the city under mutual aid agreements and shall in time of a
major disaster volunteer its manpower and equipment, if needed, provided that
all mutual aid assistance must be approved by the captain and City Manager.
   (I)   Any and all equipment necessary for administering life-saving and
efficient operation of the emergency medical service and its personnel shall be
purchased only after joint recommendation of the captain and City Manager.
   (J)   The emergency medical service shall be composed of volunteer members.
The rate of compensation for all members of the emergency medical service shall
be as established by Council. All changes and reviews in rate of compensation
must be done jointly by the captain and City Manager, with their joint
recommendation then being presented to Council.
   (K)   The members of the Emergency Medical Service when performing their
official duties or responding to an emergency shall be considered as performing
a governmental function as provided by R.C. § 737.04.
   (L)   The captain of the Emergency Medical Service shall be appointed by the
Mayor.
   (M)   The captain of the Emergency Medical Service shall appoint the
lieutenants.
(‘74 Code, § 34.26) (Ord. 400-A, passed 11-16-76; Am. Ord. 425-A, passed 12-19-
72; Am. Ord. 80-642, passed 5-6-80)
Statutory reference:
   Emergency Medical Service, see R.C. § 4765.01 et seq.
§ 35.22 EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE AS UNIT OF FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Emergency Medical Service shall be a unit of the Fire Department.
   (B)   It is not the intention of this section to change the line of command
within the emergency medical service as provided in §
35.21.
(‘74 Code, § 34.27) (Ord. 404-A, passed 1-4-72; Am. Ord. 80-642, passed 5-6-80)
USER FEES FOR PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES
§ 35.30 USER FEES FOR PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES.
   (A)   The Mt. Healthy Fire/Rescue Department shall initiate a user fee for
the delivery of fire department services, personnel, supplies and equipment to
the scene of emergencies. The rate of the user fee shall be that which is the
total of costs incurred, which includes any services, personnel, supplies, and
equipment, and may fluctuate based on needs of each call for emergency
services.
   (B)   Public Safety Services may include but not be limited to, medical care
to individuals, extinguishments of fires, cleaning up spills and debris,
extrication of entrapped individuals and other safety or hazardous situations
which may occur at the scene of a motor vehicle accident, structure fires and
other emergency scenes.
   (C)   Whenever the Fire/Rescue Department responds to a motor vehicle fire,
motor vehicle accident, structure fire, or other emergency service, either
within or outside the city, the Fire Chief shall establish the fees to be
charged for service based upon services, personnel, supplies, and equipment
employed.
   (D)   The aforesaid fees shall be charged to and billed to:
      (1)   The insurance carrier or to the responsible party or parties. This
is an add-on cost of the claim for damages of the vehicles, property, and/or
injuries.
      (2)   The owner of the motor vehicle for which spills or debris around
the vehicle are cleaned up, fires are extinguished, or the site of the accident
around the vehicle is secured.
      (3)   The owner of the property requiring the control or extinguishing of
fires and other emergency services as provided by the Fire/Rescue Department
personnel.
      (4)   The person being treated, attended to, or rescued by the Fire/
Rescue Department personnel, or the person who may be responsible for such
person being treated or rescued.
   (E)   User fees will be as follows:
 
Level of Service                                                     User Fees
Scene safety and investigation                                       $435.00
Scene safety, extinguishments, investigation, clean-up and material  $495.00
used
Scene safety, extrication, investigation, clean-up and material used $1,800.00
 
(Ord. 04-1445, passed 4-20-04)
CHAPTER 36: CIVIL ACTIONS AGAINST THE MUNICIPALITY
Section
   
36.01   Definitions
   
36.02   Nonliability of municipality; exceptions
   
36.03   Defenses and immunities
   
36.04   Limitation of actions
   
36.05   Damages
   
36.06   Satisfaction of judgments
   
36.07   Defending and indemnifying employees
   
36.08   Liability insurance
   
36.09   Certain actions unaffected
§ 36.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMERGENCY CALL. A call to duty including, but not limited to, communications
from citizens, police dispatches, and personal observations by peace officers
of inherently dangerous situations that demand an immediate response on the
part of a peace officer.
   EMPLOYEE. An officer, agent, employee, or servant, whether or not
compensated or full-time or part-time, who is authorized to act and is acting
within the scope of his or her employment for a political subdivision. EMPLOYEE
does not include an independent contractor and does not include any individual
engaged by a school district pursuant to R.C. § 3319.301. EMPLOYEE includes any
elected or appointed official of a political subdivision. EMPLOYEE also
includes a person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a criminal
offense and who has been sentenced to perform community service work in a
political subdivision whether pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02 or otherwise, and a
child who is found to be a delinquent child and who is ordered by a juvenile
court pursuant to R.C. § 2152.19 or 2152.20 to perform community service or
community work in a political subdivision.
   GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION.
      (1)   A function of a political subdivision that is specified in division
(2) of this definition or that satisfies any of the following:
         (a)   A function that is imposed upon the state as an obligation of
sovereignty and that is performed by a political subdivision voluntarily or
pursuant to legislative requirement;
         (b)   A function that is for the common good of all citizens of the
state;
         (c)   A function that promotes or preserves the public peace, health,
safety, or welfare, that involves activities that are not engaged in or not
customarily engaged in by nongovernmental persons, and that is not specified in
this section as a proprietary function.
      (2)   A GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
         (a)   The provision or nonprovision of police, fire, emergency
medical, ambulance, and rescue services or protection;
         (b)   The power to preserve the peace; to prevent and suppress riots,
disturbances, and disorderly assemblages; to prevent, mitigate, and clean up
releases of oil and hazardous and extremely hazardous substances as defined in
R.C. § 3750.01; and to protect persons and property;
         (c)   The provision of a system of public education;
         (d)   The provision of a free public library system;
         (e)   The regulation of the use of, and the maintenance and repair of,
roads, highways, streets, avenues, alleys, sidewalks, bridges, aqueducts,
viaducts, and public grounds;
         (f)   Judicial, quasi-judicial, prosecutorial, legislative, and quasi-
legislative functions;
         (g)   The construction, reconstruction, repair, renovation,
maintenance, and operation of buildings that are used in connection with the
performance of a governmental function, including, but not limited to, office
buildings and courthouses;
         (h)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
maintenance, and operation of jails, places of juvenile detention, workhouses,
or any other detention facility, as defined in R.C. § 2921.01;
         (i)   The enforcement or nonperformance of any law;
         (j)   The regulation of traffic, and the erection or nonerection of
traffic signs, signals, or control devices;
         (k)   The collection and disposal of solid wastes, as defined in R.C.
§ 3734.01 including, but not limited to, the operation of solid waste disposal
facilities as FACILITIES is defined in that section, and the collection and
management of hazardous waste generated by households. As used in this
subsection, HAZARDOUS WASTE GENERATED BY HOUSEHOLDS means solid waste
originally generated by individual households that is listed specifically as
hazardous waste in or exhibits one or more characteristics of hazardous waste
as defined by rules adopted under R.C. § 3734.12, but that is excluded from
regulation as a hazardous waste by those rules;
         (l)   The provision or nonprovision, planning or design, construction,
or reconstruction of a public improvement, including, but not limited to, a
sewer system;
         (m)   The operation of a job and family services department or agency,
including, but not limited to, the provision of assistance to aged and infirm
persons and to persons who are indigent;
         (n)   The operation of a health board, department, or agency,
including, but not limited to, any statutorily required or permissive program
for the provision of immunizations or other inoculations to all or some members
of the public; provided that a GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION does not include the
supply, manufacture, distribution, or development of any drug or vaccine
employed in any such immunization or inoculation program by any supplier,
manufacturer, distributor, or developer of the drug or vaccine;
         (o)   The operation of mental health facilities, developmental
disabilities facilities, alcohol treatment and control centers, and children’s
homes or agencies;
         (p)   The provision or nonprovision of inspection services of all
types, including, but not limited to, inspections in connection with building,
zoning, sanitation, fire, plumbing, and electrical codes, and the taking of
actions in connection with those types of codes, including, but not limited to,
the approval of plans for the construction of buildings or structures and the
issuance or revocation of building permits or stop work orders in connection
with buildings or structures;
         (q)   Urban renewal projects and the elimination of slum conditions,
including the performance of any activity that a County Land Reutilization
Corporation is authorized to perform under R.C. Chapter 1724 or R.C. Chapter
5722;
         (r)   Flood control measures;
         (s)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, operation,
care, repair, and maintenance of a township cemetery;
         (t)   The issuance of revenue obligations under R.C. § 140.06;
         (u)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
maintenance, and operation of any school athletic facility, school auditorium,
or gymnasium or any recreation area or facility, including but not limited to
any of the following:
            1.   A park, playground, or playfield;
            2.   An indoor recreational facility;
            3.   A zoo or zoological park;
            4.   A bath, swimming pool, pond, water park, wading pool, wave
pool, water slide or other type of aquatic facility;
            5.   A golf course;
            6.   A bicycle motocross facility or other type of recreational
area or facility in which bicycling, skating, skate boarding, or scooter riding
is engaged;
            7.   A rope course or climbing walls;
            8.   An all-purpose vehicle facility in which all-purpose vehicles,
as defined in R.C. § 4519.01, are contained, maintained, or operated for
recreational activities.
         (v)   The provision of public defender services by a county or joint
county public defender’s office pursuant to R.C. Chapter 120;
         (w)   1.   At any time before regulations prescribed pursuant to 49
U.S.C. 20153 become effective, the designation, establishment, design,
construction, implementation, operation, repair, or maintenance of a public
road rail crossing in a zone within a municipal corporation in which, by
ordinance, the legislative authority of the municipal corporation regulates the
sounding of locomotive horns, whistles, or bells;
            2.   On and after the effective date of regulations prescribed
pursuant to 49 U.S.C. 20153, the designation, establishment, design,
construction, implementation, operation, repair, or maintenance of a public
road rail crossing in such a zone or of a supplementary safety measure, as
defined in 49 U.S.C. 20153, at or for a public road rail crossing, if and to
the extent that the public road rail crossing is excepted, pursuant to
subsection (c) of that section, from the requirement of the regulations
prescribed under subsection (b) of that section.
         (x)   A function that the General Assembly mandates a political
subdivision to perform.
   LAW. Any provision of the Constitution, statutes, or rules of the United
States or of this state, provisions of charters, ordinances, resolutions, and
rules of political subdivisions, and written policies adopted by boards of
education. When used in connection with the “common law,” this definition does
not apply.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION or SUBDIVISION. A municipal corporation, township,
county, school district, or other body corporate and politic responsible for
governmental activities in a geographic area smaller than that of the state.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION includes but is not limited to a county hospital
commission appointed under R.C. § 339.14, board of hospital commissioners
appointed for a municipal hospital under R.C. § 749.04, board of hospital
trustees appointed for a municipal hospital under R.C. § 749.22, regional
planning commission created pursuant to R.C. § 713.21, county planning
commission created pursuant to R.C. § 713.22, joint planning council created
pursuant to R.C. § 713.231, interstate regional planning commission created
pursuant to R.C. § 713.30, port authority created pursuant to R.C. § 4582.02 or
4582.26 or in existence  on December 16, 1964, regional council established by
political subdivisions pursuant to R.C. Chapter 167, emergency planning
district and joint emergency planning district designated under R.C. § 3750.03,
joint emergency medical services district created pursuant to R.C. § 307.052, a
fire and ambulance district created pursuant to R.C. § 505.375, joint
interstate emergency planning district established by an agreement entered into
under that section, and a county solid waste management district and joint
solid waste management district established under R.C. § 343.01 or 343.012, a
community school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, county land reutilization
corporation organized under R.C. Chapter 1724, the county or counties served by
a community- based correctional facility and program or district community-
based correction facility and program established and operated under R.C. §§
2301.51 through 2301.58, a community-based correctional facility and program or
district community-based correctional facility and program that is so
established and operated, and the facility governing board of a community-
based correctional facility and program or district community- based
correctional facility and program that is so established and operated.
   PROPRIETARY FUNCTION.
      (1)   A function of a political subdivision that is specified in division
(2) of this definition or that satisfies both of the following:
         (a)   The function is not one described in divisions (1)(a) or (1)(b)
of the definition of GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION contained in this section, and is
not one specified in division (2) of the definition of GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTION
contained in this section;
         (b)   The function is one that promotes or preserves the public peace,
health, safety, or welfare and that involves activities that are customarily
engaged in by nongovernmental persons.
      (2)   A PROPRIETARY FUNCTION includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
         (a)   The operation of a hospital by one or more political
subdivisions;
         (b)   The design, construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair,
maintenance, and operation of a public cemetery other than a township cemetery;
         (c)   The establishment, maintenance, and operation of a utility,
including, but not limited to, a light, gas, power, or heat plant, a railroad,
a busline or other transit company, an airport, and a municipal water supply
system;
         (d)   The maintenance, destruction, operation, and upkeep of a sewer
system;
         (e)   The operation and control of a public stadium, auditorium, civic
or social center, exhibition hall, arts and crafts center, band or orchestra,
or off-street parking facility.
   PUBLIC ROADS. Means public roads, highways, streets, avenues, alleys, and
bridges within a political subdivision. PUBLIC ROADS does not include berms,
shoulders, rights-of-way, or traffic control devices unless the traffic control
devices are mandated by the Ohio Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
   STATE. The State of Ohio, including, but not limited to, the General
Assembly, the Supreme Court, the offices of all elected state officers, and all
departments, boards, offices, commissions, agencies, colleges, and
universities, institutions, and other instrumentalities of the State of Ohio.
STATE does not include political subdivisions.
(R.C. § 2744.01) (‘74 Code, § 36.01)
§ 36.02 NONLIABILITY OF MUNICIPALITY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Classifications of functions; nonliability; jurisdiction of the
courts.
      (1)   For the purposes of this chapter, the functions of political
subdivisions are classified as governmental functions and proprietary
functions. Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a political
subdivision is not liable in damages in a civil action for injury, death, or
loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or omission of the
political subdivision or an employee of the political subdivision in connection
with a governmental or proprietary function.
      (2)   The defenses and immunities conferred under this chapter and R.C.
Chapter 2744 apply in connection with all governmental and proprietary
functions performed by the political subdivision and its employees, whether
performed on behalf of the political subdivision or on behalf of another
political subdivision.
      (3)   Subject to statutory limitations upon their monetary jurisdiction,
the Courts of Common Pleas, the Municipal Courts, and the County Courts have
jurisdiction to hear and determine civil actions governed by or brought
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Exceptions. Subject to §
36.03 and R.C. §§ 2744.03 and 2744.05, a political subdivision is liable in
damages in a civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property
allegedly caused by an act or omission of the political subdivision or of any
of its employees in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, as
follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, political
subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or property caused
by the negligent operation of any motor vehicle by their employees when the
employees are engaged within the scope of their employment and authority. The
following are full defenses to that liability:
         (a)   A member of a municipal police department or any other police
agency was operating a motor vehicle while responding to an emergency call and
the operation of the vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct;
         (b)   A member of a municipal fire department or any other
firefighting agency was operating a motor vehicle while engaged in duty at a
fire, proceeding toward a place where a fire is in progress or is believed to
be in progress, or answering any other emergency alarm and the operation of the
vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct;
         (c)   A member of an emergency medical service owned or operated by a
political subdivision was operating a motor vehicle while responding to or
completing a call for emergency medical care or treatment, the member was
holding a valid commercial driver’s license issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter
4506 or a driver’s license issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4507, the operation
of the vehicle did not constitute willful or wanton misconduct, and the
operation complies with the precautions of R.C. § 4511.03.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 3314.07 and 3746.24,
political subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or
property caused by the negligent performance of acts by their employees with
respect to proprietary functions of the political subdivisions.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3746.24, political
subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or property caused
by their negligent failure to keep public roads in repair and other negligent
failure to remove obstructions from public roads, except that it is a full
defense to that liability, when a bridge within a municipality is involved,
that the municipality does not have the responsibility for maintaining or
inspecting the bridge.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3746.24, political
subdivisions are liable for injury, death, or loss to person or property that
is caused by the negligence of their employees and that occurs within or on the
grounds of, and is due to physical defects within or on the grounds of,
buildings that are used in connection with the performance of a governmental
function, including, but not limited to, office buildings and courthouses, but
not including jails, places of juvenile detention, workhouses, or any other
detention facility, as defined in R.C. § 2921.01.
      (5)   In addition to the circumstances described in divisions (B)(1)
through (4) of this section, a political subdivision is liable for injury,
death, or loss to person or property when civil liability is expressly imposed
upon the political subdivision by a section of the Revised Code, including, but
not limited to, R.C. §§ 2743.02 and 5591.37. Civil liability shall not be
construed to exist under another section of this code or the Revised Code
merely because that section imposes a responsibility or mandatory duty, because
that section provides for a criminal penalty, because of a general
authorization in that section that a political subdivision may sue and be sued,
or because that section uses the term “shall” in a provision pertaining to a
political subdivision.
   (C)   An order that denies a political subdivision or an employee of a
political subdivision the benefit of an alleged immunity from liability as
provided in this chapter or any other provision of the law is a final order.
(R.C. § 2744.02) (‘74 Code, § 36.02)
§ 36.03 DEFENSES AND IMMUNITIES.
   (A)   In a civil action brought against a political subdivision or an
employee of a political subdivision to recover damages for injury, death, or
loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or omission in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the following defenses
or immunities may be asserted to establish nonliability:
      (1)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the employee
involved was engaged in the performance of a judicial, quasi-judicial,
prosecutorial, legislative, or quasi-legislative function.
      (2)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the conduct
of the employee involved, other than negligent conduct, that gave rise to the
claim of liability was required by law or authorized by law, or if the conduct
of the employee involved that gave rise to the claim of liability was necessary
or essential to the exercise of powers of the political subdivision or
employee.
      (3)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the action or
failure to act by the employee involved that gave rise to the claim of
liability was within the discretion of the employee with respect to policy
making, planning, or enforcement powers by virtue of the duties and
responsibilities of the office or position of the employee.
      (4)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the action or
failure to act by the political subdivision or employee involved that gave rise
to the claim of liability, resulted in injury or death to a person who had been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a criminal offense and who, at the time of
the injury or death, was serving any portion of his or her sentence by
performing community service work for or in the political subdivision whether
pursuant to R.C. § 2951.02 or otherwise, or resulted in injury or death to a
child who was found to be a delinquent child and who, at the time of the injury
or death, was performing community service or community work for or in a
political subdivision in accordance with the order of a juvenile court entered
pursuant to R.C. § 2151.355, and if, at the time of that person’s or child’s
injury or death, the person or child was covered for purposes of R.C. Chapter
4123 in connection with the community service or community work for or in the
political subdivision.
      (5)   The political subdivision is immune from liability if the injury,
death, or loss to person or property resulted from the exercise of judgment or
discretion in determining whether to acquire, or how to use, equipment,
supplies, materials, personnel, facilities, and other resources, unless the
judgment or discretion was exercised with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or
in a wanton or reckless manner.
      (6)   In addition to any immunity or defense referred to in division (A)
(7) of this section and in circumstances not covered by that division or R.C.
§§ 3314.07 and 3746.24, the employee is immune from liability unless one of the
following applies:
         (a)   His or her acts or omissions were manifestly outside the scope
of his or her employment or official responsibilities;
         (b)   His or her acts or omissions were with malicious purpose, in bad
faith, or in a wanton or reckless manner;
         (c)   Civil liability is expressly imposed upon the employee by a
section of the Revised Code. Civil liability shall not be construed to exist
under another section of the Revised Code merely because that section imposes a
responsibility or mandatory duty upon an employee, because that section
provides for a criminal penalty, because of a general authorization in that
section that an employee may sue and be sued, or because the section uses the
term “shall” in a provision pertaining to an employee.
      (7)   The political subdivision, and an employee who is the Chief Legal
Officer of a political subdivision, an assistant of any such person, or a judge
of a court of this state, is entitled to any defense or immunity available at
common law or established by the Revised Code.
   (B)   Any immunity or defense conferred upon, or referred to in connection
with, an employee by division (A)(6) or (7) of this section does not affect or
limit any liability of a political subdivision for an act or omission of the
employee as provided in §
36.02 above.
(R.C. § 2744.03) (‘74 Code, § 36.03)
§ 36.04 LIMITATION OF ACTIONS.
   (A)   An action against a political subdivision to recover damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or
omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, whether
brought as an original action, cross- claim, counterclaim, third-party claim,
or claim for subrogation, shall be brought within two years after the cause of
action accrues, or within any applicable shorter period of time for bringing
the action provided by the Revised Code. The period of limitation contained in
this division shall be tolled pursuant to R.C. § 2305.16. This section applies
to actions brought against political subdivisions by all persons, governmental
entities, and the state.
   (B)   In the complaint filed in the civil action against a political
subdivision or an employee of a political subdivision to recover damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property allegedly caused by an act or
omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, whether
filed in an original action, cross-claim, counterclaim, third- party claim, or
claim for subrogation, the complainant shall include a demand for a judgment
for the damages that the judge in a nonjury trial or the jury in a jury trial
finds that the complainant is entitled to be awarded, but shall not specify in
that demand any monetary amount for damages sought.
(R.C. § 2744.04) (‘74 Code, § 36.04)
§ 36.05 DAMAGES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Revised Code or rules of a
court to the contrary, in an action against a political subdivision to recover
damages for injury, death or loss to person or property caused by an act or
omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary function, punitive or
exemplary damages shall not be awarded.
   (B)   (1)   If a claimant receives or is entitled to receive benefits for
injuries or loss allegedly incurred from a policy or policies of insurance or
any other source, the benefits shall be disclosed to the court, and the amount
of the benefits shall be deducted from any award against a political
subdivision recovered by the claimant. No insurer or other person is entitled
to bring an action under a subrogation provision in an insurance or other
contract against a political subdivision with respect to those benefits. The
amount of the benefits shall be deducted from an award against a political
subdivision under division (B)(1) of this section regardless of whether the
claimant may be under an obligation to pay back the benefits upon recovery, in
whole or in part, for the claim. A claimant whose benefits have been deducted
from an award under division (B)(1) of this section is not considered fully
compensated and shall not be required to reimburse a subrogated claim for
benefits deducted from an award pursuant to division (B)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section shall be construed to do
either of the following:
         (a)   Limit the rights of a beneficiary under a life insurance policy
or the rights of sureties under fidelity or surety bonds;
         (b)   Prohibit the Department of Medicaid from recovering from the
political subdivision, pursuant to R.C. § 5160.37, the cost of medical
assistance under a medical assistance program.
   (C)   (1)   There shall not be any limitation on compensatory damages that
represent the actual loss of the person who is awarded the damages. However,
except in wrongful death actions brought pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2125, damages
that arise from the same cause of action, transaction or occurrence, or series
of transactions or occurrences and that do not represent the actual loss of the
person who is awarded the damages shall not exceed $250,000 in favor of any one
person. The limitation on damages that do not represent the actual loss of the
person who is awarded the damages provided in this section does not apply to
court costs that are awarded to a plaintiff, or to interest on a judgment
rendered in favor of a plaintiff, in an action against a political subdivision.
      (2)   (a)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS
AWARDED THE DAMAGES includes all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost by the person
injured as a result of the injury, including wages, salaries, or other
compensation lost as of the date of a judgment and future expected lost
earnings of the person injured;
            2.   All expenditures of the person injured or another person on
behalf of the person injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation
services, or for other care, treatment, services, products, or accommodations
that were necessary because of the injury;
            3.   All expenditures to be incurred in the future, as determined
by the court, by the person injured or another person on behalf of the person
injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation services, or for
other care, treatment, service, products or accommodations that will be
necessary because of the injury;
            4.   All expenditures of a person whose property was injured or
destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person whose property was
injured or destroyed in order to repair or replace the property that was
injured or destroyed;
            5.   All expenditures of the person injured or of the person whose
property was injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person
injured or of the person whose property was injured or destroyed in relation to
the actual preparation or presentation of the claim involved;
            6.   Any other expenditures of the person injured or of the person
whose property was injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the
person injured or of the person whose property was injured or destroyed that
the court determines represent an actual loss experienced because of the
personal or property injury or property loss.
         (b)   THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS AWARDED THE DAMAGES does
not include any fees paid or owed to an attorney for any services rendered in
relation to a personal or property injury or property loss, and does not
include any damages awarded for pain and suffering, for the loss of society,
consortium, companionship, care, assistance, attention, protection, advice,
guidance, counsel, instruction, training, or education of the person injured,
for mental anguish, or for any other intangible loss.
(R.C. § 2744.05)
§ 36.06 SATISFACTION OF JUDGMENTS.
   (A)   Real or personal property, and moneys, accounts, deposits, or
investments of a political subdivision are not subject to execution, judicial
sale, garnishment, or attachment to satisfy a judgment rendered against a
political subdivision in a civil action to recover damages for injury, death,
or loss to person or property caused by an act or omission of the political
subdivision or any of its employees in connection with a governmental or
proprietary function. Those judgments shall be paid from funds of the political
subdivisions that have been appropriated for that purpose, but, if sufficient
funds are not currently appropriated for the payment of judgments, the fiscal
officer of a political subdivision shall certify the amount of any unpaid
judgments to the taxing authority of the political subdivision for inclusion in
the next succeeding budget and annual appropriation measure and payment in the
next succeeding fiscal year as provided by R.C. § 5705.08, unless any judgment
of that nature is to be paid from the proceeds of bonds issued pursuant to R.C.
§ 133.14 or pursuant to annual installments authorized by divisions (B) or (C)
of this section.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO
IS AWARDED THE DAMAGES includes all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries, or other compensation lost by the person
injured as a result of the injury, as of the date of judgment;
            2.   All expenditures of the person injured or of another person on
behalf of the person injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation
services, or for other care, treatment, services, products, or accommodations
that were necessary because of the injury;
            3.   All expenditures of a person whose property was injured or
destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person whose property was
injured or destroyed in order to repair or replace the property that was
injured or destroyed;
            4.   All expenditures of the person injured or whose property was
injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the person injured or of
the person whose property was injured or destroyed in relation to the actual
preparation or presentation of the claim involved;
            5.   Any other expenditure of the person injured or of the person
whose property was injured or destroyed or of another person on behalf of the
person injured or of the person whose property was injured or destroyed that
the court determines represent an actual loss experienced because of the
personal or property injury or property loss.
         (b)   As used in this section, THE ACTUAL LOSS OF THE PERSON WHO IS
AWARDED THE DAMAGES does not include any of the following:
            1.   Wages, salaries, or other compensation lost by the person
injured as a result of the injury that are future expected earnings of that
person;
            2.   Expenditures to be incurred in the future, as determined by
the court, by the person injured or by another person on behalf of the person
injured for medical care or treatment, for rehabilitation services, or for
other care, treatment, services, products, or accommodations that will be
necessary because of the injury;
            3.   Any fees paid or owed to an attorney for any services rendered
in relation to a personal or property injury or property loss;
            4.   Any damages awarded for pain and suffering, for the loss of
society, consortium, companionship, care, assistance, attention, protection,
advice, guidance, counsel, instruction, training, or education of the person
injured, for mental anguish, or for any other intangible loss.
      (2)   (a)   Except as specifically provided to the contrary in this
section, a court that renders a judgment against a political subdivision as
described in division (A) of this section and that is not in favor of the state
may authorize the political subdivision, upon the motion of the political
subdivision, to pay the judgment or a specified portion of the judgment in
annual installments over a period not to exceed ten years, subject to the
payment of interest at the rate specified in R.C. § 1343.03(A). A court shall
not authorize the payment in installments under this division of any portion of
a judgment or entire judgment that represents the actual loss of the person who
is awarded the damages.
         (b)   Additionally, a court shall not authorize the payment in
installments under this division of any portion of a judgment or entire
judgment that does not represent the actual loss of the person who is awarded
the damages unless the court, after balancing the interests of the political
subdivision and of the person in whose favor the judgment was rendered,
determines that installment payments would be appropriate under the
circumstances and would not be unjust to the person in whose favor the judgment
was rendered. If a court makes that determination, it shall fix the amount of
the installment payments in a manner that achieves for the person in whose
favor the judgment was rendered the same economic result over the period as
that person would have received if the judgment or portion of the judgment
subject to the installment payments had been paid in a lump sum payment.
   (C)   At the option of a political subdivision, a judgment as described in
division (A) of this section and that is rendered in favor of the state may be
paid in equal annual installments over a period not to exceed ten years,
without the payment of interest.
(R.C. § 2744.06) (‘74 Code, § 36.05)
§ 36.07 DEFENDING AND INDEMNIFYING EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) of this section,
a political subdivision
shall provide for the defense of an employee, in any state or federal court, in
any civil action or proceeding which contains an allegation for damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property caused by an act or omission of
the employee in connection with a governmental or proprietary function. Amounts
expended by a political subdivision in the defense of its employees shall be
from funds appropriated for this purpose or from proceeds of insurance.
      (2)   A political subdivision does not have the duty to provide for the
defense of an employee under division (A)(1) of this section if any of the
following apply:
         (a)   The act or omission occurred while the employee was not acting
in good faith.
         (b)   The act or omission occurred while the employee was acting
manifestly outside the scope of the employee’s employment or official
responsibilities.
         (c)   The civil action or proceeding is commenced by or on behalf of a
political subdivision.
         (d)   The employee is an employee of a regional council of governments
established under R.C. Chapter 167 and both of the following apply:
            1.   The employee is not also an employee of a political
subdivision that is a member of the council.
            2.   The act or omission, if proven, would constitute a violation
of R.C. Chapter 102 or R.C. Chapter 2921.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
a political subdivision shall indemnify and hold harmless an employee in the
amount of any judgment, other than a judgment for punitive or exemplary
damages, that is obtained against the employee in a state or federal court or
as a result of a law of a foreign jurisdiction and that is for damages for
injury, death, or loss to person or property caused by an act or omission in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function.
      (2)   A political subdivision is not required to indemnify and hold
harmless an employee under division (B)(1) of this section if any of the
following apply:
         (a)   At the time of the act or omission, the employee was not acting
in good faith.
         (b)   At the time of the act or omission, the employee was not acting
within the scope of the employee’s employment or official responsibilities.
         (c)   The employee is an employee of a regional council of governments
established under R.C. Chapter 167 and both of the following apply:
            1.   The employee is not also an employee of a political
subdivision that is a member of the council.
            2.   The act or omission constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter
102 or R.C. Chapter 2921.
   (C)   (1)   A political subdivision may enter into a consent judgment or
settlement and may secure releases from liability for itself or an employee,
with respect to any claim for injury, death, or loss to person or property
caused by an act or omission in connection with a governmental or proprietary
function.
      (2)   No action or appeal of any kind shall be brought by any person,
including any employee or a taxpayer, with respect to the decision of a
political subdivision pursuant to division (C)(1) of this section whether to
enter into a consent judgment or settlement or to secure releases, or
concerning the amount and circumstances of a consent judgment or settlement.
Amounts expended for any settlement shall be from funds appropriated for this
purpose.
   (D)   (1)   If a political subdivision refuses to provide an employee with a
defense in a civil action or
proceeding as described in division (A) of this section, upon the motion of the
political subdivision, the court shall conduct a hearing regarding the
political subdivision’s duty to defend the employee in that civil action. The
political subdivision shall file the motion within 30 days of the close of
discovery in the action. After the motion is filed, the employee shall have not
less than 30 days to respond to the motion.
      (2)   At the request of the political subdivision or the employee, the
court shall order the motion to be heard at an oral hearing. At the hearing on
the motion, the court shall consider all evidence and arguments submitted by
the parties. The court shall determine whether the political subdivision has
the duty to defend the employee under division (A) of this section. The
pleadings shall not be determinative of whether the employee acted in good
faith or was manifestly outside the scope of employment or official
responsibilities.
      (3)   If the court determines that the political subdivision has the duty
to defend the employee under division (A) of this section, the court shall
order the political subdivision to defend the employee in the action.
(R.C. § 2744.07) (‘74 Code, § 36.06)
§ 36.08 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   (1)   A political subdivision may use public funds to secure insurance
with respect to its and its employees’ potential liability in damages in civil
actions for injury, death, or loss to persons or property allegedly caused by
an act or omission of the political subdivision or any of its employees in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function. The insurance may be at
the limits, for the circumstances, and subject to the terms and conditions,
that are determined by the political subdivision in its discretion. The
insurance may be for the period of time that is set forth in specifications for
competitive bids or, when competitive bidding is not required, for the period
of time that is mutually agreed upon by the political subdivision and insurance
company. The period of time does not have to be, but can be, limited to the
fiscal cycle under which the political subdivision is funded and operated.
      (2)   (a)   Regardless of whether a political subdivision procures a
policy of liability insurance pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section or
otherwise, the political subdivision may establish and maintain a self-
insurance program relative to its and its employees’ potential liability in
damages in civil actions for injury, death, or loss to persons or property
allegedly caused by an act or omission of the political subdivision or any of
its employees in connection with a governmental or proprietary function. The
political subdivision may reserve such funds as it deems appropriate in a
special fund that may be established pursuant to an ordinance or resolution of
the political subdivision and not subject to R.C. § 5705.12. The political
subdivision may allocate the costs of insurance of a self-insurance program, or
both, among the funds or accounts in the subdivision’s treasury on the basis of
relative exposure and loss experience. The political subdivision may require
any deductibles under an insurance or self- insurance program, or both, to be
paid from funds or accounts in the subdivision’s treasury from which a loss was
directly attributable. If it so chooses, the political subdivision may contract
with any person, other political subdivision, or regional council of
governments for purposes of the administration of such program.
         (b)   Political subdivisions that have established self-insurance
programs relative to their and their employees’ potential liability as
described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section may mutually agree that their
self-insurance programs will be jointly administered in a specific manner.
   (B)   The purchase of liability insurance, or the establishment and
maintenance of a self-insurance program, by a political subdivision does not
constitute a waiver of any immunity or defense of the political subdivision or
its employees, except that the political subdivision may specifically waive any
immunity or defense to which it or its employees may be entitled if a provision
to that effect is specifically included in the policy of insurance or in a
written plan of operation of the self-insurance program, or if any, the
legislative enactment of the political subdivision authorizing the purchase of
the insurance or the establishment and maintenance of the self-insurance
program. Such a specific waiver shall be only to the extent of the insurance or
self-insurance program coverage.
   (C)   The authorizations for political subdivisions to secure insurance and
to establish and maintain self- insurance programs in this section are in
addition to any other authority to secure insurance or to establish and
maintain self-insurance programs that is granted pursuant to the Revised Code
or the Ohio Constitution, and they are not in derogation of any other
authorization.
(R.C. § 2744.08) (‘74 Code, § 36.07)
   (D)   If a political subdivision, pursuant to division (A)(2)(a) of this
section or a joint self-insurance pool pursuant to R.C. § 2744.081, has
allocated costs to, or required the payment of deductibles from, funds or
accounts in the subdivision’s treasury, the subdivisions’s fiscal officer,
pursuant to ordinance or resolution of the Legislative Authority, shall
transfer amounts equal to those costs or deductibles from the funds or accounts
of the subdivision’s General Fund if both of the following occur:
      (1)   The subdivision requests payment from the employee responsible for
the funds or accounts for those costs or deductibles;
      (2)   The employee receiving the request fails to remit payment within 45
days after the date of receipt of the request.
   (E)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 5705.14, 5705.15, and 5705.16 do not apply
to transfers made pursuant to division (D) of this section.
(R.C. § 2744.082)
Statutory reference:
   Joint municipal self-insurance pools, see R.C. § 2744.081
§ 36.09 CERTAIN ACTIONS UNAFFECTED.
   This chapter does not apply to, and shall not be construed to apply to, the
following:
   (A)   Civil actions that seek to recover damages from a political
subdivision or any of its employees for contractual liability;
   (B)   Civil actions by an employee, or the collective bargaining
representative of an employee, against his or her political subdivision
relative to any matter that arises out of the employment relationship between
the employee and the political subdivision;
   (C)   Civil actions by an employee of a political subdivision against the
political subdivision relative to wages, hours, conditions, or other terms of
his or her employment;
   (D)   Civil actions by sureties, and the rights of sureties, under fidelity
or surety bonds;
   (E)   Civil claims based upon alleged violations of the Constitution or
statutes of the United States, except that the provisions of §
36.07 shall apply to such claims or related civil actions.
(R.C. § 2744.09) (‘74 Code, § 36.08)
CHAPTER 37: PERSONNEL POLICIES
Section
   
37.01   Adoption of Policy and Procedure Manual
   
37.02   Adoption of CDL alcohol and drug testing policy
   
37.03   Insurance benefits
   
37.04   Vacations
   
37.05   Holidays and personal days
   
37.06   Sick leave
   
37.07   Free admission to municipal swimming pool
   
37.08   Contribution to Public Employees Retirement System picked up by city
   
37.09   Compensation
§ 37.01 ADOPTION OF POLICY AND PROCEDURE MANUAL.
   The City of Mt. Healthy Policy and Procedure Manual is hereby adopted by
reference in its entirety and incorporated into this code of ordinances as if
fully set forth herein.
(‘74 Code, § 35.27) (Ord. 94-1124, passed 11-1-94; Am. Ord. 95-1179, passed 12-
19-95; Am. Ord. 96-1186, passed 4-16-96; Am. Ord. 05-1463, passed 5-17-05)
§ 37.02 ADOPTION OF CDL ALCOHOL AND DRUG TESTING POLICY.
   The city hereby adopts a policy for CDL Alcohol and Drug Testing upon the
terms set out in Exhibit “A” attached to Ordinance 95-1180, passed 12-19-95.
The policy is hereby adopted by reference in its entirety and incorporated into
this code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 95-1180, passed 12-19-95)
§ 37.03 INSURANCE BENEFITS.
   The following benefits shall be provided to all full-time (2080 hours per
year) employees who are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement,
unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance.
   (A)   The city shall provide full-time (2080 hours per year) employees
hospitalization and major medical insurance under Employers Health Insurance
policy or similar.
   (B)   Should a full-time (2080 hours per year) employee desire
hospitalization and major medical insurance for his or her spouse and dependent
children, the city shall pay 75% of the additional premium for the employee’s
policy. The employee shall, through regular payroll deductions, contribute 25%
of the additional premium.
   (C)   The city shall provide dental insurance for all full-time (2080 hours
per year) employees, paid in full by the City of Mt. Healthy.
   (D)   The city shall provide a group life insurance policy to a surviving
spouse, other designated beneficiary, or the estate of a full-time (2080 hours
per year) employee in the amount of $20,000.
(‘74 Code, § 35.20) (Ord. 99-1285, passed 4-20-99; Am. Ord. 00-1309, passed 4-
4-00; Am. Ord. 00-1339, passed 4-4-00)
§ 37.04 VACATIONS.
   The following benefits shall be provided to all full-time (2080 hours per
year) employees who are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement,
unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance.
   (A)   The full-time (2080 hours per year) employees shall be entitled to the
following vacation with pay unless otherwise specifically provided:
      (1)   Twelve months of service but less than 84 months completed: 80
hours.
      (2)   Eighty-four months of service but less than 180 months completed:
120 hours.
      (3)   One hundred eighty months of service but less than 240 months
completed: 160 hours.
      (4)   Two hundred forty months or more of service completed: 200 hours.
   (B)   (1)   The Park Superintendent shall receive four weeks vacation. The
amount of vacation for this specific employee will be negotiated and set when
hired, and shall never exceed five weeks.
      (2)   The Street Superintendent shall receive five weeks vacation
annually. The amount of vacation for this specific employee will be negotiated
and set when hired, and shall never exceed five weeks.
   (C)   Vacation must be taken in the calendar year earned, or it is lost,
except that up to ten days vacation may be carried over to the following
calendar year.
   (D)   The employees supervisor shall have the right to establish reasonable
vacation schedules so as to permit efficient daily operation of the city.
   (E)   In the event a full-time (2080 hours per year) employee is separated
from the city for any reasons other than a disciplinary one, he or she shall
receive vacation pay prorated to the date of separation. In the event an
employee dies while in city service his or her prorated vacation pay shall be
paid to his or her surviving spouse or other designated beneficiary, or to his
or her estate.
(‘74 Code, § 35.21) (Ord. 99-1285, passed 4-20-99; Am. Ord. 00-1309, passed 4-
4-00; Am. Ord. 00-1318, passed 6-6-00; Am. Ord. 00-1339, passed 4-4-00)
§ 37.05 HOLIDAYS AND PERSONAL DAYS.
   The following benefits shall be provided to all full-time (2080 hours per
year) employees who are not covered by a collective bargaining agreement,
unless otherwise specifically provided by ordinance.
   (A)   Full-time (2080 hours per year) employees shall be entitled to the
following holidays and personal days at full pay.
      (1)   New Year’s Day.
      (2)   Memorial Day.
      (3)   Independence Day.
      (4)   Labor Day.
      (5)   Thanksgiving Day.
      (6)   Christmas Day.
   (B)   Scheduled personal days:*
      (1)   Martin Luther King, Jr. Day.
      (2)   President’s Day.
      (3)   Good Friday (one-half day).
      (4)   Columbus Day.
      (5)   The day after Thanksgiving Day.
      (6)   December 24 (one-half day).
      (7)   December 31 (one-half day).
   *It is presumed that employees will use a personal day on the dates
indicated above. However, if an employee chooses to use a personal day on a
different date, two weeks notice must be given to the employee’s supervisor or
designee.
(‘74 Code, § 35.22) (Ord. 99-1285, passed 4-20-99; Am. Ord. 00-1309, passed 4-
4-00; Am. Ord. 00-1339, passed 4-4-00)
§ 37.06 SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Full-time (2080 hours per year) employees shall be entitled to 15 sick
days per year. Unused sick leave shall be cumulative without limit. Upon
retirement from active service with the city, and with ten or more years of
service with the city, the state or political subdivision, an employee shall be
paid in cash for one-fourth the value of his or her accrued but unused sick
leave credit. This payment shall be made in three equal annual installments,
except that if the first installment is less than 30 days credit, an employee
may take up to 30 days in the first installment, and the balance of the
payment, if any, shall be paid in two equal annual installments.
   (B)   In the event a full-time (2080 hours per year) employee dies, the
payment or payments shall be made to such person as the employee designates as
his or her beneficiary on a written “designation of beneficiary,” form signed
by the employee and filed with the Finance Director. If no designation of
beneficiary form is filed with the Finance Director then the payments shall be
made to the executor or administrator of the deceased employee’s estate or, if
the estate is fully administered or is relieved from administration, to the
person or persons designated by the court as the proper parties to receive the
assets of the deceased employee.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall receive an annual uniform and equipment
allowance of $600. The city shall either pay uniforms and equipment bills
directly or reimburse officers for actual expenses up to the amount of the
allowance.
(‘74 Code, § 35.23) (Ord. 99-1285, passed 4-20-99; Am. Ord. 00-1309, passed 4-
4-00; Am. Ord. 00-1339, passed 4-4-00)
§ 37.07 FREE ADMISSION TO MUNICIPAL SWIMMING POOL.
   No admission shall be charged for use of the municipal swimming pool by
full-time, nonseasonal employees, members of the Police Department, members of
the Fire Department or Emergency Medical Service, and their immediate families.
(‘74 Code, § 35.25) (Ord. 84-774, passed 7-3-84)
§ 37.08 CONTRIBUTION TO PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM PICKED UP BY CITY.
   (A)   City Council shall designate all participating employees’ mandatory
contribution to PERS as picked up by the city, although such contributions
shall continue to be designated as employee contributions. The amount of the
employee’s income reported by the city as subject to federal and state income
tax shall be the employee’s total gross income, reduced by the then-current
percentage amount of the employee’s mandatory retirement contribution; no
employee’s total salary shall be increased by such pick up, nor shall the
city’s total contribution to PERS be increased thereby.
   (B)   This pick up provision shall apply to both participating elected
officials of the city, and to participating salaried and hourly employees of
the city. An employee may not be given the option of choosing to receive the
picked-up amounts directly instead of having them paid by the city to the
Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio, and employee contributions must be
paid by the city in lieu of contributions by the employee.
   (C)   In the event that a majority of the employees of the city do not
desire this pick up plan, or if there is an adverse determination from the
Internal Revenue Service affecting the qualifying status of this pick up plan,
this pick up plan shall be null and void as if never enacted.
(‘74 Code, § 35.26) (Ord. 88-874, passed 12-20-88; Am. Ord. 89-904, passed 10-
24-89)
§ 37.09 COMPENSATION.
   Compensation for city officials and employees shall be set from time to time
by legislative authority, unless otherwise covered by collective bargaining
agreement.
CHAPTER 38: PUBLIC MEETINGS
Section
   
38.01   Definitions
   
38.02   General provisions concerning information and notification
   
38.03   Notice of regular and organizational meetings
   
38.04   Notice of special meetings
   
38.05   Notice to news media of special meetings
   
38.06   Notification of discussion of specific types of public business
Statutory reference:
   Open meeting rules, see R.C. § 121.22
§ 38.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLERK. The Clerk of Council.
   DAY. Calendar day.
   MEETING. Any prearranged discussion of the public business of the municipal
body by a majority of the members of the municipal body.
   MUNICIPAL BODY.
      (1)   The Council and any board, commission, committee, agency,
authority, or similar decision-making body of the city.
      (2)   Any committee or subcommittee of a body described in (1) above.
   ORAL NOTIFICATION. Notification given orally either in person or by
telephone, directly to the person for whom such notification is intended, or by
leaving an oral message for such person at the address, or if by telephone at
the telephone number, of such person as shown on the records kept by the Clerk
under this chapter.
   POST. To post in an area accessible to the public during the usual business
hours at the offices of the Clerk, on the home page of the city website and at
the community center, and City Hall.
   PUBLISHED. Published once in a newspaper having a general circulation in the
municipality, as defined in R.C. § 7.12, except that no portion of such
newspaper need be printed in the municipality. If at the time of any such
publication there is no such newspaper of general circulation, then publication
shall be in a newspaper then determined by the Clerk to have the largest
circulation in the municipality.
   SPECIAL MEETING. A meeting which is neither a regular meeting nor an
adjournment of a regular (or special) meeting to another time or day to
consider items specifically stated on the original agenda of such regular (or
special) meeting.
   WRITTEN NOTIFICATION. Notification in writing mailed, telegraphed, or
delivered to the address of the person for whom such notification is intended
as shown on the records kept by the Clerk under this chapter, or in any way
delivered to such person. If mailed, such notification shall be mailed by
first-class mail, deposited in a U.S. Postal Service mailbox no later than the
second day preceding the day of the meeting to which such notification refers,
provided that at least one regular mail delivery day falls between the day of
mailing and the day of such meeting.
(‘74 Code, § 30.20) (Ord. 510-A, passed - -76)
§ 38.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING INFORMATION AND NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any person may visit or telephone the office of the Clerk during that
office’s regular office hours to determine, based on information available at
that office: the time and place of regular meetings; the time, place, and
purposes of any then known special meetings; and whether the available agenda
of any such future meeting states that any specific type of public business,
identified by the person, is to be discussed at the meeting.
   (B)   Any notification provided herein to be given by the Clerk may be given
by any person acting in behalf of or under the authority of the Clerk.
   (C)   A reasonable attempt at notification shall constitute notification in
compliance with these rules.
   (D)   To better insure compliance with these rules as to notice and
notification, it shall be the responsibility of the chairman or secretary of a
municipal body other than Council, or the person or persons calling the
meetings, to timely advise the Clerk of future meetings, and the subject
matters to be discussed thereat, of the municipal body.
(‘74 Code, § 30.25) (Ord. 510-A, passed - -76)
§ 38.03 NOTICE OF REGULAR AND ORGANIZATIONAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Clerk shall post a statement of the time(s) and place(s) of
regular meetings of each municipal body for each calendar year not later than
the second day preceding the day of the first regular meeting (other than the
organizational meeting) of the calendar year of that municipal body. The Clerk
shall check at reasonable intervals to ensure that the statement remains so
posted during the calendar year. If at any time during the calendar year the
time or place of regular meetings, or of any regular meeting, is changed on a
permanent or temporary basis, a statement of the time and place of the changed
regular meetings shall be so posted by the Clerk at least 24 hours before the
time of the first changed regular meeting.
   (B)   The Clerk shall post a statement of the time and place of any
organizational meeting of a municipal body at least 24 hours before the time of
the organizational meeting.
   (C)   Upon the adjournment of any regular or special meeting to another day,
the Clerk shall promptly post notice of the time and place of the adjourned
meeting.
   (D)   In addition to the posting of the statements as provided in divisions
(A) and (B), the Clerk shall cause to be published once a statement of the time
(s) and place(s) of regular meetings for the calendar year of each municipal
body, a statement of the time and place of any changed regular meetings, and a
statement of the time and place of any organizational meeting of a municipal
body. Such publication shall occur no later than the day preceding the day of
the first regular meeting of the calendar year, the day preceding the day of
the first changed regular meeting, and the day preceding the day of any
organizational meeting, as the case may be.
(‘74 Code, § 30.21) (Ord. 510-A, passed - -76)
§ 38.04 NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Except in the case of a special meeting referred to in §
38.05(F), the Clerk shall, no later than 24 hours before the time of a special
meeting of a municipal body, post a statement of the time, place, and purposes
of the special meeting.
   (B)   The statement required by this section and the notifications required
by §
38.05 shall state such specific or general purpose or purposes then known to
the Clerk to be intended to be considered at the special meeting and may state,
as an additional general purpose, that any other business as may properly come
before the municipal body at the meeting may be considered and acted upon.
   (C)   In addition to the posting of the statement as provided in division
(A), the Clerk shall cause to be published once, no later than 12 hours prior
to the time of a special meeting of a municipal body, a statement of the time,
place, and purposes of the special meeting.
(‘74 Code, § 30.22) (Ord. 510-A, passed - -76)
§ 38.05 NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Any news medium organization that desires to be given advance
notification of special meetings of a municipal body shall file with the Clerk
a written request therefor.
   (B)   Except in the event of an emergency requiring immediate official
action as referred to in division (F), a special meeting shall not be held
unless at least 24 hours advance notice of the time, place, and purposes of the
special meeting are given to the news media that have requested the advance
notification in accordance with divisions (C) and (D).
   (C)   News media requests for such advance notification of special meetings
shall specify: the municipal body that is the subject of the request; the name
of the medium; the name and address of the person to whom written notifications
to the medium may be mailed, telegraphed, or delivered; and the names,
addresses, and telephone numbers (including addresses and telephone numbers at
which notifications may be given either during or outside of business hours) of
at least two persons to either one of whom oral notifications to the medium may
be given and at least one telephone number which the request identifies as
being manned, and which can be called at any hour for the purpose of giving
oral notification to such medium.
   (D)   Any such request shall be effective for one year from the date of
filing with the Clerk or until the Clerk receives written notice from the
medium cancelling or modifying the request, whichever is earlier. Each
requesting news medium shall be informed of the period of effectiveness at the
time it files its request. The requests may be modified or extended only by
filing a complete new request with the Clerk. A request shall not be deemed to
be made unless it is complete in all respects, and the request may be
conclusively relied on by the city, the municipal body that is the subject of
the request, and the Clerk.
   (E)   The Clerk shall give the oral notification or written notification, or
both, as the Clerk determines, to the news media that have requested advance
notification in accordance with divisions (C) and (D) of the time, place, and
purposes of each special meeting, at least 24 hours prior to the time of the
special meeting.
   (F)   In the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action, a
special meeting may be held without giving 24 hours advance notification
thereof to the requesting news media. The persons calling the meeting, or any
one or more of such persons, or the Clerk on their behalf, shall immediately
give oral notification or written notification, or both, as the person or
persons giving the notification determine, of the time, place, and purposes of
the special meeting to the news media that have requested the advance
notification in accordance with divisions (C) or (D). The minutes or the call,
or both, of any such special meeting shall state the general nature of the
emergency requiring immediate official action.
(‘74 Code, § 30.23) (Ord. 510-A, passed - -76)
§ 38.06 NOTIFICATION OF DISCUSSION OF SPECIFIC TYPES OF PUBLIC BUSINESS.
   (A)   Any person, upon written request and as provided in this section, may
obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which any specific
type of public business is scheduled to be discussed.
   (B)   Such person may file a written request with the Clerk specifying: the
person’s name, and the address and telephone number at or through which the
person can be reached during and outside of business hours; the specific type
of public business the discussion of which the person is requesting advance
notification; the municipal body that is the subject of the request; and the
number of calendar months (not to exceed twelve) which the request covers. The
request may be cancelled by request from such person to the Clerk.
   (C)   Each such written request must be accompanied by cash, or a check or
money order payable to the city in the amount of $2 for each month covered by
the request. This amount has been determined by the Council to represent a
reasonable fee to cover costs of providing such advance notification.
   (D)   These requests may be modified or extended only by filing a complete
new request with the Clerk. A request shall not be deemed to be made unless it
is complete in all respects, and the request may be conclusively relied on by
the city, or municipal body which is the subject of the request, and the Clerk.
   (E)   The Clerk shall if possible give such advance notification under this
section by written notification. If such written notification cannot be given
or has not been given, the Clerk shall give oral notification.
   (F)   The contents of written notification under division (E) may be a copy
of the agenda of the meeting. Written notification under division (E) may be
accomplished by giving advance written notification, by copies of the agendas,
of all meetings of the municipal body that is the subject of such request.
(‘74 Code, § 30.24) (Ord. 510-A, passed - -76)
CHAPTER 39: MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX REGULATIONS
EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
Section
General Provisions
   
39.001   Purpose
   
39.002   Definitions
   
39.003   Filing of new and vacating tenant occupants
   
39.004   Allocation of funds
   
39.005   Saving clause
   
39.006   Interest and penalties
Imposition of Tax
   
39.020   Basis of imposition
   
39.021   Allocation of net profits
   
39.022   Operating loss carry-forward
   
39.023   Consolidated returns
   
39.024   Exceptions
   
39.025   Effective period
   
39.026   Twelve day occasional entry
Return and Payment of Tax
   
39.035   Dates and exemptions
   
39.036   Returns and contents thereof
   
39.037   Generic forms
   
39.038   Payment with returns
   
39.039   Amended returns
   
39.040   Credit for tax paid to another municipality; credits and limitations
thereof
   
39.041   Time limitation on suits, refunds
Collection at Source
   
39.055   Withholding by employer
   
39.056   Employer considered as trustee
   
39.057   Corporate officers personal liability
   
39.058   Employees’ listings
   
39.059   Domestic servants
Declarations
   
39.070   Requirement for filing
   
39.071   Dates for filing
   
39.072   Forms; credit for tax withheld or paid another municipality
   
39.073   Amended declaration
   
39.074   Annual return required
Duties of the Finance Director
   
39.085   Collection and maintenance responsibility
   
39.086   Enforcement authority
   
39.087   Determination of taxes
   
39.088   Compromise authority
   
39.089   Collection and deposit of income tax revenues
   
39.090   Taxpayer’s records; examination powers of Finance Director
   
39.091   Confidential nature of information
Board of Review
   
39.105   Composition
   
39.106   Procedure
   
39.107   Appeals
 
   
39.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Community Reinvestment, see
Chapter 154
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 39.001 PURPOSE.
   To provide funds for municipal purposes, there shall be and is hereby levied
a tax on salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation, and
on net profits and other taxable income as herein provided.
(‘74 Code, § 93.01) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. A C corporation’s federal taxable income
before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the
Internal Revenue Code, but including subsequent adjustments from required
additions and deductions. Pass-through entities must compute adjusted federal
taxable income as if the pass-through entity was a C corporation. This
definition does not apply to any taxpayer required to file a return under R.C.
§ 5745.03 or to the net profit from a sole proprietorship.
   ASSOCIATION. A partnership, limited partnership, S corporation joint
venture, or any other form of unincorporated enterprise, owned by two or more
persons.
   BOARD OF REVIEW. The Board created by and constituted as provided for in §§
39.105 through
39.107.
   BUSINESS. An enterprise, activity, profession, or undertaking of any nature
conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an
individual, partnership, association, corporation, or any other entity,
including but not limited to the renting or leasing of property, real, personal
or mixed.
   CITY or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Mt. Healthy, Ohio.
   CORPORATION. A corporation or joint stock association organized under the
laws of the United States, the State of Ohio, or any other state, territory,
foreign country, or dependency.
   DOMICILE. A principle residence that the taxpayer intends to use for an
indefinite time and to which whenever he is absent he intends to return. A
taxpayer has only one domicile even though he may have more than one residence.
   EMPLOYEE. One who works for wages, salary, commissions, or other types of
compensation in the services of any employer.
   EMPLOYER. An individual, partnership, association, corporation, governmental
body, unit, or agency, or any other entity, whether or not organized for
profit, that employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission, or
other compensation basis.
   FINANCE DIRECTOR.  The person appointed to administer the municipality’s
income tax ordinance and to direct the operation of the Municipal Income Tax
Department or the person executing the duties of the Finance Director.
   FISCAL YEAR. An accounting period of 12 months ending on any day other than
December 31.
   FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a taxpayer pursuant
to the Internal Revenue Code.
   GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form designed for reporting estimated
municipal income taxes and annual municipal income tax liability that is not
prescribed by a particular municipal corporation for the reporting of that
municipal corporation’s tax on income. Any municipality that requires taxpayers
to file income tax returns, reports, or other documents shall accept for filing
a generic form of such a return, report, or document if the generic form, once
completed and filed, contains all the information required to be submitted with
the municipality’s prescribed returns, reports, or documents.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. Total income of taxpayers from whatever source derived.
   INCOME FROM A PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. Partnership income of partners,
membership interests of members of a limited liability company, distributive
shares of shareholders of an S corporation, or other distributive or
proportionate ownership shares of income from other pass-through entities.
   INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income yield,
interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the ownership,
sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property including, but not
limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as those terms are defined
in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks, trade names,
investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in regulated
investment companies, and appreciation on deferred compensation. INTANGIBLE
INCOME does not include prizes, awards, or other income associated with any
lottery winnings or other similar games of chance.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat. 2085, 26
U.S.C. 1, as amended.
   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and nonfederal
interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork
know as the World Wide Web.
   JOINT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT. Districts created under R.C. §§ 715.70
through 715.83, as amended from time to time.
   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed under R.C.
Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
   MUNICIPALITY. A municipal corporation including the City of Mt. Healthy.
   NET PROFITS. The net gain from all operations including those pertaining to
capital gains and losses of a business, profession, or enterprise after
provision for all ordinary and necessary expenses, except taxes imposed by this
chapter, and federal and other taxes based on income, paid or accrued in
accordance with the accounting system used by the taxpayer for federal income
tax purposes, and, in the case of an association, without deduction of salaries
paid to partners or the owners.
   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN. A compensation plan described in
I.R.C. § 3121(v)(2)(C).
   NONRESIDENT. A person, whether an individual, association, corporation, or
other entity, domiciled outside the city.
   NONRESIDENT INCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY. An incorporated business entity
not having an office or place of business within the city.
   NONRESIDENT UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY. An unincorporated business
entity not having an office or place of business within the city.
   OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual’s employer or the
employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the federal
gross income of the individual.
   OWNER. A partner of a partnership, a member of a limited liability company,
a shareholder of an S corporation, or other person with an ownership interest
in a pass-through entity.
   OWNER’S PROPORTIONATE SHARE. With respect to each owner of a pass-through
entity, the ratio of (a) the owner’s income from the pass-through entity that
is subject to taxation by the municipal corporation, to (b) the total income
from that entity of all owners whose income from the entity is subject to
taxation by that municipal corporation.
   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership, limited liability company, S
corporation, or any other class of entity the income or profits from which are
given pass-through treatment under the Internal Revenue Code.
   PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, companies, business trusts, estates,
trusts, partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, corporations,
governmental entities, and any other entity.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. Any bona fide office (other than a mere statutory
office), factory, warehouse, or other space which is occupied and used by the
taxpayer in carrying on any business activity, individually or through one or
more of his employees regularly in attendance.
   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. In the case of an employer having headquarters’
activities at a place of business within a taxing municipality, the place of
business at which the headquarters is situated. In the case of any employer not
having its headquarters’ activities at a place of business within a taxing
municipality, the term means the largest place of business located in a taxing
municipality.
   QUALIFIED PLAN. A retirement plan satisfying the requirements under I.R.C. §
401, as amended.
   QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a), without regard to
any wage limitations, adjusted in accordance with R.C. § 718.03(A).
   RESIDENT. A person, whether an individual, association, corporation, or
other entity, domiciled in the city.
   RETURN PREPARER. Any person other than a taxpayer that is authorized by a
taxpayer to complete or file an income tax return, report, or other document
for or on behalf of the taxpayer.
   RULES AND REGULATIONS. The rules and regulations as set forth in this
chapter.
   SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service Schedule C filed by a taxpayer pursuant
to the Internal Revenue Code.
   SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service Schedule E filed by a taxpayer pursuant
to the Internal Revenue Code.
   SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service Schedule F filed by a taxpayer pursuant
to the Internal Revenue Code.
   S CORPORATION. A corporation that has made an election under I.R.C. subtitle
A, chapter 1, subchapter S for its taxable year.
   TAX YEAR. The calendar year, or the fiscal year on the basis of which net
profits are to be computed under this chapter, and, in the case of a return for
a fractional part of a year, the period for which such return is required to be
made.
   TAXABLE INCOME. Qualifying wages paid by an employer or employers,
compensation for personal services, other income defined by statute as taxable,
and/or adjusted federal taxable income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other enterprise or activity adjusted in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
   TAXPAYER. A person subject to a tax on income levied by a municipal
corporation. TAXPAYER does not include any person that is a disregarded entity
or a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary for federal income tax purposes, but
TAXPAYER includes any other person who owns the disregarded entity or
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary.
(‘74 Code, § 93.02) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 90-914, passed 2-20-
90; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.003 FILING OF NEW AND VACATING TENANT OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Filing of new tenant occupants. Within 30 days after a new tenant
occupies rental property of any kind within the city, all property owners of
rental property who rent to tenants of apartments, rooms, trailer park, or
other property shall file with the Finance Director of the city a report
showing the names, addresses, telephone numbers, if available, and place of
employment of each such tenant who occupies an apartment, a room in a rooming
house, space in a trailer park, or other rental property within the corporate
limits of the city.
(‘74 Code § 93.03)
   (B)   Filing of vacant tenants. Within 30 days after a tenant vacates an
apartment, room, trailer park, or other rental property located within the
city, the property owner of such vacated rental property shall file with the
Finance Director of the city a report showing the date of vacating the rental
property and identify each such vacating tenant.
(‘74 Code § 93.03)
   (C)   Capital gains. Capital gains from the sale, exchange or other
disposition of depreciable property shall be taxable to the extent of the
aggregate amounts of the depreciation taken on such property for the city
income tax purpose.
   (D)   Any property owner who fails to make the report of tenants of the
premises under his or her control, as required by subsections (A) or (B) above,
shall be fined $50 per unreported tenant.
(Ord. 496-A, passed 5-6-75; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469,
passed 12-21-05; Am. Ord. 12-1632, passed 2-21-12)  Penalty, see §
39.999
§ 39.004 ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.
   The Council shall provide by proper legislation a breakdown of the revenues
from this chapter according to needs for operating expenses, capital
improvements, and debt retirement.
(‘74 Code, § 93.90) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.005 SAVING CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the
tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section, or part of this chapter
or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several
groups of persons or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional or illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality,
or invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section, or part of this
chapter, and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is declared to
be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal, or invalid sentence, or part hereof, not be included
therein.
(‘74 Code, § 93.91) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.006 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Interest. All taxes imposed and monies withheld or required to be
withheld by employers under the provisions of this chapter, remaining unpaid
after they become due, shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5% per month.
   (B)   Penalties. In addition to interest as provided in division (A) above,
penalties for failure to pay taxes and to withhold and remit taxes pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter are imposed as follows:
      (1)    In the case of taxpayers failing to pay the full amount of tax due
or failing to file a tax return when required to do so by this chapter, a
penalty of $75 shall be imposed.
      (2)   In the event that an employer shall fail to withhold or fail to
remit to the Finance Director the taxes withheld from employees, a penalty of
$50 shall be imposed.
      (3)   In the case of taxpayers failing to pay after a minimum of three
attempts by the Tax Department to comply, a warrant block will be placed on the
taxpayer's driver's license, and a processing fee of $15 will be applied to the
balance due for the submission of information to the BMV.
   (C)   Legal procedures. Further legal action may be enforced to uphold this
chapter as hereby provided.
   (D)   Exceptions. A penalty shall not be assessed or an additional tax
assessment made by the Finance Director when a return has been filed in good
faith and the tax paid thereon within the time prescribed by the Finance
Director; and provided further that, in the absence of fraud, neither penalty
nor interest shall be assessed on any additional tax assessment resulting from
a federal audit, providing an amended return is filed and the additional tax is
paid within three months after final determination of the federal tax
liability.
   (E)   Abatement by Board of Review. On an appeal from the refusal of the
Finance Director to recommend abatement of penalty and interest, the Board of
Review may abate such penalty or interest, or both.
(‘74 Code, § 93.98) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 83-756, passed 12-6-
83; Am. Ord. 90-914, passed 2-20-90; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord.
05-1469, passed 12-21-05; Am. Ord. 08-1549, passed 12-16-08; Am. Ord. 12-1632,
passed 2-21-12; Am. Ord. 12-1643, passed 7-17-12)
IMPOSITION OF TAX
§ 39.020 BASIS OF IMPOSITION.
   (A)   All residents must register with the Tax Department upon moving into
the city.
   (B)   All taxpayers having income subject to income taxation under this
chapter shall file an annual tax return whether or not tax is due. Subject to
provisions of § 39.005, an annual tax, for the purposes specified in § 39.001,
shall be levied at the rate of 2% per annum.
      (1)   On all qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation, and other
taxable income earned or received by residents of the municipality.
      (2)   On all qualifying wages, commissions, other compensation, and other
taxable income earned or received by nonresidents for work done or services
performed or rendered in the municipality.
      (3)   (a)   On the portion attributable to the municipality of the net
profits earned by all resident unincorporated businesses, pass-through
entities, professions or other activities, derived from work done or services
performed or rendered, and business or other activities conducted, in the
municipality.
         (b)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits
earned by a resident owner of a resident unincorporated business entity or
pass- through entity not attributable to the municipality and not levied
against such unincorporated business entity or pass-through entity.
      (4)   (a)   On the portion attributable to the municipality of the net
profits by all nonresident unincorporated businesses, pass-through entities,
professions, or other activities, derived from work done or services performed
or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the municipality,
whether or not such unincorporated business entity has an office or place of
business in the municipality.
         (b)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits
earned by a resident owner of a nonresident unincorporated business entity or
pass- through entity not attributable to the municipality and not levied
against such unincorporated business entity or pass-through entity.
      (5)   On the portion attributable to the municipality of the net profits
earned by all corporations that are not pass-through entities from work done or
services performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in
the municipality, whether or not such corporations have an office or place of
business in the municipality.
      (6)   On a resident partner’s or owner’s share of the net profits earned
during the effective period of this chapter of all corporations derived from
sales made, work done, services performed or rendered, or business or other
activities conducted in the municipality, whether or not such corporations have
an office or place of business in the municipality.
      (7)   On all income received as gambling winnings as reported on IRS Form
W-2G, Form 5754 and/or any other form required by the Internal Revenue Service
that reports winnings from gambling, prizes and lottery winnings.
(‘74 Code, § 93.05) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 562-A, passed 6-20-78;
Am. Ord. 83-756, passed 12-6-83; Am. Ord. 90-914, passed 2-20-90; Am. Ord. 01-
1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05; Am. Ord. 14-1708,
passed 7-15-14)
§ 39.021 ALLOCATION OF NET PROFITS.
   (A)   This section does not apply to taxpayers that are subject to and
required to file reports under R.C. Chapter 5745. Except as otherwise provided
in this section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within
and without the boundaries of a municipal corporation shall be considered as
having a taxable situs in such municipal corporation for purposes of municipal
income taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following.
   (B)   Multiply the entire net profits of the business by a business
allocation apportionment percentage formula to be determined by:
      (1)   (a)   The average original cost of the real and tangible personal
property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in such
municipal corporation during the taxable period to the average original cost of
all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in
the business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
         (b)   As used in the preceding division (a), REAL PROPERTY shall
include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such
property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight.
      (2)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to persons employed in the business or profession for services performed
in such municipal corporation to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid
during the same period to persons employed in the business or profession,
wherever their services are performed, excluding compensation that is not
taxable by the municipal corporation under R.C. § 718.011.
      (3)   Gross receipts of the business or profession from sales made and
services performed during the taxable period in such municipal corporation to
gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period from sales
and services, wherever made or performed.
      (4)   Adding together the percentages determined in accordance with
divisions (B)(1), (2), and (3) hereof, or such of the aforesaid percentages as
are applicable to the particular taxpayer, and dividing the total so obtained
by the number of percentages used in deriving said total.
   (C)   A factor is applicable even though it may be apportioned entirely in
or outside the municipality.
   (D)   Provided, however, that in the event a just and equitable result
cannot be obtained under the business apportionment percentage formula provided
for herein, the Finance Director, upon application of the taxpayer, shall have
the authority to substitute other factors or methods calculated to effect a
fair and proper apportionment.
   (E)   As used in this section, SALES MADE IN A MUNICIPAL CORPORATION means:
      (1)   All sales of tangible personal property delivered within such
municipal corporation regardless of where title passes if shipped or delivered
from a stock of goods within such municipal corporation;
      (2)   All sales of tangible personal property delivered within such
municipal corporation regardless of where title passes even though transported
from a point outside such municipal corporation if the taxpayer is regularly
engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales
within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such solicitation
or promotion; and
      (3)   All sales of tangible personal property shipped from a place within
such municipal corporation to purchasers outside such municipal corporation
regardless of where title passes if the taxpayer is not, through its own
employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the
place where delivery is made.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, net profit from rental
activity not constituting a business or profession shall be subject to tax only
by the municipal corporation in which the property generating the net profit is
located.
   (G)   This section does not apply to individuals who are residents of the
municipality and, except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 718.01, the
municipality may impose a tax on all income earned by residents of the
municipality to the extent allowed by the United States Constitution.
(‘74 Code, § 93.06) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see R.C. § 718.02
§ 39.022 OPERATING LOSS CARRY-FORWARD.
   (A)   The portion of a net operating loss sustained in any taxable year,
apportioned to the municipality, may be applied against the portion of the
profit of succeeding tax years apportioned to the municipality until exhausted,
but in no event for more than the three taxable years immediately following the
year in which the loss occurred. No portion of a net operating loss shall be
carried back against net profits of any prior year.
   (B)   The portion of a net operating loss sustained shall be apportioned to
the municipality in the same manner as provided herein for apportioning net
profits to the municipality.
   (C)   The Finance Director shall provide by rules and regulations the manner
in which such net operating loss carry-forward shall be determined.
   (D)   The net operating loss of a taxpayer that loses its legal identity, by
any means such as merger or consolidation, shall not be allowed as a carry-
forward loss deduction to the surviving or new taxpayer.
   (E)   The net operating loss sustained by a business or profession is not
deductible from employee earnings, but may be carried forward. However, if a
taxpayer is engaged in two or more taxable business activities to be included
in the same return, the net loss of one unincorporated business activity
(except any portion of a loss reportable for municipal income tax purposes to
another municipality) may be used to offset the profits of another for purposes
of arriving at overall net profits.
(‘74 Code, § 93.07) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 90-914, passed 2-20-
90; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.023 CONSOLIDATED RETURNS.
   (A)   A consolidated return may be filed by a group of corporations who are
affiliated through stock ownership if that affiliated group filed for the same
tax period a consolidated return for federal income tax purposes pursuant to
I.R.C. § 1501. A consolidated return must include all companies that are so
affiliated.
   (B)   Once a consolidated return has been filed for any taxable year,
consolidated returns shall continue to be filed in subsequent years unless the
applicable requirements of the rules and regulations for discontinuing the
filing of consolidated returns have been met.
(‘74 Code, § 93.08) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.024 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as levying a tax upon
the following:
   (A)   Proceeds from welfare benefits, unemployment insurance benefits,
pensions, Social Security benefits, and qualified retirement plans as defined
by the Internal Revenue Service;
   (B)   Proceeds of insurance, annuities, workers’ compensation insurance,
permanent disability benefits, compensation for damages for personal injury and
like reimbursements, not including damages for loss of profits and wages;
   (C)   Compensation attributable to a plan or program described in I.R.C. §
125;
   (D)   Dues, contributions and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational organizations, or labor unions, trade or professional
associations, lodges and similar organizations;
   (E)   Gains from involuntary conversion, cancellation of indebtedness,
interest on federal obligations and income of a decedent’s estate during the
period of administration (except such income from the operation of a business);
   (F)   Alimony;
   (G)   Compensation for damage to property by way of insurance or otherwise;
   (H)   Interest and dividends from intangible property;
   (I)   Military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of the
United States and of members of their reserve components, including the Ohio
National Guard (R.C. § 718.01);
   (J)   Income of any charitable, educational, fraternal or other type of
nonprofit association or organization enumerated in R.C. § 718.01 to the extent
that such income is derived from tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or
intangible property, or tax-exempt activities;
   (K)   Any association or organization falling in the category listed in the
preceding paragraph receiving income from non-exempt real estate, tangible or
intangible personal property, or business activities of a type ordinarily
conducted for profit by taxpayers operating for profit shall not be excluded
hereunder;
   (L)   In the event any association or organization receives taxable income
as provided in the preceding paragraph from real or personal property ownership
or income producing business located both within and without the corporate
limits of the municipality, it shall calculate its income apportioned to the
municipality under the method or methods provided above;
   (M)   If exempt for federal income tax purposes, fellowship and scholarship
grants are excluded from municipal income tax;
   (N)   The rental value of a home furnished to a minister of the gospel as
part of his compensation, or the rental allowance paid to a minister of the
gospel as part of his compensation, to the extent used by him to rent or
provide a home pursuant to I.R.C. § 107;
   (O)   Compensation paid under R.C. §§ 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person serving
as a precinct official, to the extent that such compensation does not exceed
$1,000 annually. Such compensation in excess of $1,000 may be subjected to
taxation. The payer of such compensation is not required to withhold municipal
tax from that compensation;
   (P)   Compensation paid to an employee of a transit authority, regional
transit authority, or a regional transit commission created under R.C. Chapter
306 for operating a transit bus or other motor vehicle for the authority or
commission in or through the municipality, unless the bus or vehicle is
operated on a regularly scheduled route, the operator is subject to such tax by
reason of residence or domicile in the municipality, or the headquarters of the
authority or commission is located within the municipality;
   (Q)   The municipality shall not tax the compensation paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed by the individual in the
municipality on 12 or fewer days in a calendar year unless one of the following
applies:
      (1)   The individual is an employee of another person, the principal
place of business of the individual’s employer is located in another
municipality in Ohio that imposes a tax applying to compensation paid to the
individual for services paid on those days, and the individual is not liable to
that other municipality for tax on the compensation paid for such services; or
      (2)   The individual is a professional entertainer or professional
athlete, the promoter of a professional entertainment or sports event, or an
employee of such promoter, all as may be reasonably defined by the
municipality;
   (R)   The income of a public utility, when that public utility is subject to
the tax levied under R.C. §§ 5727.24 or 5727.30, except a municipal corporation
may tax the following, subject to R.C. Chapter 5745:
      (1)   The income of an electric company or combined company; and
      (2)   The income of a telephone company. As used in this division (R),
COMBINED COMPANY, ELECTRIC COMPANY, and TELEPHONE COMPANY have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 5727.01; and
   (S)   An S corporation shareholder’s distributive share of net profits of
the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive share of net profits
that represents wages as defined in I.R.C. § 3121(a) or net earnings from self-
employment as defined in I.R.C. § 1402(a), to the extent such distributive
share would not be allocated or apportioned to this state under R.C. § 5733.05
(B)(1) and (2) if the S corporation were a corporation subject to the taxes
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5733.
   (T)   Generally, the above-noted items in this section are the only forms of
income not subject to the tax. Any other income, benefits, or other forms of
compensation shall be taxable.
(‘74 Code, § 93.09) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-l-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.025 EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   The tax imposed by this chapter shall be levied, collected and paid with
respect to all income and net profits, subject to the tax, earned on or after
April 1, 1971.
(‘74 Code, § 93.10) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-
05)
§ 39.026 TWELVE DAY OCCASIONAL ENTRY RULE.
   The city shall not tax the compensation of an individual if all the
following apply:
   (A)   The individual does not reside in the city.
   (B)   The compensation is paid for personal services performed by the
individual within the municipality on 12 or fewer days during the calendar
year.
   (C)   In the case of an individual who is an employee, the principal place
of business of the individual’s employer is located outside the municipality
and the individual pays tax on compensation described in division (D) of this
section to the city, if any, in which the employer’s principal place of
business is located, and no portion of that tax is refunded to the individual.
   (D)   The individual is not a professional entertainer or professional
athlete, the promoter of a professional entertainment or sports event, or an
employee of such a promoter, all as may be reasonably defined by the
municipality.
(Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX
§ 39.035 DATES AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Mandatory filing. On or before April 15 of each year, every resident
subject to the provisions of this chapter shall, except as hereinafter
provided, make and file with the Finance Director a municipal tax return on a
form prescribed by and acceptable to the Finance Director, whether or not a tax
is due. When the return is made for a fiscal year or other period different
from the calendar year, the return shall be filed on or before the fifteenth
day of the fourth month following the end of such fiscal year or period. The
Finance Director is hereby authorized to provide by regulation that the return
of an employer or employers, showing the amount of municipal tax deducted by
said employer or employers from the qualifying wages, commissions, or other
compensation, and other taxable income of a nonresident employee, and paid by
him or them to the Finance Director, may be accepted as the return required of
a nonresident employee whose sole income, subject to tax under this chapter, is
such qualifying wages, commissions, or other compensation, and other taxable
income.
   (B)   A husband and wife may file either separate returns or a joint return
for municipal purposes, even though one of the spouses has neither taxable
income nor deductions included on the municipal return, regardless of whether
their federal and state returns were filed separately or jointly. If a joint
city return is made, the tax shall be computed on the aggregate taxable income
and the liability with respect to the tax shall be joint and several.
   (C)   The return shall be filed with the Finance Director on a form or forms
furnished by or obtainable upon request from the Finance Director; or on a
generic form, if the generic form, when completed and filed, contains all of
the information required to be submitted with the municipality’s prescribed
return and, if the taxpayer or return preparer filing the generic form
otherwise complies with this chapter governing the filing of returns.
(‘74 Code, § 93.20) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.036 RETURNS AND CONTENTS THEREOF.
   (A)   The return shall set forth:
      (1)   The aggregate amounts of qualifying wages, commissions, other
compensation received, allocated, apportioned or set aside, other income
defined by statute as taxable, and gross income from any business, profession,
or other activity, less allowable expenses incurred in the acquisition of such
gross income, earned during the preceding year and subject to the tax;
      (2)   The amount of the tax imposed by this chapter on such earnings and
profits; and
      (3)   Such other pertinent statements, information returns, copies of
federal or state tax returns and/or schedules, or other information as the
Finance Director may require, including a statement that the figures used in
the return are the figures used for federal income tax, adjusted to set forth
only such income as is taxable under the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   Any taxpayer that has requested an extension for filing a
federal income tax return may request an extension for the filing of a
municipal income tax return by filing a copy of the taxpayer’s federal
extension request with the municipal tax division. Any taxpayer not required to
file a federal income tax return may request an extension for filing a
municipal income tax return in writing. The request for extension must be filed
on or before the original due date for the annual return. The extended due date
of the municipal income tax return shall be the last day of the month following
the month to which the due date of the federal income tax return has been
extended.
      (2)   The Finance Director may deny a taxpayer’s request for extension if
the taxpayer:
         (a)   Fails to timely file the request;
         (b)   Fails to file a copy of the federal extension request (if
applicable);
         (c)   Owes the municipality any delinquent income tax, penalty,
interest or other charge for the late payment or nonpayment of income tax; or
         (d)   Has failed to file any required income tax return, report, or
other related document for a prior tax period.
      (3)   The granting of an extension for filing a municipal tax return does
not extend the due date as provided in this section for payment of the tax;
hence, penalty and interest may apply to any unpaid tax during the period of
extension at the rate set out by §
39.006. No penalty shall be assessed in those cases in which the return is
filed and the final tax paid within the extension period provided all other
filing and payment requirements of this chapter have been met. Any extension by
the Finance Director shall be granted upon the condition that declaration
filing and payment requirements have been fulfilled; however, if, upon further
examination it then becomes evident that declaration filing and payment
requirements have not been fulfilled, penalty and interest may be assessed in
full and in the same manner as though no extension had been granted.
(‘74 Code, § 93.21) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.037 GENERIC FORMS.
   The city shall accept a generic form of any return, report, or document
required to be filed if the generic form, once completed and filed, contains
all of the information required to be submitted with the city’s prescribed
returns, reports or documents, and if the taxpayer or return preparer filing
the generic form otherwise complies with the rules or ordinances of the
municipality governing the filing of returns, reports or documents.
(Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.038 PAYMENT WITH RETURNS.
   (A)   The taxpayer making a return shall at the time of the filing thereof
pay to the Finance Director the amount of taxes shown as due thereon; however,
where tax has been withheld at the source, pursuant to the provisions of §
39.055; or where any portion of said tax shall have been paid by the taxpayer,
pursuant to the provisions of §
39.070; or where an income tax, creditable against the city tax pursuant to §
39.040 has been paid to another municipality, credit for the amount so paid
shall be deducted from the amount shown to be due, and only the balance, if
any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing said return. All tax
returns and payments of taxes due shall be received by the Tax Department no
later than the date due.
   (B)   A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the
municipality is entitled under the provisions of this chapter may have such
overpayment applied against any subsequent liability hereunder or at his
election indicated on the return, such overpayment or part thereof shall be
refunded provided that no additional taxes or refunds of less than $1 shall be
collected or refunded. No refunds shall be made of amounts less than $10 except
in the case of an individual or business taxpayer who is filing a final return
as a result of moving out of the city or terminating business activities within
the city.
   (C)   Any taxpayer who issues a check or other negotiable instrument in
payment of an obligation under this chapter, which is later dishonored by the
payor-taxpayer’s financial institution for any reason, may be required to pay a
processing fee of $25 in addition to the interest and penalties provided for
late payment of taxes hereunder. This processing fee is not the city’s
exclusive remedy and does not preclude the city from pursuing prosecution of
the taxpayer under the appropriate, then-current provisions of state statutes.
(‘74 Code, § 93.23) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 90-914, passed 2-20-
90; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.039 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (A)   Where necessary, an amended return must be filed in order to report
additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund of tax
overpaid, subject to the requirements and limitations contained in §§
39.040 and
39.041. Amended returns shall be on a form obtainable on request from the
Finance Director .
   (B)   Within three months from the final determination of any federal tax
liability affecting the taxpayer’s city tax liability, such taxpayer shall make
and file an amended city return, showing income subject to the tax based on
such final determination of federal tax liability, and pay any additional tax
shown thereon, or make claim for refund of any overpayment.
   (C)   Information returns, schedules and statements required to support tax
returns which are incomplete without such information shall be filed within the
time limits set forth for the filing of the tax returns and the failure to file
such information returns, schedules and statements shall be a violation of this
chapter. Provided, however, that the taxpayer shall have ten days after
notification by the Finance Director, or his authorized representative, to file
the items required by this section.
(‘74 Code, § 93.24) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.040 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY; CREDITS AND LIMITATIONS
THEREOF.
   (A)   Every individual taxpayer who resides in the municipality and who
receives salaries, wages, commissions, or other compensation or net profits
from sales made, work done, or services performed or rendered outside of the
municipality, if it be made to appear that he has paid a municipal income tax
on such income, taxable under this chapter, to another municipality, shall be
allowed a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter in the amount of the
tax so paid by him or in his behalf to such other municipality, not to exceed
1.6%.
(‘ 74 Code, § 93.70)
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions contained in §
39.040, or any other provisions inconsistent herewith, a claim for a refund or
credit under this section shall be made in such a manner as the Finance
Director may by regulation provide. No such claim for refund or credit shall be
allowed unless made on or before the date of filing the taxpayer’s final
return, unless such taxpayer’s employer files with the Finance Director a list
showing the tax withheld from such taxpayer’s wages, salaries, or commissions
for other municipalities.
(‘74 Code, § 93.71)
(Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469,
passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.041 TIME LIMITATION ON SUITS, REFUNDS.
   (A)   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with
any interest and penalties thereon, by suit as other debts of like amount are
recoverable. No additional assessment shall be made after three years from the
time of payment of any tax due hereunder; provided there shall be no period of
limitation on an additional assessment in case of a return that omits gross
income in excess of 25% of that required to be reported, or in the case of
filing a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax, or in the
case of a failure to file a return. In those cases in which the Commissioner of
Internal Revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the federal statute
of limitations, the period within which an additional assessment may be made by
the Finance Director shall be extended one year from the time of the final
determination of the federal tax liability. (‘74 Code, § 83.75)
   (B)   Claims for refund of municipal income taxes must be brought within
three years after the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later.
(Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469,
passed 12-21-05; Am. Ord. 14-1723, passed 10-21-14)
Statutory reference:
   Refunds, see R.C. § 718.06
COLLECTION AT SOURCE
§ 39.055 WITHHOLDING BY EMPLOYER.
   (A)   Each employer within, or doing business within, the municipality, who
employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission, or other
compensation basis, shall deduct, when such salary, wage, commission or other
compensation is paid, allocated, or set aside, the tax at the rate provided in
§
39.020 on the qualifying wages due by such employer to each such employee and
shall, on or before the fifteenth day of the month following such withholding,
make a return and payment.
   (B)   An employer is not required to make any withholding with respect to an
individual’s disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the
time of the disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of the
corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued.
   (C)   (1)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer to withhold the tax as required by a municipal
corporation or by the employer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the
tax.
      (2)   The failure of an employer to remit to the municipal corporation
the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for that tax unless the
employee colluded with the employer in connection with the failure to remit the
tax withheld.
   (D)   Compensation deferred before the effective date of this amendment is
not subject to any municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax
withholding requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not
constitute qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or
distributed.
   (E)   So long as taxes withheld by an employer for the municipality during
the measurement period, payments may be made quarterly on or before the
fifteenth day of the month following the end of each quarter, subject to the
approval of the Finance Director. The Finance Director may revoke the approval
of quarterly filing and payments whenever the Finance Director has reason to
believe that the conditions for granting such authorization have changed, were
judged incorrectly, were not met, or when it is in the best interest of the
municipality to do so. Notice of withdrawal shall be made in writing and, in
such case, the employer must begin to file in accordance with this section.
(‘74 Code, § 93.30) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.056 EMPLOYER CONSIDERED AS TRUSTEE.
   Each employer in collecting said tax shall be deemed to hold the same, until
payment is made by such employer to the municipality, as a trustee for the
benefit of the municipality, and any such tax collected by such employer from
his employees shall, until the same is paid to the municipality, be deemed a
trust fund in the hands of such employer. Each employer shall be liable for the
payment of the tax required to be deducted and withheld, whether or not such
tax, in fact, has been withheld.
(‘74 Code, § 93.31) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.057 CORPORATE OFFICERS PERSONAL LIABILITY.
   Any person who is required to withhold tax from qualifying wages shall pay
all such tax to the municipality in accordance with the provisions of this
section. In the event taxes withheld from the qualifying wages of employees are
not paid to the municipality in accordance with the provisions of this section,
all officers, members, managers, employees, and trustees having control or
supervision of or charged with the responsibility of filing the return and
making payment are jointly and severally personally liable for the tax not
returned or paid to the municipality as well as any related interest and
penalties, and are also liable under the provisions of §
39.006. The dissolution, termination, or bankruptcy of a corporation, limited
liability company, or business trust does not discharge an officer’s, member’s,
manager’s, employee’s, or trustee’s liability for a failure of the corporation,
limited liability company, or business trust to file returns or pay said taxes.
(‘74 Code, § 93.32) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.058 EMPLOYEES’ LISTINGS.
   (A)   Each employer shall file a withholding tax reconciliation showing the
sum total of all compensation paid all employees, the portion of which, if any,
was not subject to withholding along with an explanation for same, and the
portion of which was subject to withholding, together with the amount of such
withholdings remitted. Such return shall include information concerning each
employee from whom the municipal tax was withheld, showing the name, address,
zip code and Social Security number of each such employee, the total amount of
compensation paid during the year and the amount of municipal tax withheld. If
the total tax withheld from any employee included tax withheld and remitted to
another municipality, the amount of same shall be separately shown on the
return of information to the municipality concerning each employee. The
withholding tax reconciliation shall be filed by each employer on or before
February 28 following the end of such calendar year.
   (B)   In addition to the wage reporting requirements of this section, any
person required by the Internal Revenue Service to report on Form 1099- Misc.
payments to individuals not treated as employees for services performed shall
also report such payments to the municipality when the services were performed
in the municipality. The information may be submitted on a listing, and shall
include the name, address, and Social Security number, or federal
identification number, and the amount of the payments made. Federal form(s)
1099 may be submitted in lieu of such listing. The information shall be filed
annually on or before February 28 following the end of such calendar year.
(‘74 Code, § 93.33) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 83-756, passed 12-6-
83; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.059 DOMESTIC SERVANTS.
   No person shall be required to withhold the tax on the qualifying wages,
commissions, or other compensation, and other taxable income paid domestic
servants employed exclusively in or about such person’s residence. However,
domestic servants shall be responsible for filing and paying their own returns
and taxes.
(‘74 Code, § 93.34) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
DECLARATIONS
§ 39.070 REQUIREMENT FOR FILING.
   Every person who anticipates any taxable income which is not subject to §
39.020, or who engages in any business, profession, enterprise, or activity
subject to the tax imposed by §
39.020, shall file a declaration setting forth such estimated income or the
estimated profit or loss from such business activity, together with the
estimated tax due thereon, if any. Provided, however, if a person’s income is
wholly from qualifying wages from which the tax will be withheld and remitted
to this municipality in accordance with §
39.055, such person need not file a declaration.
(‘74 Code, § 93.40) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.071 DATES FOR FILING.
   (A)   The declaration required by §
39.070 shall be filed on or before April 15 of each year during the life of
this chapter, or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following
from the date the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
   (B)   Those taxpayers having a fiscal year or period differing from the
calendar year shall file a declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the
fourth month following the start of each fiscal year or period.
(‘74 Code, § 93.41) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.072 FORMS; CREDIT FOR TAX WITHHELD OR PAID ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY.
   (A)   The declaration shall be filed on a form furnished by or obtainable
from the Finance Director or an acceptable generic form, and credit shall be
taken for the municipal tax to be withheld from any portion of such income. In
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, credit may be taken for tax to
be withheld and remitted to another taxing municipality.
   (B)   The original declaration, or any subsequent amendment thereof, may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment date as
provided for herein.
   (C)   For taxpayers who are individuals, such declaration of estimated tax
to be paid the municipality shall be accompanied by a payment of at least 22.5%
of the estimated annual tax and at least a similar amount shall be paid on or
before the last day of the seventh, tenth, and thirteenth months after the
beginning of the taxable year.
   (D)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, such declaration of estimated
tax to be paid the municipality shall be accompanied by a payment of at least
22.5% of the estimated annual tax and at least a similar amount shall be paid
on or before the fifteenth day of the sixth, ninth, and twelfth months after
the beginning of the taxable year.
   (E)   The mere submission of a declaration estimating a tax liability shall
not constitute filing unless accompanied by the required payment.
(‘74 Code, § 93.42) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 90-914, passed 2-20-
90; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.073 AMENDED DECLARATION.
   (A)   A declaration may be amended at any time.
   (B)   In the event that an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid
balance shown due thereon shall be paid in equal installments on or before the
remaining payment dates.
(‘74 Code, § 93.43) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.074 ANNUAL RETURN REQUIRED.
   (A)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end
of the calendar or fiscal year, an annual return shall be filed, and any
balance which may be due the municipality shall be paid therewith in accordance
with the provisions of §
39.037.
   (B)   Each employer within, or doing business within, the municipality, who
employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission, or other
compensation basis, shall deduct at the time of payment of such salaries,
wages, commissions, or other compensation due by the employer to each employee,
and shall, on or before the last day of April, July, October, and January of
each year, after the effective date of this chapter, make a return and pay to
the Finance Director the amount of taxes so deducted during the preceding
calendar quarter. The return shall be on a form or forms prescribed by or
acceptable to the Finance Director, and shall be subject to the rules and
regulations prescribed therefor by the Finance Director.
(‘74 Code, § 93.44) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
DUTIES OF THE FINANCE DIRECTOR
§ 39.085 COLLECTION AND MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   There is created an Income Tax Bureau in the Finance Director’s office
for the administration of the provisions of this chapter. Such Bureau shall
consist of a Finance Director and such clerical and secretarial personnel as
may be permitted by Council. The Finance Director and all such additional
personnel shall be appointed by the City Manager.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to collect and receive
the tax imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed therein, and to keep
an accurate record thereof, and to report all monies so received.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Finance Director to enforce payment of all
income taxes owing the municipality, to keep accurate records for a minimum of
five years, showing the amount due from each taxpayer required to file a
declaration or make any return, including a return of taxes withheld, and to
show the dates and amounts of payments thereof.
(‘74 Code, § 93.50) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 81-662, passed 1-6-81;
Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.086 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The Finance Director is charged with the enforcement of the provisions of
this chapter, and is empowered, subject to the approval of the Board of Review,
to adopt, promulgate, and enforce rules and regulations authorized or required
by this chapter relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the collection
and payment of taxes and the administration and enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter, including provisions for the re-examination and correction of
returns.
(‘74 Code, § 93.51) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.087 DETERMINATION OF TAXES.
   In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or has filed a
return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Finance Director
may determine the amount of tax appearing to be due the municipality from the
taxpayer, and may send to such taxpayer a written statement showing the amount
of tax so determined, together with interest and penalties thereon, if any.
(‘74 Code, § 93.52) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.088 COMPROMISE AUTHORITY.
   Subject to the consent of the Board of Review or pursuant to regulations
approved by the Board of Review, the Finance Director shall have the power to
compromise any liability imposed by this chapter.
(‘74 Code, § 93.53) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.089 COLLECTION AND DEPOSIT OF INCOME REVENUES.
   In enforcing the provisions of this chapter the Finance Director shall be
responsible to, and under the control of, the City Manager. The Finance
Director and all other members of the Income Tax Bureau shall be employees of
the Finance Director’s office and shall assist the Finance Director in matters
relating to income tax. The Finance Director shall have the ultimate
responsibility for the collection and deposit of income tax revenues and the
performance of the duties herein assigned to the Finance Director.
(‘74 Code, § 93.54) (Ord. 81-662, passed 1-6-81; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.090 TAXPAYER’S RECORDS; EXAMINATION POWERS OF THE FINANCE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Finance Director, or any of his authorized agents, is authorized
to examine the books, papers, records, and federal income tax returns of any
employer or taxpayer, or any person subject to, or whom the Finance Director
believes subject to, the provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of
verifying the accuracy of any withholdings due under this chapter. Every such
employer, supposed employer, taxpayer, or supposed taxpayer is directed and
required to furnish, on written request of the Finance Director, or his duly
authorized agent or employees, the means, facilities and opportunity for making
such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.
   (B)   The Finance Director is authorized to order any person, presumed to
have knowledge of the facts, to appear at the office of the Finance Director,
and to examine such person, under oath, concerning any income which was or
should have been returned for taxation or withheld, or any transaction tending
to affect such income. For this purpose, he may compel the production of books,
papers, records, and federal income tax returns, and the attendance of all
persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such
persons have knowledge of such income or information pertinent to such inquiry.
(‘74 Code, § 93.61)
   (C)   The refusal to produce books, papers, records, and federal income tax
returns, or the refusal to submit to such examination by any employer or person
subject, or presumed to be subject, to the tax or by any officer, agent, or
employee of a person subject to the tax or required to withhold tax, or the
failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this section or with an
order or subpoena of the Finance Director authorized hereby, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter punishable as provided in §
39.999.
(‘74 Code, § 93.62)
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute his tax
liability for a period of five years from the date his return is filed or the
taxes required to be withheld are paid.
(‘74 Code, § 93.63)
(Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469,
passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.091 CONFIDENTIAL NATURE OF INFORMATION.
   Any information gained as a result of any returns, investigations, hearings,
or verifications required or authorized by this chapter shall be confidential,
and no disclosure thereof shall be made except to municipal, county, state, or
federal taxing agencies, or, except for official purposes, or except in
accordance with proper judicial order. Each disclosure shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition to the penalty provided in §
39.999, any employee of the municipality who violates the provisions of this
section relative to the disclosure of confidential information shall be guilty
of an offense punishable by immediate dismissal.
(‘74 Code, § 93.64) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
BOARD OF REVIEW
§ 39.105 COMPOSITION.
   A Board of Review consisting of three persons, appointed by the Mayor, is
created. Board members shall receive such compensation as Council may
determine.
(‘74 Code, § 93.80) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.106 PROCEDURE.
   A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Board
shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep a record of its
transactions. All hearings by the Board shall be conducted privately unless the
taxpayer requests a public hearing. The provisions of §§
39.090 and
39.091 with reference to the confidential character of information required to
be disclosed by this chapter shall apply to such matters as may be heard before
the Board on appeal.
(‘74 Code, § 93.81) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.107 APPEALS.
   Any person dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the Finance Director
which is made under the authority conferred by this chapter may appeal
therefrom to the Board of Review within 30 days from the announcement of such
ruling or decision by the Finance Director, and the Board shall have
jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify any such ruling or decision, or any
part thereof.
(‘74 Code, § 93.82) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-
01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
§ 39.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   Knowingly make an incomplete, false, or fraudulent return;
      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, or
interest imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Fail, neglect, or refuse to withhold the tax from his employees and
remit such withholding tax to the Finance Director;
      (5)   Refuse to permit the Finance Director or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or his employer’s books, records, papers, or federal
income tax returns;
      (6)   Fail to appear before the Finance Director and to produce his or
his employer’s books, records, papers, or federal income tax returns, upon
order or subpoena of the Finance Director;
      (7)   Refuse to disclose to the Finance Director any information with
respect to such person’s or such person’s employer’s income or net profits;
      (8)   Willfully give to an employer by an employee false information as
to his true name, correct Social Security number and residence address, or the
failure of such employee to promptly notify an employer of any change in
residence address and date thereof;
      (9)   Failure on the part of any employer to maintain proper records of
employees’ residence addresses, total wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or
to knowingly give the Finance Director false information;
      (10)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Finance Director;
      (11)   Willfully fail or willfully refuse to make any payment on the
estimated tax for any year or part of any tax year as required by §
39.070;
      (12)   Fail to cause the tax withheld from the qualifying wages of the
employees pursuant to this chapter to be paid to the municipality in accordance
with the provisions of §
39.055; or
      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties, or interest imposed by this chapter; for
which violation no penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense and shall be fined not more than $100; on a
second offense within two years after the first offense, such person is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days, or both, for each offense; on each subsequent
violation within two years after the first offense such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree, and punished as provided for herein.
   (B)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and penalties and
interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within three years after
the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later. Prosecutions for
an offense made punishable under a municipal ordinance imposing an income tax
shall be commenced within three years after the commission of the offense,
provided that in the case of 25% or more of income required to be reported,
prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission of the
offense.
(R.C. § 718.06(A), (B))
   (C)   The failure of any employer, taxpayer, or person to receive or procure
a return, declaration, or other required form shall not excuse him from making
any information, return or declaration, from filing such form, or from paying
the tax.
   (D)   The term “person” as used in this section shall, in addition to the
meaning prescribed in §
39.002, include in the case of an association or corporation not having any
partner, member, or officer within the municipality, any employee or agent of
such association or corporation who can be found within the corporate limits of
the municipality.
(‘74 Code, § 93.99) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71; Am. Ord. 83-756, passed 12-6-
83)
   (E)   Whoever violates §
39.003 shall, on conviction, be fined not more than $50.
(‘74 Code, §§ 93.03, 93.04) (Ord. 496-A, passed 5-6-75)
   (F)   Any person divulging information in violation of §
39.091 shall be punished as provided in §
10.99.
(‘74 Code, § 93.64) (Ord. 384-A, passed 4-1-71)
(Am. Ord. 01-1348, passed 1-16-01; Am. Ord. 05-1469, passed 12-21-05)
CHAPTER 39A: MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX REGULATIONS
EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
Section
   
39A.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax
   
39A.02   Definitions
   
39A.03   Imposition of tax
   
39A.04   Collection at source
   
39A.05   Annual return; filing
   
39A.06   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities
   
39A.07   Estimated taxes
   
39A.08   Rounding of amounts
   
39A.09   Requests for refunds
   
39A.10   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund
   
39A.11   Amended returns
   
39A.12   Limitations
   
39A.13   Audits
   
39A.14   Service of assessment
   
39A.15   Administration of claims
   
39A.16   Tax information confidential
   
39A.17   Fraud
   
39A.18   Interest and penalties
   
39A.19   Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information
   
39A.20   Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator
   
39A.21   Board of Tax Review
   
39A.22   Authority to create rules and regulations
   
39A.23   Rental and leased property
   
39A.24   Savings clause
   
39A.25   Collection of tax after termination of chapter
   
39A.26   Adoption of RITA rules and regulations
   
39A.27   Election to be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95
 
   
39A.99   Violations; penalties
§ 39A.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (A)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and
facilities and capital improvements, the City of Mt. Healthy (the “City”)
hereby levies an annual municipal income tax on income, qualifying wages,
commissions and other compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   (1)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of 2%. The tax is levied at a
uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in the
city. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided in Section
39A.03 and other sections as they may apply.
      (2)   Effective January 1, 2015, tax at a rate of 1/2% was approved by
residents of the city voting in a general election to provide additional funds
for the Police Department operations. The revenue received for this portion of
the income tax will be accounted for in a separate fund on the city's books and
expenses of the Police Department will be allocated to these funds.
   (C)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by Ordinance No.
15-1759 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution.
The tax is levied in accordance with, and is intended to be consistent with,
the provisions and limitations of R.C. Chapter 718.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.02 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in Title LVII of the
Ohio Revised Code, unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term
used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a
comparable context in both the laws of the United States relating to federal
income tax and in Title LVII of the Ohio Revised Code and the use is not
consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating
to federal income tax shall control over the use of the term in Title LVII of
the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (C)   As used in this chapter:
      (1)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME, for a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under (C)(24)(d) of this division, means a C corporation's federal taxable
income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined under
the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income.
         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (C)(1)(a) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in Section 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         (d)   1.   Except as provided in (C)(1)(d)2. of this section, deduct
income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and
gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of an asset
described in Section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Division (C)(1)(d)1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in Section 1245 or 1250
of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
         (h)   1.   Except as limited by divisions (C)(1)(h)2., 3., and 4. of
this section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person in a taxable
year beginning on or after January 1, 2017.
   The amount of such net operating loss shall be deducted from net profit that
is reduced by exempt income to the extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable
income to zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss
carried forward to not more than five consecutive taxable years following the
taxable year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more years than
necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (C)(1)
(h) of this section to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, or
2022, a person may not deduct more than 50% of the amount of the deduction
otherwise allowed by division (C)(1)(h)1. of this section.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct the full amount allowed by (C)(1)(h)1. of this section.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward deduction that
is available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant
to (C)(1)(h) of this section.
            5.   Nothing in division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section. To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years by operation of division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this
section is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable
year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation described in
division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section shall apply to the amount carried
forward.
         (i)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
39A.05(D)(5)(c)2.
         (j)   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
39A.05(D)(5)(c)2.
   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded entity that has
made an election described in division (C)(48)(b) of this section, is not a
publicly traded partnership that has made the election described in division
(C)(24)(d) of this section, and is not an individual, the taxpayer shall
compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer
were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid
or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless
such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as
payment of interest under Section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United
States Treasury Regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-
employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
   Nothing in division (C)(1) of this section shall be construed as allowing
the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed
as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes
of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   (a)   ASSESSMENT means a written finding by the Tax Administrator
that a person has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest,
or any combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation
that commences the person's time limitation for making an appeal to the Board
of Tax Review pursuant to §
39A.21, and has “ASSESSMENT” written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         (b)   ASSESSMENT does not include a notice denying a request for
refund issued under §
39A.09(C)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the  municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator's request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator's other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (C)(2)(a) of this
section.
      (3)   AUDIT means the examination of a person or the inspection of the
books, records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before
the Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal
income tax.
      (4)   BOARD OF TAX REVIEW or BOARD OF REVIEW or BOARD OF TAX APPEALS, or
other named local board constituted to hear appeals of municipal income tax
matters, means the entity created under §
39A.21.
      (5)   CALENDAR QUARTER means the three-month period ending on the last
day of March, June, September, or December.
      (6)   CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 3772.01.
      (7)   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL SERVICE,
and similar terms include any delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. §
5703.056.
      (8)   DISREGARDED ENTITY means a single member limited liability company,
a qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      (9)   DOMICILE means the true, fixed, and permanent home of a taxpayer
and to which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may
have more than one residence but not more than one domicile.
      (10)   EMPLOYEE means an individual who is an employee for federal income
tax purposes.
      (11)   EMPLOYER means a person that is an employer for federal income tax
purposes.
      (12)   EXEMPT INCOME means all of the following:
         (a)   The military pay or allowances of members of the Armed Forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state.
         (b)   Intangible income.
         (c)   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state, or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident,
or liability insurance policies. As used in division (C)(12)(c) of this
section, “unemployment compensation” does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in Section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (d)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax- exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities.
         (e)   Compensation paid under R.C. § 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation.
         (f)   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by
charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions,
lodges, and similar organizations;
         (g)   Alimony and child support received.
         (h)   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages.
         (i)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject
to the tax levied under R.C. § 5727.24 or 5727.30. Division (C)(12)(i) of this
section does not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745.
         (j)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business.
         (k)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under Section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (l)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (C)(35) of this section.
         (m)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of
a United States Air Force Base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile.
         (n)   An S corporation shareholder's share of net profits of the S
corporation, other than any part of the share of net profits that represents
wages as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net
earnings from self-employment as defined in Section 1402(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         (o)   For tax years 2024 and after, the income of individuals under 18
years of age.
         (p)   1.   Except as provided in divisions (C)(12)(p)2., 3., and 4. of
this section, qualifying wages described in §
39A.04(B)(1)(b) or (e) to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the city under either of those divisions.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. of this
section does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the
employee resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.
            3.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. of this
section does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold
under §
39A.04(B)(1)(d)2.
            4.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. of this
section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions
apply:
               (a)   For qualifying wages described in §
39A.04(B)(1)(b), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's principal
place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
39A.04(B)(1)(e), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed
location is located;
               (b)   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (C)(12)(p)4.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
         (q)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(12)(q)2. or 3. of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in the city on not more than 20 days
in a taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in this division (C)(12)(q)2. does not
apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual's base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation.
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of this division (C)
(12)(q)2.b., PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE, PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER, and PUBLIC FIGURE
have the same meanings as in §
39A.04 (B)(1).
            3.    Compensation to which division (C)(12)(q) of this section
applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of
operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of division (C)(12)(q) of this section, BASE OF
OPERATION means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         (r)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed
for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence.
         (s)   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution
or laws of the United States.
   Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through entity under
division (C) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the pass-through
entity to the extent of that owner's distributive or proportionate share of
that item of the entity's income.
      (13)   FORM 2106 means Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (14)   GENERIC FORM means an electronic or paper form that is not
prescribed by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for
reporting taxes withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer,
estimated municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or
for filing a refund claim.
      (15)   GROSS RECEIPTS means the total revenue derived from sales, work
done, or service rendered.
      (16)   INCOME means the following:
         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in (C)(24)(d) of this division.
            2.   For the purposes of division (C)(16)(a)1. of this section:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident's ownership
interest in a pass- through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident's distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (C)(16)(a)4. of this section;
               b.   The resident's distributive share of the net profit of each
pass- through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity's net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (C)(16)(a)2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders' shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
division (C)(12)(n) or (C)(16)(e) of this section.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer's
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         (b)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer;
         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings
from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
         (e)   Intentionally left blank.
      (17)   INTANGIBLE INCOME means income of any of the following types:
income yield, interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from
the ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate investment trusts,
investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred
compensation. INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include prizes, awards, or other
income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other
similar games of chance.
      (18)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5747.01.
      (19)   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY means a limited liability company formed
under R.C. Chapter 1705, or under the laws of another state.
      (20)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. § 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.
      (21)   (a)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME means the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to the city under §
39A.03, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward
available to the person for the city.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of the city, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then
reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) of this section, and further reduced
by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for
the municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the city, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under §
39A.03, then reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) of this section, and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward available to
the individual for the city.
         (b)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is
an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (C)(21)
(a)2.a. or (C)(21)(b) of this section, the amount of the individual's employee
business expenses reported on the individual's Form 2106 that the individual
deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year, subject to the
limitation imposed by Section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the
municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may
deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes, but only to
the extent the expenses do not relate to exempt income. For a municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct
such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer's
performance of personal services in that nonresident municipal corporation and
are not related to exempt income.
      (22)   MUNICIPALITY means the same as the City of Mt. Healthy, Ohio. If
the terms are capitalized in this chapter they are referring to the City of Mt.
Healthy. If not capitalized they refer to a municipal corporation other than
the City of Mt. Healthy.
      (23)   NET OPERATING LOSS means a loss incurred by a person in the
operation of a trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include
unutilized losses resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or
passive activity loss limitations.
      (24)   (a)   NET PROFIT for a person other than an individual means
adjusted federal taxable income.
         (b)   NET PROFIT for a person who is an individual means the
individual's net profit required to be reported on Schedule C, Schedule E, or
Schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes
of division (C)(24)(b) of this section, the net operating loss carried forward
shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (C)
(1)(h) of this section.
         (c)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(C)(24)(a) of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be
taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in
the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         (d)   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits
by the city, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for the city. The
election shall be made on the annual return for the city. The city will treat
the publicly traded partnership as a C corporation if the election is so made.
      (25)   NONRESIDENT means an individual that is not a resident.
      (26)   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY means the online computer network system,
created under  R.C. § 125.30 that allows persons to electronically file
business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic
filing and payment system.
      (27)   OTHER PAYER means any person, other than an individual's employer
or the employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the
federal gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators
and video lottery terminal sales agents.
      (28)   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY means a partnership not treated as an
association taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a
limited liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C
corporation for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other
class of entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-
through treatment for federal income tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not
include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (29)   PENSION means any amount paid to an employee or former employee
that is reported to the recipient on an IRS Form 1099-R, or successor form.
Pension does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to
nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an
IRS Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      (30)   PERSON includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities, and any other entity.
      (31)   POSTAL SERVICE means the United States Postal Service.
      (32)   POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK, and similar terms include the
date recorded and marked in the manner described in R.C. § 5703.056(B)(3).
      (33)   (a)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRY-FORWARD means any net
operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2017, to
the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution or ordinance of the city
that was adopted by the city before January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and
utilized to offset income or net profit generated in the city in future taxable
years.
         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any
pre-2017 net operating loss carry-forward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (34)   PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP means any partnership, an interest in
which is regularly traded on an established securities market. A “publicly
traded partnership” may have any number of partners.
      (35)   QUALIFYING WAGES means wages, as defined in Section 3121(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as
follows:
         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in Section 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer.
            3.    Intentionally left blank.
            4.    Intentionally left blank.
            5.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         (b)   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option. Division (C)(35)(b)2. of this section applies
only to those amounts constituting ordinary income.
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in Section 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code.
Division (C)(35)(b)3. of this section applies only to employee contributions
and employee deferrals.
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in Section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages.
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with Section 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code.
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under Section 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in Section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either division (C)(35)(b) of this section or R.C. §
718.03, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the
130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (36)   RELATED ENTITY means any of the following:
         (a)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder's
family enumerated in Section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the
stockholder and the members of the stockholder's family own directly,
indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of
the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;
         (b)   A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer's
outstanding stock;
         (c)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (C)(36)(d) of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least 50% of the value of the corporation's outstanding
stock;
         (d)   The attribution rules described in Section 318 of the Internal
Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership
requirements in divisions (C)(36)(a) to (c) of this section have been met.
      (37)   RELATED MEMBER means a person that, with respect to the taxpayer
during all or any  portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a
component member as defined in Section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or
a person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance
with Section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of
determining whether a person is a related member under this division, “20%”
shall be substituted for “5%” wherever “5%” appears in Section 1563(e) of the
Internal Revenue Code.
      (38)   RESIDENT means an individual who is domiciled in the municipal
corporation as determined under §
39A.03(C).
      (39)   S CORPORATION means a person that has made an election under
subchapter/ordinance S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code
for its taxable year.
      (40)   SCHEDULE C means internal revenue service Schedule C (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   SCHEDULE E means internal revenue service Schedule E (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   SCHEDULE F means internal revenue service Schedule F (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (43)   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY means a limited liability
company that has one direct member.
      (44)   SMALL EMPLOYER means any employer that had total revenue of less
than $500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division,
TOTAL REVENUE means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited
to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and other
investment income; compensation; commissions; premiums; money; property;
grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient
service revenue; premiums; fees,  including premium fees and service fees;
tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of
payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and
any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under
generally accepted accounting principles. “Small employer” does not include the
federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      (45)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR means the individual charged with direct
responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by the city in
accordance with this chapter.
      (46)   TAX RETURN PREPARER means any individual described in Section 7701
(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15.
      (47)   TAXABLE YEAR means the corresponding tax reporting period as
prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (48)   (a)   TAXPAYER means a person subject to a tax levied on income by
a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not
include a grantor trust or, except as provided in division (C)(48)(b)1. of this
section, a disregarded entity.
         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company's single member is also a
limited liability company.
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004.
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under R.C. § 718.01(L) as that section existed on December 31, 2004.
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member.
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (C)(48)(b)2.e. of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company's taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      (49)   TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES means the rights provided
to taxpayers in §§
39A.09,
39A.12,
39A.13,
39A.19(B),
39A.20,
39A.21, and R.C. §§ 5717.011 and 5717.03, and the responsibilities of taxpayers
to file, report, withhold, remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise
comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules and
regulations adopted by the city for the imposition and administration of a
municipal income tax.
      (50)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
      (51)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT means a lottery sales agent
licensed  under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf
of the state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15; Am. Ord. 24-2044, passed 5-21-24)
§ 39A.03 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The income tax levied by the City at a rate of 2% is levied on the Municipal
Taxable Income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or receiving
income in the city.
   (A)   Individuals.
      (1)   For residents of the city, the income tax levied herein shall be on
all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation
from whatever source earned or received by the resident, including the
resident's distributive share of the net profit of pass-through entities owned
directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the resident. This
is further detailed in the definition of income (§
39A.02(C)(16)).
      (2)   For nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or activities
conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of the
nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident.
      (3)   For residents and nonresidents, income can be reduced to “Municipal
Taxable Income” as defined in §
39A.02(C)(21). Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
39A.02(C)(12).
   (B)   Refundable Credit for Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Plan.
      (1)   (a)   As used in this division:
            1.    NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN means a compensation
plan described in Section 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
            2.    QUALIFYING LOSS means the amount of compensation attributable
to a taxpayer's nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of
money and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and
property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer
sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer
receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            3.    QUALIFYING TAX RATE means:
               a.   The applicable tax rate for the taxable year for the which
the taxpayer paid income tax to the city with respect to any portion of the
total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
               b.   If different tax rates applied for different taxable years,
then the qualifying tax rate is a weighted average of those different tax
rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the city each
year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            4.    REFUNDABLE CREDIT means the amount of the city income tax
that was paid on the non- distributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
         (b)   If, in addition to the city, a taxpayer has paid tax to other
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation's
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
         (c)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to the city
for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
         (d)   The credit allowed under this division is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer's qualifying loss is attributable to:
            1.   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had
established the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
            2.   The employee's failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer's terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
   (C)   Domicile.
      (1)   (a)   1.   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the city
for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the city
on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax
Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the city
for all or part of the taxable year.
            2.   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described
in division (C)(1)(a)1. of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the city
for all or part of the taxable year.
         (b)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is
domiciled in the city for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be
considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
            1.   The individual's domicile in other taxable years;
            2.   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
            3.   The address on the individual's driver's license;
            4.   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual's
residence or domicile;
            5.   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
            6.    Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual
regarding the individual's residency;
            7.   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
            8.   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual's dependents as defined in Section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code,
to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual's spouse in the municipal
corporation where the educational institution is located;
            9.   The number of contact periods the individual has with the
city. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one “contact period”
with the city if the individual is away overnight from the individual's abode
located outside of the city and while away overnight from that abode spends at
least some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the
city.
         (c)   All additional applicable factors are provided in the Rules and
Regulations.
   (D)   Businesses.
      (1)   This division applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in the city, unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in the
city or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or telephone
company that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C. Chapter
5745.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D)(1)(b) and (E) of
this section, net profit from a business or profession conducted both within
and without the boundaries of the city shall be considered as having a taxable
situs in the City for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same
proportion as the average ratio of the following:
            1.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the city during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
   As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or real property shall
include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of such
property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by eight;
            2.   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the
taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for
services performed in the city to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid
during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession,
wherever the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from
which taxes are not required to be withheld under §
39A.04(C);
            3.   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the city
to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period
from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
         (b)   1.   If the apportionment factors described in division (D)(1)
(a) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business
activity in the city, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the
city may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of
the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one
or more of the following:
               a.    Separate accounting;
               b.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
               c.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
               d.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
            2.   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
39A.12(A).
            3.   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (D)(1)(b)1. of this
section, but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by §
39A.12(A).
            4.   Nothing in division (D)(1)(b) of this section nullifies or
otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a the
Tax Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(a)2. of this section, WAGES,
SALARIES, AND OTHER COMPENSATION includes only wages, salaries, or other
compensation paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following
locations:
            1.   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to,
or under the possession of one of the following:
               a.   The employer;
               b.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or
a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
               c.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person
described in (D)(1)(c)1.b. of this section, or a related member of such a
vendor, customer, client, or patient.
            2.   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
            3.   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that
the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other
location in lieu of a location described in division (D)(1)(c)1. or 2. of this
section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer
may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Tax Administrator's determination was unreasonable.
         (d)   For the purposes of division (D)(1)(a)3. of this section, except
as provided in division (E) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals
made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as
follows:
            1.   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property
shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For
the purposes of this division, a sale of property originates in the city if,
regardless of where title passes, the property meets any of the following
criteria:
               a.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the city
from a stock of goods located within the city.
               b.   The property is delivered within the city from a location
outside the city, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the city and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
               c.   The property is shipped from a place within the city to
purchasers outside the city, provided that the taxpayer is not, through its own
employees, regularly engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the
place where delivery is made.
            2.   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to
the city to the extent that such services are performed in the city.
            3.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city.
            4.   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents
and royalties from real property located in the city shall be sitused to the
city.
            5.   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the city based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the city.
         (e)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the
rental of real estate owned directly by the individual, or by a disregarded
entity owned by the individual, shall be subject to the city's tax only if the
property generating the net profit is located in the city or if the individual
taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of the city. The city shall
allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose of
calculating net profit sitused under this division to the municipal corporation
in which the property is located.
         (f)   1.    Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker
relating to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the city, if
applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the city
to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year.
            2.   An individual who is a resident of the city shall report the
individual's net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's
annual tax return for the city. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such a credit is allowed under the city's income tax ordinance.
         (g)   When calculating the ratios described in division (D)(1)(a) of
this section for the purposes of that division or division (D)(1)(b) of this
section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios
the property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
         (h)   Left intentionally blank.
         (i)   Intentionally left blank.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this division:
         (a)   QUALIFYING REMOTE EMPLOYEE OR OWNER means an individual who is
an employee of a taxpayer or who is a partner or member holding an ownership
interest in a taxpayer that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes, provided that the individual meets both of the following criteria:
            1.   The taxpayer has assigned the individual to a qualifying
reporting location.
            2.   The individual is permitted or required to perform services
for the taxpayer at a qualifying remote work location.
         (b)   QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION means a permanent or temporary
location at which an employee or owner chooses or is required to perform
services for the taxpayer, other than a reporting location of the taxpayer or
any other location owned or controlled by a customer or client of the taxpayer.
QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION may include the residence of an employee or
owner and may be located outside of a municipal corporation that imposes an
income tax in accordance with this chapter. An employee or owner may have more
than one qualifying remote work location during a taxable year.
         (c)   REPORTING LOCATION means either of the following:
            1.   A permanent or temporary place of doing business, such as an
office, warehouse, storefront, construction site, or similar location, that is
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the taxpayer;
            2.   Any location in this state owned or controlled by a customer
or client of the taxpayer, provided that the taxpayer is required to withhold
taxes under §
39A.04, on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal
services at that location.
         (d)   QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION means one of the following:
            1.   The reporting location in this state at which an employee or
owner performs services for the taxpayer on a regular or periodic basis during
the taxable year;
            2.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee
or owner under division (E)(1)(d)1. of this section, the reporting location in
this state at which the employee's or owner's supervisor regularly or
periodically reports during the taxable year;
            3.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee
or owner under division (E)(1)(d)1. or 2. of this section, the location that
the taxpayer otherwise assigns as the employee's or owner's qualifying
reporting location, provided the assignment is made in good faith and is
recorded and maintained in the taxpayer's business records. A taxpayer may
change the qualifying reporting location designated for an employee or owner
under this division at any time.
      (2)   For tax years ending on or after December 31, 2023, a taxpayer may
elect to apply the provisions of this division to the apportionment of its net
profit from a business or profession. For taxpayers that make this election,
the provisions of division (D) of this section apply to such apportionment
except as otherwise provided in this division.
         A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this division in
writing on or with the taxpayer's net profit return or, if applicable, a timely
filed amended net profit return or a timely filed appeal of an assessment. The
election applies to the taxable year for which that return or appeal is filed
and for all subsequent taxable years, until the taxpayer revokes the election.
         The taxpayer shall make the initial election with the tax
administrator of each municipal corporation with which, after applying the
apportionment provisions authorized in this division, the taxpayer is required
to file a net profit tax return for that taxable year. A taxpayer shall not be
required to notify the tax administrator of a municipal corporation in which a
qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work location is
located, unless the taxpayer is otherwise required to file a net profit return
with that municipal corporation due to business operations that are unrelated
to the employee's or owner's activity at the qualifying remote work location.
         After the taxpayer makes the initial election, the election applies to
every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducts business. The
taxpayer shall not be required to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in such municipal corporation.
         Nothing in this division prohibits a taxpayer from making a new
election under this division after properly revoking a prior election.
      (3)   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in division (D)
(1) of this section, all of the following apply to a taxpayer that has made the
election described in division (E)(2) of this section:
         (a)   For the purpose of division (D)(l)(a) of this section, the
average original cost of any tangible personal property used by a qualifying
remote employee or owner at that individual's qualifying remote work location
shall be sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting location.
         (b)   For the purpose of division (D)(1)(b) of this section, any
wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
         (c)   For the purpose of division (D)(1)(c) of this section, and
notwithstanding division (D)(1)(d) of this section, any gross receipts of the
business or profession from services performed during the taxable period by a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
      (4)   Nothing in this division prevents a taxpayer from requesting, or a
tax administrator from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or
a portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method as
described in division (D)(1)(b) of this section. However, a tax administrator
shall not require an alternative apportionment method in such a manner that it
would require a taxpayer to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in that municipal corporation.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, nothing in this
division is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on qualifying wages
pursuant to §
39A.04.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15; Am. Ord. 24-2044, passed 5-21-24)
§ 39A.04 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   Withholding provisions.
      (1)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer located or
doing business in the city shall withhold an income tax from the qualifying
wages earned and/or received by each employee in the city. Except for
qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under §
39A.03 or division (B)(1)(d) or (f) of this section, the tax shall be withheld
at the rate, specified in §
39A.01(B)(1), of 2%. An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall
deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the
employer, agent, or other payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays
the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the
employee.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (A)(2)(b) of this section, an
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall remit to the Tax
Administrator of the city the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld
or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld by the employer,
agent, or other payer according to the following schedule:
            1.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer on
behalf of the city in the preceding calendar year exceeded $2,399, or if the
total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and
withheld on behalf of the city in any month of the preceding calendar quarter
exceeded $200.
   Payment under division (A)(2)(a)1. of this section shall be made so that the
payment is received by the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days after the
last day of each month for which the tax was withheld.
            2.   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer not
required to make payments under division (A)(2)(a)1. of this section of taxes
required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax
Administrator not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the end
of each calendar quarter.
            3.    Intentionally left blank.
         (b)   If the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is
required to make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal
taxes withheld on payments to employees under Section 6302 of the Internal
Revenue Code, 26 C.F.R. 31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation,
the payment shall be made by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator
of all taxes deducted and withheld on behalf of the city. The payment of tax by
electronic funds transfer under this division does not affect an employer's,
agent's, or other payer's obligation to file any return as required under this
section.
         (c)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and the city as the return
required of a nonresident employee whose sole income subject to the tax under
this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent
of an employer, or other payer.
         (d)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not
required to withhold the city income tax with respect to an individual's
disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the
disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the
corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such
corporation's successor entity.
         (e)   1.   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's, agent's, or other
payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
            2.   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer to remit to the city the tax withheld relieves the employee from
liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent,
or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
         (f)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to
the city income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the
deferred compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the
deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
         (g)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the city until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
         (h)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
            1.   The names, addresses, and social security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for the city during the preceding calendar year;
            2.   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee,
the total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
            3.   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax
was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the
preceding calendar year;
            4.   Any other information required for federal income tax
reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service Form W-2 or its equivalent form
with respect to such employee;
            5.   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
         (i)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with
the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
         (j)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold the city income
tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's employees and
constituting qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and
gratuities are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this division,
a tip or gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or gratuity is
paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee,
or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or
other electronic means.
         (k)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this chapter, to be tax required to be withheld and remitted
for the purposes of this section.
   (B)   Occasional entrant - withholding.
      (1)   (a)   As used in this division:
            1.   EMPLOYER includes a person that is a related member to or of
an employer.
            2.   FIXED LOCATION means a permanent place of doing business in
this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned
or controlled by an employer.
            3.    PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, “principal place of work” means
the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, “principal place of work” means the
location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days
in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee's
employer.
   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the employee spent
the greatest number of days in a calendar year performing services for or on
behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more municipal
corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days that is
greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other municipal
corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee's qualifying wages
subject to division (B)(1)(b)1.a. of this section among those two or more
municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair and
reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee's “principal place of work” with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an employee spends
a particular day shall be determined in accordance with division (B)(1)(b)2. of
this section, except that “location” shall be substituted for “municipal
corporation” wherever “municipal corporation” appears in that division.
            4.    PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE means an athlete who performs services
in a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
            5.    PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER means a person who performs services
in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-
event basis.
            6.   PUBLIC FIGURE means a person of prominence who performs
services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances, or similar
events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
            7.   WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION does not include the home of
an employee.
         (b)   1.   Subject to divisions (B)(1)(c), (e), (f) and (g) of this
section, an employer is not required to withhold the city income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in the city if the employee performed such services in the city on 20 or fewer
days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
               a.   The employee's principal place of work is located in the
city.
               b.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in the city. For the purposes of this division, PRESUMED
WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary worksite in the
city at which the employer provides or provided services that can reasonably
be, or would have been,  expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in
a calendar year. Services can reasonably be expected by the employer to last
more than 20 days if either of the following applies at the time the services
commence:
                  1.    The nature of the services are such that it will
require more than 20 days of the services to complete the services;
                  2.    The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
               c.   The employee is a resident of the city and has requested
that the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying wages as provided
in §
39A.04.
               d.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure.
            2.   For the purposes of division (B)(1)(b)1. of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in the
city only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf
of the employer in the city than in any other municipal corporation on that
day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a
particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following
activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee's principal
place of work:
               a.    Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
               b.    Traveling from a location at which the employee was
performing services for the employer to any other location;
               c.    Traveling from any location to another location in order
to pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property
that has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured, or improved by the employee's employer;
               d.    Transporting or delivering property described in division
(B)(1)(b)2.c. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property,
the employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real
estate owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the employee's
employer;
               e.    Traveling from the location at which the employee makes
the employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee's
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
         (c)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in
another Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception
from withholding requirements described in division (B)(1)(b)1. of this section
shall apply only if, with respect to the employee's qualifying wages described
in that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying
wages to that municipal corporation.
         (d)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(1)(d)2. of this section,
if, during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in the City exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to the City for any subsequent days in that calendar
year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal
services performed in the City.
            2.   An employer required to begin withholding tax for the city
under division (B)(1)(d)1. of this section may elect to withhold tax for the
city for the first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the
employee for personal services performed in the city.
         (e)   If an employer's fixed location is the city and the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in § 39A.02, the employer shall
withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee's qualifying wages for a
taxable year and remit that tax only to the city, regardless of the number of
days which the employee worked outside the corporate boundaries of the city.
   To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small employer for a taxable
year, the employer will be required to provide the Tax Administrator with the
employer's federal income tax return for the preceding taxable year.
         (f)   Divisions (B)(1)(b)1. and (B)(1)(d) of this section shall not
apply to the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an
agreement regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the
requirements of § 39A.04.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.05 ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (A)   (1)   An annual city income tax return shall be completed and filed by
every taxpayer for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the
tax, whether or not a tax is due thereon.
         (a)   The Tax Administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer under § 39A.04 when the nonresident individual taxpayer's sole
income subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due the city.
         (b)   Retirees having no Municipal Taxable Income for the city income
tax purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption from these
filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The written
exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which
retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree
receives Municipal Taxable Income taxable to the city, at which time the
retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent's executor,
administrator, or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
      (3)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the city, the return or notice required of that individual shall be
completed and filed by the individual's duly authorized agent, guardian,
conservator, fiduciary, or other person charged with the care of the person or
property of that individual.
      (4)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be
completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
      (5)   The City shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
      (6)   (a)   Each return required to be filed under this division shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall
include the taxpayer's social security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
         (b)   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an
individual to include, with each annual return, and amended return, copies of
the following documents: all of the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service Form W-
2, “Wage and Tax Statements,” including all information reported on the
taxpayer's federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any
municipal corporation; the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service Form 1040; and,
with respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation necessary to
support the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who
files the annual return required by this section electronically is not required
to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless
the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the return has been filed.
         (c)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer's Internal Revenue Service Form 1041, Form
1065, Form 1120, Form 1120-REIT, Form 1120F, or Form 1120S, and, with respect
to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary
to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual net profit
return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some other manner
shall either mail the documents required under this division to the Tax
Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is available,
submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway.
         (d)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required by the city to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal
income tax liability. The requirements imposed under division (A)(6) of this
section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on
a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (7)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each return
required to be filed under this section shall be completed and filed as
required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date prescribed for the
filing of state individual income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G). The
taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed by
the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made
payable to the City of Mt. Healthy. No remittance is required if the net amount
due is $10 or less.
         (b)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city's income tax
return. The extended due date of the city's income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates. For tax years ending on or after January l, 2023, the
extended due date of city's income tax return for a taxpayer that is not an
individual shall be the fifteenth day of the eleventh month after the last day
of the taxable year to which the return relates. An extension of time to file
under this division is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless
the Tax Administrator grants an extension of that date.
            1.   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of the city's income tax return.
            2.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may submit a
written request that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month
extension of the date for filing the taxpayer's city income tax return. If the
request is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the city
income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer's
requested extension.
         (c)   If the Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city's income tax
return. The extended due date of the city's income tax return shall be the same
as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
         (d)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to
ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the city, the Tax Administrator may
require taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided
in this division, including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual
returns.
         (e)   If a taxpayer receives an extension for the filing of a
municipal income tax return under division (A)(7)(b), (c), or (d) of this
section, the tax administrator shall not make any inquiry or send any notice to
the taxpayer with regard to the return on or before the date the taxpayer files
the return or on or before the extended due date to file the return, whichever
occurs first.
            If a tax administrator violates division (A)(7)(c) of this section,
the municipal corporation shall reimburse the taxpayer for any reasonable costs
incurred to respond to such inquiry or notice, up to $150.
            Division (A)(7)(e) of this section does not apply to an extension
received under division (A)(7)(b) of this section if the tax administrator has
actual knowledge that the taxpayer failed to file for a federal extension as
required to receive the extension under division (A)(7)(b) of this section or
failed to file for an extension under division (A)(7)(b)2. of this section.
         (f)   To the extent that any provision in this division (A)(7)
conflicts with any provision in divisions (C)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this
section, the provisions in divisions (C)(1), (2), (3), or (4) prevail.
      (8)   (a)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the city shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount
due is $10 or less.
         (b)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the city for a taxable
year pursuant to division (A)(8)(a) of this section shall file with the city an
annual net profit return under division (A)(6)(c) of this section.
      (9)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds transfer,
the payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to an account
designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments, except
that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to
circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered
to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. This division shall not
apply to payments required to be made under §
39A.04(B)(1)(a) or provisions for semi-monthly withholding.
      (10)   Taxes withheld for the city by an employer, the agent of an
employer, or other payer as described in §
39A.04 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax
imposed on the taxpayer by the city, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to the city and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent, or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld.
      (11)   Each return required by the city to be filed in accordance with
this division shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
      (12)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of
any income tax return, report, or document required by the city, provided that
the generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations adopted by the city
or the Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer
filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter
and of the city's ordinance, resolution, or rules and regulations governing the
filing of returns, reports, or documents.
   (B)   Filing via Ohio Business Gateway.
      (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to
the taxpayer's net profit from a business or profession may file the City's
income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
   (C)   Extension for service in or for the armed forces.
      (1)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the city for
both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time for
payment of taxes required by the city during the period of the member's or
civilian's duty service, and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be
filed on or before the one hundred eightieth day after the member's or
civilian's duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax
Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant's active duty or service terminates. The Tax Administrator may
prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
However, taxes pursuant to a contract entered into under this division are not
delinquent, and the Tax Administrator shall not require any payments of
penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period.
         (b)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be
required to file any return, report, or other tax document nor be required to
pay any tax otherwise due to the municipal corporation before the one hundred
eighty-first day after the applicant's active duty or service terminates.
         (c)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under (C)(2)(a)
of this division are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in
this division the application of divisions (C)(1) and (2) of this section.
         (b)   1.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension
under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in
which to file any return, report, or other tax document and an extension of
time in which to make any payment of taxes required by a municipal corporation
in accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under this
division (C)(3)(b)1. shall be equal to the length of the corresponding
extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used
in this division, QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the national guard or a
member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called
to active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the president of
the United States or an act of the congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces.
            2.   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division
(C)(3)(b)1. of this section are not delinquent during the extension period.
Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the
extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax
Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in
connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator
shall not include any period of extension granted under division (B)(1)(b)1. of
this section in calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
      (4)   For each taxable year to which division (C)(1), (2), or (3) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (C)(2)(b) and (c) of
this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing
status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year.
   (D)   Consolidated municipal income tax return.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         (a)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS means an affiliated group as
defined in Section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a
group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
         (b)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to Section 1501 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         (c)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. “Consolidated
federal taxable income” does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (D)
(1)(a) of this section.
         (d)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4927.01.
         (e)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5727.01.
      (2)   (a)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the city's
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five- year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (D)(2)(b) of this
section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax
Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
         (b)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income
tax returns under this section must be made in the first year following the
last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election
period in effect under division (D)(2)(a) of this section. The election to
discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a
five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
         (c)   An election made under division (D)(2)(a) or (b) of this section
is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated the city income tax return for that taxable year if the Tax
Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany
transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a
distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net
profits to the city. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated the
city income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated city income
tax return for all subsequent taxable years, unless the taxpayer requests and
receives written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate
return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.
      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated the city income tax return
in the same manner as is required under the United States department of
treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the
consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common
parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D)(5)(b), (c), and
(d) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax
return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
39A.02, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income” for “federal
taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that division and
by substituting “an affiliated group of corporations” for “a C corporation's”
wherever “a C corporation's” appears in that division.
         (b)   No corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
39A.02(C)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
         (c)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at
least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated the city income tax return shall do one of
the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (D)(1) through (8) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to the city. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity
shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
            2.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (D)(1) through (8) of
this section, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to the city. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the entity
shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
         (d)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less
than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass- through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in divisions (D)(1) through (8) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused
to the city;
            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to the city income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated the city income tax return shall
make the computations required under divisions (D)(1) through (8) of this
section, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income attributable to”
for “net profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by
substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever
“taxpayer” appears in that section.
      (7)   Each corporation filing a consolidated the city income tax return
is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines,
charges, or other amounts imposed by the city in accordance with this chapter
on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member
for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an
affiliated group.
      (8)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with the city before January 1, 2016, to file a consolidated
or combined tax return with the city may continue to file consolidated or
combined tax returns in accordance with such election or agreement for taxable
years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15; Am. Ord. 24-2044, passed 5-21-24)
§ 39A.06 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (A)   Every individual taxpayer domiciled in the city who is required to and
does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to another
municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages, commissions,
net profits or other compensation taxable under this chapter may claim a non-
refundable credit upon satisfactory evidence of the tax paid to the other
municipality. Subject to division (C) of this section, the credit shall not
exceed 100% of the amount obtained by multiplying the income, qualifying wages,
commissions, net profits or other compensation subject to tax in the other
municipality by the lower of the tax rate in such other municipality or the
rate of 1.6%
   (B)   The city shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident
of the city who works in a joint economic development zone created under R.C. §
715.691 or a joint economic development district created under R.C. § 715.70,
715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against its tax on
income to its residents who are employed in another municipal corporation.
   (C)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then for purposes of division (A) of this section, “the income,
qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation” subject to
tax in the other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by
dividing the tax withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for
that municipality.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.07 ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for the city's income tax for the
current taxable year.
      (2)   TAX LIABILITY means the total taxes due to the city for the taxable
year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and after
applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from another
taxable year.
   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         (a)   Taxes withheld for the city from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the city in equal amounts on each payment date unless the
taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, in
which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts
were actually withheld.
         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent
taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic
funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division,
DATE OF THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the
cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the Postal Service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
39A.05(G) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the city, including
the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before
the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (d)   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with §
39A.05.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
39A.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due.
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the city under §
39A.05 for that year.
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the city but was not
domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes
the first day of the taxable year.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.08 ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round
amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on
the document.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.09 REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (A)   As used in this section, “withholding tax” has the same meaning as in
§
39A.18.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax
levied by the municipal corporation:
      (1)   Overpayments of $10 or more;
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested is $10 or more.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor's claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (C)
(3) of this section, the Administrator shall issue an assessment to any
taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment
shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer's originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
39A.21.
   (D)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (C) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the Postal Service, and the earliest
Postal Service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request.
      (2)   The request is delivered by the Postal Service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day.
      (3)   The request is delivered by the Postal Service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (E)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of
any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until the
date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
39A.18(A)(4).
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.10 SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR REFUND.
   (A)   Income tax that has been deposited with the city, but should have been
deposited with another municipality, is allowable by the city as a refund but
is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (B)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with the city is subject to recovery by the city. If the
city's tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a refund
of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, the city shall allow
a non-refundable credit against the tax or withholding the city claims is due
with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or withholding paid to
the first municipality with respect to such income or wages.
   (C)   If the city's tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the non- refundable credit shall be calculated using the
city's tax rate. However, if the city's tax rate is greater than the tax rate
in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the non- refundable credit
is to be paid to the city, along with any penalty and interest that accrued
during the period of nonpayment.
   (D)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carry-forward.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.11 AMENDED RETURNS.
   (A)   (1)   If a taxpayer's tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
the city changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer's federal or
state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the
city. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the Tax
Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (B)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall reopen those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer's federal or state income tax return only:
         (a)   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations, and attachments were reopened; or
         (b)   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under §
39A.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (C)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division within the period prescribed by division (D) of this
section for filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period
prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that division. If the amount of the refund is less than $10, no refund need be
paid by the city. A request filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations only to those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's
federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in §
39A.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened. All facts, figures, computations, and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations, and attachments.
   (D)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer's the city's tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended the city return showing income subject to the
city income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state tax
liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional the city income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is less than $10.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.12 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of this section
may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer,
agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in writing to the
extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time
limit described in division (C) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows:
         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Tax Review the request described in §
39A.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding, or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Tax Review did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment.
          (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which
the final determination of the Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any
party appeals from the determination of the local board of Tax Review, the
sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Board of
Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately
reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part,
or that reversal is available or taken.
   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be
reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission
of the offense.
   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
39A.09.
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the city does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Tax Review, of the Ohio Board
of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax
Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the
amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided
by § 39A.09, with interest on that amount as provided by §
39A.09(E).
   (E)   No civil action to recover the city income tax or related penalties or
interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.13 AUDITS.
   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer's rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (C)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper,
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person conducting
an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the taxpayer's
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner.
   This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not
an attorney.
   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer's case.
   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.14 SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      LAST KNOWN ADDRESS means the address the Tax Administrator has at the
time a document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the Tax
Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a change
of address service offered by the Postal Service or an authorized delivery
service under R.C. § 5703.056.
      UNDELIVERABLE ADDRESS means an address to which the postal service or an
authorized  delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056 is not able to deliver an
assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for non-delivery is
because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the assessment.
   (B)   Subject to division (C) of this section, a copy of each assessment
shall be served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under R.C. § 5703.056. With
the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax Administrator
may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided in this
section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic mail.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, a Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a new
last known address, including the use of a change of address service offered by
the Postal Service or an authorized delivery service under R.C. § 5703.056. If
the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known address, the
assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served. If the
ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable address, the
assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the assessment's postmark.
         (b)   Once the Tax Administrator or other city official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local Board of Tax Review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division
(C)(1)(a) of this section is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and
that the assessment is served.
      (2)   If mailing of an assessment by a Tax Administrator by certified
mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address, the Tax
Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The assessment
shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and include the
following statement:
         “This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under
applicable law ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax
Administrator as shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an
appeal may be filed apply from and after that date.”
   Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable address, the
mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery of the
assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
   If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable
address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (C)(1)(a) of this
section. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service under
this division in accordance with division (D) of this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (C) of this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of
the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified
mail was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the
Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person's agent or the person's affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
person's affiliate is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee's business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (D)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other the city
official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division
prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the local Board of Tax Review.
   (E)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator's designee from delivering an assessment by a Tax Administrator
by personal service.
   (F)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (C)(1)(b) of this section, including those on which a claim has been
delivered for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under
this section.
   (G)   Additional regulations as detailed in the Rules and Regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.15 ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable to
the city that arises pursuant to the city's income tax imposed in accordance
with this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the
municipal corporation:
      (1)   Compromise a claim;
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator's rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (D)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (E)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.16 TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person's official duties or the official business of the city as
authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator or a designee thereof may
furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and
other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the Tax
Commissioner, and tax administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit the city from publishing or disclosing
statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to
particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.17 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the preparation
or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document authorized or required by the city ordinance or state law to
be filed with a the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel, or advise
the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement,
claim, or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or knowingly procure,
counsel or advise such change, alteration, or amendment of the records upon
which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document is based
with intent to defraud the city or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.18 INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      APPLICABLE LAW means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes,
directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the city provided they impose or
directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance, or filing
requirements of the city.
      FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE means the rate of the average market yield on
outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods
to maturity of three years or less, as determined under Section 1274 of the
Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX means any income
tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by the city pursuant to
applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS SECTION means the
federal short- term rate, rounded to the nearest whole  number percent, plus
5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the
year in which the federal short- term rate is determined in accordance with
this division (A).
      RETURN includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule, and
other document required to be filed with the Tax Administrator or the city by a
taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other payer pursuant to
applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX means estimated income tax due but not paid
by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      UNPAID INCOME TAX means income tax due but not paid by the date the
income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX means withholding tax due but not paid by the date
the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      WITHHOLDING TAX includes amounts an employer, any agent of an employer,
or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an employee's
qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer, agent, or other
payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying wages.
   (B)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;
         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required
to be paid or remitted to the city on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
the city to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (C)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer, or other payer
for any reason fails, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file
timely with the city any return required to be filed, the following penalties
and interest shall apply:
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (A) of
this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax,
and unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   (a)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, the city may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid.
         (b)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, the city may impose
a penalty equal to 50% of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   (a)   For tax years ending on or before December 31, 2022, with
respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the city may impose
a penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each return, regardless of the
liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during which
the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The
penalty shall not exceed $150 for each failure.
         (b)   For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, with respect
to returns other than estimated income tax returns, the City of Mt. Healthy may
impose a penalty not exceeding $25 for each failure to timely file each return,
regardless of the liability shown thereon, except that City of Mt. Healthy
shall abate or refund the penalty assessed on a taxpayer's first failure to
timely file a return after the taxpayer files that return.
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires the city to refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that the city has
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (E)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city to abate or
partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the Tax
Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator's sole discretion, that such
abatement is appropriate.
   (F)   By the thirty-first day of October of each year the city shall publish
the rate described in division (A) of this section applicable to the next
succeeding calendar year.
   (G)   The city may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, or any other payer the city's post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney's fees.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15; Am. Ord. 24-2044, passed 5-21-24)
§ 39A.19 AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   Authority. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the
Tax Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless
the performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision
of the Ohio Revised Code:
      (1)   (a)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an query nature as provided
by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums,
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths.
         (b)   The powers referred to in this division of this section shall be
exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of
the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under the city's
income tax ordinance;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator's findings, and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer's assigns, or legal representative as
provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
39A.03;
      (7)   (a)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator's own
motion, review, re-determine, or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, or orders the Tax Administrator has made.
         (b)   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Tax Review or
other appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator shall not review, re-
determine, or correct any tax finding, determination, computation, or order
which the Tax Administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is
withdrawn by the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law;
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
39A.04.
   (B)   Verification of accuracy of returns and determination of liability.
      (1)   A Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax
returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is subject to, or that
the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter
for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return
was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by
the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer, or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent, or
employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records, and federal
and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the
request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer, or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator's
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by the city or for the withholding of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person's
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
   (C)   Identification information.
      (1)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person's social security
number, federal employer identification number, or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect
to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or
upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
39A.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
39A.99.
         (b)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under §
39A.19(C) within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such
identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax
Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to §
39A.18.
         (c)   The penalties provided for under divisions (C)(2)(a) and (b) of
this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
39A.99 for a violation of § 39A.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed
by the Tax Administrator by law.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.20 REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the Rules and Regulations.
   (C)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (D)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (E)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (F)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.21 BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two
members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the city, but such
appointees may not be employees, elected officials, or contractors with the
city at any time during their term or in the five years immediately preceding
the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the City Manager.
This member may be an employee of the city, but may not be the director of
finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar
official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any
direct subordinate thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Board of Tax Review shall be two years.
There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve if the member
is reappointed by the legislative authority. The board member appointed by the
City Manager shall serve at the discretion of the administrative official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member,
the legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against
the member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person
or by counsel in the member's own defense upon not less than ten days' notice.
The decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Tax Review who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Tax Review shall impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Tax Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Tax
Review due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Tax
Review in the member's place. The appointment of such an individual shall be
subject to the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the
appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (B)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer's right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed.
   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Tax Review by filing a request with the Board of Tax Review.
The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (D)   The Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60
days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C) of this
section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a
hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board of Tax Review and may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified public accountant, or other representative. The Board of Tax Review
may allow a hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In
such a case, the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day
of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.
   (E)   The Board of Tax Review may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator's assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Tax
Review shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the
Board of Tax Review's final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax
Administrator may appeal the Board of Tax Review's final determination as
provided in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (F)   The Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt
rules governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions.
Such records are not public records available for inspection under R.C. §
149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Tax Review created
pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. §
121.22.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.22 AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of the city, or
a Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the administrator by
resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an income tax imposed by
the city in accordance with this chapter. Such rules shall not conflict with or
be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter. Taxpayers are hereby
required to comply not only with the requirements of this chapter, but also to
comply with the Rules and Regulations.
   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on the
internet.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.23 RENTAL AND LEASED PROPERTY.
   (A)   All property owners of real property located in the city, who rent or
otherwise lease the same, or any part thereof, to any person for residential
dwelling purposes, including apartments, rooms and other rental accommodations,
during any calendar year, or part thereof, commencing with the effective date
of this section, shall file with the Tax Administrator on or before the January
31 first following such calendar year a written report disclosing the name,
address and also telephone number, if available, of each tenant known to have
occupied on December 31 during such calendar year such apartment, room or other
residential dwelling rental property.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may order the appearance before him, or his duly
authorized agent, of any person whom he believes to have any knowledge of the
name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential rental real
property in the city. The Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent, is
authorized to examine any person, under oath, concerning the name, address and
telephone number of any tenant of residential real property located in the
city. The Tax Administrator, or his duly authorized agent, may compel the
production of papers and records and the attendance of all personal before him,
whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such person has knowledge
of the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential real
property in the city.
   (C)   Any property owner or person that violates one or more of the
following shall be subject to §
39A.99:
      (1)   Fails, refuses or neglects to timely file a written report required
by subsection (a) hereof; or
      (2)   Makes an incomplete or intentionally false written report required
by subsection (a) hereof; or
      (3)   Fails to appear before the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized
agent and to produce and disclose any tenant information pursuant to any order
or subpoena of the Tax Administrator as authorized in this section; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.24 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the
tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter
or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several
groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, or part hereof,
not been included therein.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.25 COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully
terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §
39A.12 and §
39A.99 hereof.
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
39A.04 and
39A.05 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.26 ADOPTION OF RITA RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city hereby adopts the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) Rules and
Regulations, including amendments that may be made from time to time, for use
as the city's Income Tax Rules and Regulations. In the event of a conflict with
any provision(s) of the city Income Tax Ordinance and the RITA Rules and
Regulations, this chapter will supersede. Until and if the contractual
relationship between the city and RITA ceases, §
39A.26 will supersede all other provisions regarding promulgation of rules and
regulations by the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
§ 39A.27 ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO R.C. §§ 718.80 TO 718.95.
   (A)   The City of Mt. Healthy hereby adopts and incorporates herein by
reference R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 for tax years beginning on or after January
1, 2018.
   (B)   A taxpayer, as defined in division (C) of this section, may elect to
be subject to R.C. § 718.80 in lieu of the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   TAXPAYER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 718.01, except that
"taxpayer" does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. TAXPAYER may include receivers, assignees, or
trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a
taxpayer.
(Ord. 24-2044, passed 5-21-24)
§ 39A.99 VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Whoever violates §
39A.04,
39A.16(A) or
39A.17 by failing to remit the city income taxes deducted and withheld from an
employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to
six months, or both. If the individual that commits the violation is an
employee, or official, of the City, the individual is subject to discharge from
employment or dismissal from office.
   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of §
39A.16(A) shall be guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If the individual that commits the violation is an employee, or official,
of the city, the individual is subject to discharge from employment or
dismissal from office.
   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
39A.16(A) constitutes a separate offense.
   (D)   If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   File any incomplete or false return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his books, records, papers and federal and state income
tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (5)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his
books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Administrator;
      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (8)   Give to an employer false information as to his true name, correct
social security number, and residence address, or fail to promptly notify an
employer of any change in residence address and date thereof;
      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (E)   Any person who violates any of the provisions in division (D) of this
section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in division (A) of this
section
(Ord. 15-1759, passed 11-3-15)
CHAPTER 40: PUBLIC EMERGENCIES
Section
   
40.01   Authority of Mayor in times of public emergency
   
40.02   Additional assistance for police and fire divisions
   
40.03   Duration of emergency
   
40.04   Compliance with orders required
   
40.05   Authorization of city departments to act
§ 40.01 AUTHORITY OF MAYOR IN TIMES OF PUBLIC EMERGENCY.
   (A)   In times of riot, public danger or emergency, the Mayor, or in his
absence the City Manager, is authorized and given the consent of City Council
to take command of the police officers and firefighters, and enforce the law
and do all things necessary and advisable in regard thereto.
(Ord. 351-A, passed 7-16-68)
   (B)   During such emergencies, the Mayor, or in his absence the City
Manager, may do the following:
      (1)   Prohibit or limit the number of persons who may gather or
congregate, or prescribe conditions under which such persons may gather or
congregate, upon the public highways or public sidewalks or any outdoor place,
or in any theater, restaurant, place of public assembly or commercial
establishment to which the public has access.
      (2)   Restrict or prohibit movement within, above, or beneath an area or
areas which, in his judgment, are imperiled by the public danger or emergency.
      (3)   Establish a curfew during such hours on the day or night as he
deems advisable and prohibit persons from being out of doors during such
curfew.
      (4)   Prohibit or restrict the retail sale, distribution, or giving away
of gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than the gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
      (5)   Order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments
engaged in the retail sale, distribution or dispensing or giving away of liquid
flammable or combustible products.
      (6)   Prohibit or restrict the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving
away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.
      (7)   Order the closing of any and all establishments or portions thereof
engaged in the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of firearms and/or
ammunition.
      (8)   Prohibit or restrict the carrying or possession on the public
streets or public sidewalks or in any public park or square or any other public
place a weapon or any object intended to be used as a weapon including but not
limited to firearms, bows and arrows, air rifles, sling shots, knives, razors,
broken bottles, fire bombs, missiles of any kind, clubs, blackjacks, billies,
chains or similar items.
      (9)   Prohibit or restrict the retail sale, distribution, dispensing or
giving away of acids, caustics, or any chemicals or other substances capable of
being used singly or in combination to cause injury or damage to persons or
property.
(‘74 Code, § 132.20) (Ord. 351-A, passed 7-16-68) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 40.02 ADDITIONAL ASSISTANCE FOR POLICE AND FIRE DIVISIONS.
   The Mayor is authorized to contract with other governmental agencies and
firms and corporations providing security or fire services for the furnishing
of additional police and fire protection during times of public danger or
emergency. Such agreements may be reciprocal in nature.
(‘74 Code, § 132.21) (Ord. 351-A, passed 7-16-68)
§ 40.03 DURATION OF EMERGENCY.
   The public danger or emergency proclaimed in accordance with above
procedures shall exist until the officer declaring such emergency shall
determine that the event or occurrences constituting the public danger or
emergency no longer exist, provided that, such duration shall not extend beyond
one week from the time of its proclamation unless extended by action of City
Council, and further provided that City Council may, at any time it determines
that the public danger or emergency no longer exists, declare it to be at an
end.
(‘74 Code, § 132.22) (Ord. 351-A, passed 7-16-68)
§ 40.04 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS REQUIRED.
   No person, in time of riot, public danger or emergency shall knowingly fail
to obey the lawful order of any police officer, militiaman, firefighter, member
of the National Guard or other authorized person acting under orders or
authority issued under the provisions of this chapter.
(‘74 Code, § 132.23) (Ord. 351-A, passed 7-16-68)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 40.05 AUTHORIZATION OF CITY DEPARTMENTS TO ACT.
   The various departments, divisions of the city, and the personnel thereof
are authorized to exercise whatever powers and authority are necessary in order
to carry out the orders of the Mayor, or the City Manager issued in time of
public danger or emergency as set forth in this chapter.
(‘74 Code, § 132.24) (Ord. 351-A, passed 7-16-68)
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 41: CITY POLICIES
Section
   
41.01   Linked deposit program
   
41.02   Insurance proceeds as security for repair or removal of fire damaged
structures
§ 41.01 LINKED DEPOSIT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes a linked deposit program wherein the city,
when possible and according to the conditions and requirements listed in this
section, shall place reduced-rate investments with eligible lenders to be
linked to lower interest loans for eligible small business owners.
   (B)   The city hereby establishes a five member board. Members are: the
Mayor, City Manager, Finance Director, Economic Development Chairperson, and
President of the Business Association. Members shall serve without
compensation.
   (C)   In order to participate in the program, a lending institution must
have at least one branch office located within the city, must have a Memorandum
of Agreement for Deposit of Public Funds on file with the city, must sign the
Lender Application for the city’s linked deposit program, and must agree that
as the principal is paid down by the business, that portion of the funds shall
be available for withdrawal by the city, quarterly or semiannually.
   (D)   In order for a small business to be eligible for consideration for the
city’s linked deposit program, it must, as a prerequisite, meet the following:
      (1)   Complete the city’s and financial institution’s application for
participation in the program;
      (2)   Forward a completed plan of improvements to the city;
      (3)   The small business must be retaining or creating jobs within the
city;
      (4)   The small business shall be organized for profit; and
      (5)   Improve facade appearance according to specification of committee.
   (E)   Once the business applicant has fulfilled the above requirements, and
the eligible lender has forwarded a completed application to the city, the City
Manager and Finance Director shall evaluate the application along with lender
to determine if the business is eligible for the program, whether the city is
financially capable of linking deposits to assist the business, and whether it
is in the city’s best interest to accept the particular applicant. The City
Manager shall then make a recommendation to the City Council. No such link
deposit application shall be approved without an authorizing resolution from
City Council. Upon approval, the Finance Director shall communicate with the
lender to make the necessary deposit. The city shall have the discretion to
deny an application if it determines that the applicant is not eligible or if
the city is not financially able to assist the business.
   (F)   The city shall place no more than $25,000 into reduced-rate
investments which are linked to lower interest loans.
   (G)   Each approval linked deposit is valid for two years with two renewal
periods. The initial renewal may be for a two year period. The final renewal
may be for a one year period. No linked deposit shall extend for more than five
years. Any request for renewal shall be made in writing to the City Manager at
least 90 days before the expiration period. Renewal shall be based on the
prerequisites in division (C), and if all conditions have been met, the City
Manager shall renew the linked deposit. All recipients of a linked deposit
shall comply with all city Building and Zoning Codes and the requirements of
the specific lender’s loan. Failure to do so may result in the withdrawal of
city funds from the linked deposit.
(Ord. 99-1299, passed 11-16-99)
§ 41.02 INSURANCE PROCEEDS AS SECURITY FOR REPAIR OR REMOVAL OF FIRE DAMAGED
STRUCTURES.
   The procedures described in R.C. § 3929.86(C) and (D) are hereby authorized
and are to be implemented whereby no insurance company doing business in the
state shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure
located within this municipality unless the applicable provisions of R.C. §
3929.86 are fully complied with. The Fire Chief is hereby designated as the
officer authorized to carry out the duties of R.C. § 3929.86.
(Ord. 16-1800, passed 11-1-16)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
         
50.   SOLID WASTE
CHAPTER 50: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Container requirements; setting out containers
   
50.03   Collection dates
   
50.04   Garbage to be wrapped
   
50.05   Garbage to be placed in containers promptly
   
50.06   Removal of dead animals
   
50.07   Prohibiting the disposal of garbage, refuse, or junk on public ways and
playgrounds
   
50.08   Waste collection fees
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Household composting, see § 153.107
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The residue of combustion of such fuels as wood, coal, coke,
charcoal, and the like.
   COMMERCIAL WASTE. All waste, combustible and noncombustible, arising out of
the operations of business and industry and all other waste not resulting from
the ordinary operations of private residences or households.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, including vegetable and animal offal,
carcasses of dead animals, discarded construction materials, bags and boxes of
household refuse, discarded household appliances, discarded machine and vehicle
parts and yard wastes. Yard wastes and other discarded vegetable matter which
is being composted in a sanitary manner for the purpose of conservation and
soil enrichment shall not be considered to be garbage within the meaning of
this chapter.
('74 Code, § 92.20) (Ord. 197-A, passed 10-20-59; Am. Ord. 91-935, passed 10-2-
90)
§ 50.02 CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS; SETTING OUT CONTAINERS.
   (A)   Containers for the disposal of garbage, refuse and junk resulting from
the ordinary operations of private residences and households shall be of
galvanized iron or other non-rusting material, with tight fitting lids, water
tight, and of such size as to be easily handled by one person or tightly closed
plastic trash bags.
   (B)   Containers for the disposal of commercial waste shall be located on
the premises for which use they are intended and shall not expose the owners of
the adjacent and abutting land nor the general public to unpleasant odors and
sights. All such containers shall be kept tightly closed at all times to
prevent access to the contents by vermin and rodents. Containers intended for
the disposal of commercial waste shall at no time be allowed to overflow onto
the surrounding ground.
('74 Code, § 92.21)
   (C)   Combustible and noncombustible wastes and garbage shall be set out in
proper waste containers no earlier than 3:00 p.m. the day before collection at
such places, on the premises or on the sidewalks adjacent thereto, as specified
in the building code for storage of waste and garbage. Waste containers placed
on the premises or on the sidewalks adjacent thereto shall be promptly removed
therefrom to their usual storage place after the same has been emptied. Waste
containers cannot remain on the sidewalks for more than 24 hours after pickup
of the garbage.
('74 Code, § 92.22)
   (D)   Every household or residence in a building arranged for occupancy by
not more than five families shall provide proper containers for combustible and
noncombustible wastes, sufficient in number for the accumulations between the
dates of regular collections. In any building arranged for occupancy by six or
more families or households, the owner or lessor thereof, or his agent, shall
be responsible to provide the necessary number of containers.
('74 Code, § 92.23)
(Ord. 197-A, passed 10-20-59; Am. Ord. 91-935, passed 10-2-90; Am. Ord. 96-
1194, passed 6-4-96) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.03 COLLECTION DATES.
   The Mayor shall be authorized to arrange date schedules for the public
collection of waste in the various sections of the city.
('74 Code, § 92.24) (Ord. 197-A, passed 10-20-59)
§ 50.04 GARBAGE TO BE WRAPPED.
   Before being deposited in waste containers, parcels of household garbage
shall be drained of moisture and wrapped in paper or other combustible
material. All containers for garbage shall be kept clean and disinfected.
('74 Code, § 92.25) (Ord. 197-A, passed 10-20-59)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 GARBAGE TO BE PLACED IN CONTAINERS PROMPTLY.
   No combustible or noncombustible waste, commercial waste or garbage shall be
allowed to remain exposed on or adjacent to any premises for a longer time than
shall be necessary to remove and deposit the same in proper waste containers.
('74 Code, § 92.26) (Ord. 197-A, passed 10-20-59; Am. Ord. 91-935, passed 10-2-
90) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   The Mayor shall be authorized to order the removal and disposal of carcasses
of any dead animals. The disposal in such cases need not be by incineration,
but both the removal and disposal shall be subject to all regulations of the
Hamilton County Board of Health, and all the regulations applicable thereto. It
shall be the duty of the owner or custodian of any dead animal within six hours
of the death of such animal, to notify the Mayor of such death for the purpose
of securing the removal of the carcass.
('74 Code, § 92.27) (Ord. 197-A, passed 10-20-59)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 PROHIBITING THE DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE, REFUSE, OR JUNK ON PUBLIC WAYS AND
PLAYGROUNDS.
   (A)   As used in this section the word PERSON, includes any individual,
corporation, association, partnership, trustee, lessee, agent, or assign.
   (B)   No person shall place or dispose of in any manner any garbage, waste,
or peelings of vegetables or fruit, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper,
cartons, boxes, parts of automobiles, wagons, furniture, glass, oil, or
anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature along, near, or on any
public street, alley, highway, ditch, or any land adjoining any public road,
highway, or ditch, or on any public playgrounds, unless directed to do so by
public officials on special cleanup days.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to waste properly placed in containers
for collection of waste on scheduled collection days.
('74 Code, § 92.28) (Ord. 361-A, passed 7-3-69)
Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 WASTE COLLECTION FEES.
   (A)   Fees are hereby assessed for refuse collection and curbside recycling
within the limits of the city as follows:
      (1)   Each residential household unit shall be charged a sum per quarter
as established by the City Manager.
      (2)   Each nonresidential unit shall be charged a sum per quarter as
established by the City Manager.
      (3)   Payment is required on or before the date printed on the bill.
      (4)   All units will be billed regardless of occupancy.
      (5)   Residents who have delinquent bills that are not paid within 60
days will be ordered to appear before the Clerk.
   (B)   The city shall bill said fees to the landowners quarterly, or more or
less often as the City Manager may direct.
   (C)   Any bill that has not been paid within the time allowed by the Greater
Cincinnati Water Works shall be subject to late charges in the same amount as
is applied to all late City of Cincinnati consumer's water charges, until the
entire amount due (including accrued late charges) has been paid in full.
   (D)   For all one-to-four family residential properties (that is, land
containing one-to-four residential household units in a common ownership)
Rumpke, Inc. shall be the exclusive agency for refuse collection, unless the
landowner has made other arrangements to which Rumpke, Inc. has given its
consent. However, any such arrangements shall provide for on-site recycling
receptacles, either by means of a separate recycling dumpster or curbside
recycling. If any such arrangement does not provide for such on-site recycling,
then the landowner shall be responsible for such fees as may be imposed by the
city to provide for curbside recycling for the premises. The owners of
residential properties having more than four residential household units in a
common ownership may provide for alternate arrangements for refuse collection,
provided such arrangements shall provide for on-site recycling receptacles,
either by means of a separate recycling dumpster or curbside recycling. If any
such arrangement does not provide for such on-site recycling, then the
landowner shall be responsible for such fees as may be imposed by the city to
provide for curbside recycling for the premises. Upon presentation of proof of
such alternate arrangements, the landowner shall be exempt from the fees
imposed by division (A) above for the duration of such alternative
arrangements, except insofar as fees for recycling are imposed by the city
pursuant to the provisions of this section. Any such recycling charges shall be
subject to the provisions of division (B) above.
   (E)   Installation and screening of any dumpster shall require the prior
approval of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 92-1030, passed 6-2-92; Am. Ord. 92-1047, passed 12-15-92; Am. Ord. 98-
1245, passed 3-17-98; Am. Ord. 00-1312, passed 4-4-00; Am. Ord. 09-1553, passed
7-21-09; Am. Ord. 14-1692, passed 1-7-14)
   (F)   The Finance Director is authorized to annually, before the first day
in September, certify to the County Auditor the names of the property owners
and a description of their lands which are delinquent as to their waste
disposal service charges as levied by this section, or any amendments and any
delinquent charges which have been incurred up to the date of certification,
together with a 10% cost of collections per charge. The Finance Director shall
place the charges upon the tax duplicate for the ensuing December installment
of taxes for collection. The provisions of this division (F) shall not alter in
any way the authority of the Law Director to institute legal proceedings to
enforce collection of existing delinquent accounts or of these delinquencies if
necessary. The Finance Director shall establish written procedures for
notifying property owners of the delinquency and allowing the property owners a
limited period of time to cure the delinquency before the delinquent list is
certified to the County Auditor.
(Ord. 96-1196, passed 7-2-96; Am. Ord. 02-1386, passed 3-19-02; Am. Ord. 03-
1419, passed 4-15-03)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of §§
50.01 through
50.06 inclusive shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine of not
more than $50. Each day that a condition which violates any of the foregoing
sections exists is a separate violation.
('74 Code, § 92.99) (Am. Ord. 91-935, passed 10-2-90)
   (B)   Whoever violates §
50.07 shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (C)   In addition to any law enforcement/police officer of the city, a
representative of the Mt. Healthy Property Maintenance Department is authorized
to issue a citation for violations of the provisions of §§ 50.01 to 50.06.
(Ord. 18-1863, passed 9-18-18)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
73.   MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
      
74.   EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
      
75.   BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
      
76.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
77.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Compliance with order of police officer
   
70.03   Emergency vehicles to proceed cautiously past red or stop signal
   
70.04   Exceptions generally; emergency, public safety and coroner vehicles
exempt
   
70.05   Persons riding or driving animals upon roadways
   
70.06   Prohibitions against pedestrians and slow-moving vehicles on freeways
   
70.07   Use of private property for vehicular travel
   
70.08   Names of persons damaging real property by operation of vehicle to be
provided to owner
   
70.09   Limited access highways; barriers along; vehicles to enter and leave at
designated intersections
   
70.10   Through highways
   
70.11   Officer may remove ignition key
   
70.12   Removal of vehicles after accidents
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.20   Obeying traffic-control devices
   
70.21   Signal lights
   
70.22   Signals over reversible lanes
   
70.23   Ambiguous or non-working traffic signals
   
70.24   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.25   Reserved
   
70.26   Unauthorized signs and signals prohibited
   
70.27   Alteration, defacement, or removal prohibited
   
70.28   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
   
70.29   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
   
70.30   Bicycle symbol signal indications
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Jurisdiction in traffic violations, see §
33.01
   Streets and sidewalks, general regulations, see
Ch. 94
   Unauthorized use of a motor vehicle, see §
131.09
   Unclaimed and abandoned motor vehicles, see
Ch. 95
Statutory reference:
   Local traffic regulations, scope and authority, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see R.C. §§
4511.092 et seq.
   Uniform application and precedence of state traffic laws, see R.C. § 4511.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. §
4501.01 shall apply to this Title, Chapter 98, and the penal laws of the
municipality.
   (B)   For the purpose of this Title and Chapter 98, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR and TRACTION ENGINE. Every self- propelled vehicle
designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no
provision for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used
principally for agricultural purposes.
   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose of
through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared an
ALLEY by the Legislative Authority of the municipality in which the street or
highway is located.
   ARTERIAL STREET OR HIGHWAY. A street or highway primarily used by through
traffic, usually on a continuous route or a street or highway designated as
part of an arterial system.
   AUTOCYCLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.
   BICYCLE. A pedal-powered vehicle upon which a human operator sits, including
an electric bicycle.
   BICYCLE BOX. A designated area on the approach to a signalized intersection,
between an advance motorist stop line and the crosswalk or intersection, that
is intended to provide bicyclists a visible location to wait in front of
stopped motorists during the red signal phase.
   BICYCLE LANE. A portion of a roadway that has been designated for
preferential or exclusive use by bicyclists and is often delineated from the
adjacent general-purpose lanes by longitudinal pavement markings and either a
bicycle lane symbol, words, or signs. The term includes all of the following:
      (1)   A buffer-separated bicycle lane, which is separated from the
adjacent general-purpose lanes by a pattern of standard longitudinal pavement
markings that are wider than a normal or wide-lane pavement marking;
      (2)   A counter-flow bicycle lane, which is a one- directional bicycle
lane that provides a lawful path of travel for bicycles in the opposite
direction from the general traffic on a roadway that otherwise requires the
general traffic to travel in only one direction. A counter-flow bicycle lane is
designated by the traffic control devices used for other bicycle lanes;
      (3)   A separated bicycle lane, which is an exclusive facility for
bicyclists that is located within or directly adjacent to the roadway and is
physically separated from the motor vehicle traffic with a vertical element.
   BICYCLE SIGNAL FACE. A signal face that displays only bicycle symbol signal
indications in accordance with R.C. § 4511.15 that exclusively controls a
bicyclist’s movement from a designated bicycle lane or from a separate
facility, and that displays signal indications that are applicable only to a
bicyclist’s movement.
   BICYCLE SIGNAL SIGN. A sign meant to inform road users that the signal
indications in the bicycle signal face are intended only for bicyclists, and to
inform bicyclists which bicyclist movements are controlled by that bicycle
signal face.
   BIKEWAY. Any road, street, path, or way that in some manner is specifically
designated for bicycle travel, regardless of whether the facility is designated
for the exclusive use of bicycles or if it is shared with other modes of
transportation.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers,
and used for the transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing
arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or funeral car,
other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement,
designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   BUSWAY. A traveled way that is used exclusively by buses.
   CAB-ENCLOSED MOTORCYCLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or
fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured
limousine. CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE does not include any  vehicle that is used
exclusively in the business of funeral directing. (R.C. § 4501.01(LL))
   CHILD CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used
for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or
access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the street or
highway.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of the
roadway, the part of a roadway included within the extension of the lateral
lines of the sidewalk at right angles to the center line;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface, which might be supplemented by contrasting pavement texture, style, or
color;
      (3)   Notwithstanding divisions (1) and (2) of this definition, the term
does not include an area where local authorities have placed signs indicating
no crossing.
   DRIVER or OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control
of a vehicle.
   DRIVEWAY. An access from a roadway to a building, site, or abutting
property.
   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
   ELECTRONIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for
the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing and
combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety fuse matches.
   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial street or highway for through traffic with
full or partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads
separated in grade.
   FARM MACHINERY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
   FREEWAY. A divided multi- lane highway for through traffic with crossroads
separated in grade and with full control of access.
   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse, while
used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon.
   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road
surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper,
mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle designed
for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by which
traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term includes a
beacon, an in-road warning light, a lane-use control signal, and a traffic
control signal. The term does not include a power-operated sign, steadily
illuminated pavement marker, gate, flashing light signal, warning light, or
steady burning electric lamp.
   HYBRID BEACON. A special type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a
dark mode where no indications are displayed between periods of operation and,
when operated, displays both steady and flashing highway traffic signal
indications. The term includes both of the following:
      (1)   An emergency- vehicle hybrid beacon used to warn and control
traffic at an otherwise unsignalized location to assist authorized emergency
vehicles in entering or crossing a street or highway;
      (2)   A pedestrian hybrid beacon used to warn and control traffic at an
otherwise unsignalized location to assist pedestrians in crossing a street or
highway at a marked crosswalk.
   IN-ROAD WARNING LIGHT. A special type of highway traffic signal that is
installed in the roadway surface to warn road users that they are approaching a
condition on or adjacent to the roadway that might not be readily apparent and
might require the road users to reduce speed or come to a complete stop.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley, driveway,
or site roadway open to public travel with a public roadway or highway does not
constitute an intersection, unless the public roadway or highway at the
junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways separated by a median, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection if the opposing left-turn paths
cross and there is sufficient interior storage for the design vehicle. As used
in this division, “design vehicle” means the longest vehicle authorized under
R.C. § 5577.05 to operate on that roadway without a permit.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a highway traffic signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition:
         (a)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk is designated on the
roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
   LANE-USE CONTROL SIGNAL. A signal face or comparable display on a full-
matrix changeable message sign that displays indications to permit or prohibit
the use of specific lanes of a roadway or a shoulder where driving is sometimes
authorized or to indicate the impending prohibition of such use.
   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LIMITED DRIVING PRIVILEGES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal, and other local board or body
having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and laws of
this state.
   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. Means a device weighing less than 100 pounds
that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power, and has
an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles per hour
when propelled by the electric motor.
   MEDIAN. The portion of a highway separating opposing directions of the
traveled way or the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way. The median excludes turn
lanes. The width of a median may be different between intersections,
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE OR MOTOR SCOOTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4501.01.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except motorized
bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”, “autocycle”, “cab-
enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or
one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled, and
that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic centimeters
piston displacement that produces not more than one brake horsepower and is
capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater than 20 miles per
hour on a level surface. The terms do not include an electric bicycle.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used by,
a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight
miles per hour.
   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that has
two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
   NATURAL RESOURCES OFFICER. An officer appointed pursuant to R.C. § 1501.24.
   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
   PARKING or PARKED. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road, alley,
highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a driver, but
does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person on foot, in a motorized or non- motorized wheelchair,
or using another equivalent device, such as skates or a skateboard. The term
includes a personal delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the
context clearly suggests otherwise.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing vehicle by
means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing
vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads
such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1) A violation of R.C. §§ 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132, 4511.16,
4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.452,
4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511, 4511.53,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61,
4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71, 4511.711,
4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78, or 4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of R.C. §§ 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) to (D), or 4511.74
(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 to 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated;
      (4)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
      (5)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in division (1),
(2), (3), or (4) of this definition.
   PRIVATE ROAD. Every way or place in private ownership used for vehicular
travel by the owner, and those having express or implied permission from the
owner, but not by other persons.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE, shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails or tracks
placed principally on a private right- of-way.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a train.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a
distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes RIDESHARING
ARRANGEMENTS known as carpools, vanpools, and buspools.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path;
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, RIGHT-OF- WAY includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of- way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state,
county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel and parking lanes, not including the berm, sidewalk, or
shoulder, even if the berm, sidewalk, or shoulder is used by a person operating
a bicycle or other human-powered vehicle. If a highway includes two or more
separate roadways, the term means any such roadway separately but not all such
roadways collectively.
   ROUNDABOUT. A circular intersection with a yield control at each entry,
which permits a vehicle on the circulatory roadway to proceed, with deflection
of the approaching vehicles counter-clockwise around a central island.
   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United States
mail on a rural mail delivery route.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by adequate
signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers that
is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function. The term does not include any of the following:
      (1)   A bus operated by a municipally owned transportation system, a mass
transit company operating exclusively within the territorial limits of a
municipal corporation, or within such limits and the territorial limits of
municipal corporations immediately contiguous to such municipal corporation,
nor a common passenger carrier certified by the public utilities commission
unless such bus is devoted exclusively to the transportation of children to and
from a school session or a school function;
      (2)   A van or bus used by a licensed child care center or type A family
child care home to transport children from the child care center or type A
family child care home to a school if the van or bus does not have more than 15
children in the van or bus at any time;
      (3)   An alternative vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.76.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own
weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another
vehicle.
   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated
from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within
the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A shared-use path
also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers, users of manual
and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non-motorized
users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is intended to be used
primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar uses,
or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically been
reserved for non-motorized use.
   SHOULDER. A longitudinal area contiguous with the traveled way that is used
for accommodating vehicles that are stopped for an emergency and for lateral
support of base and surface courses; graded for emergency stopping; either
paved or unpaved; and when paved, may be open for part-time travel by some or
all vehicles or may also be available for use by pedestrians or bicycles in the
absence of other pedestrian or bicycle facilities.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines or easements of private
property, that is paved or improved, and is intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SITE ROADWAY OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A roadway or bikeway on site of a
shopping center, office park, airport, school, university, sports arena,
recreational park, or other similar business, government, or recreation
facility that is publicly or privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without full-time access restrictions. The term does not include a
roadway where access is restricted at all times by gates or guards to
residents, employees, or other specifically authorized persons, a parking area,
a driving aisle within a parking area, or a private highway-rail grade
crossing.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state route
number and so marked.
   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.
   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop
signs are erected.
   STOPPING or STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. A general term for denoting a public way for purposes of
travel by vehicles and vulnerable road users, including the entire area within
the right-of-way.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. § 4511.65, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel
any highway or site roadway open to public travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, channelization
device, or other device that uses colors, shapes, symbols, words, sounds, or
tactile information for the primary purpose of communicating a regulatory,
warning, or guidance message to road users on a street, highway, site roadway
open to public travel, pedestrian facility, bikeway, or pathway.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. A highway traffic signal placed at an intersection,
movable bridge, fire station, mid-block crosswalk, alternating one-way sections
of a single lane road, private driveway, or other location that requires
conflicting traffic to be directed to stop and permitted to proceed in an
orderly manner. The term includes a vehicular signal indication, a pedestrian
signal indication, and a bicycle symbol signal indication. The term does not
include an emergency-vehicle hybrid beacon or a pedestrian hybrid beacon.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
wholly on its own
structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including any vehicle when
formed by or operated as a combination of a semitrailer and a vehicle of the
dolly type, such as that commonly known as a trailer dolly, a vehicle used to
transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials between a
local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or towed on a street
or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and a vehicle designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more than 25 miles per hour.
   TRAIN. One or more locomotives coupled, with or without cars, that operates
on rails or tracks and to which all other traffic is required by law to yield
the right-of-way at highway-rail grade crossings.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and
used to carry property.
   TWO-STAGE BICYCLE TURN BOX. A designated area at an intersection that is
intended to provide bicyclists a place to wait for traffic to clear before
proceeding in a different direction of travel.
   TYPE A FAMILY CHILD CARE HOME. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. §
5104.01.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
   VEHICLE. Every device, including a bicycle, motorized bicycle and an
electric bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be
transported or drawn upon a highway. The term does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or
any device that is moved by human power.
   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE. A vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
   WILDLIFE OFFICER. An officer designated pursuant to R.C. § 1531.13.
(R.C. § 4511.01)
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)    Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall
be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact
finds by proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the
offender was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
 
      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating
division (B) of this section and division (C)(5)(a) of this section applies,
the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct
for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (B) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (D)    In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(A) of this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been
found guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension
as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving
privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any
portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      MOVING VIOLATION has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      POLICE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
Cross-reference:
   Resisting arrest, see §
136.08
§ 70.03 EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY PAST RED OR STOP SIGNAL.
   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.03) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 EXCEPTIONS GENERALLY; EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONER VEHICLES
EXEMPT.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §§
73.01 and
73.011, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02, and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. §§ 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35,
4511.66, or 4513.02 or R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   As used in this section, ENGAGED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF OFFICIAL DUTIES
includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the manufacturer or
vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway maintenance vehicle,
equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(R.C. § 4511.04)
   (E)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
   (F)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, and
4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to
a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle
in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
§ 70.05 PERSONS RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAYS.
   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST PEDESTRIANS AND SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES ON FREEWAYS.
   (A)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance;
      (2)    Occupy any space within the limits of the right- of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-driven
cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an
agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works
or official duties.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.051) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Designation of a freeway, see R.C. § 4511.011
§ 70.07 USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR VEHICULAR TRAVEL.
   The provisions of this traffic code do not prevent the owner of real
property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from
requiring additional conditions to those specified in this traffic code, or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to the owner.
(R.C. § 4511.08)
§ 70.08 NAMES OF PERSONS DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY BY OPERATION OF VEHICLE TO BE
PROVIDED TO OWNER.
   (A)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4501.01.
   (B)   If damage is caused to real property by the operation of a motor
vehicle in, or during the, violation of any section of the Revised Code or of
any municipal ordinance, the law enforcement agency that investigates the case,
upon request of the real property owner, shall provide the owner with the names
of the persons who are charged with the commission of the offense. If a request
for the names is made, the agency shall provide the names as soon as possible
after the persons are charged with the offense.
   (C)   The personnel of law enforcement agencies who act pursuant to division
(B) of this section in good faith are not liable in damages in a civil action
allegedly arising from their actions taken pursuant to that division. Political
subdivisions and the state are not liable in damages in a civil action
allegedly arising from the actions of personnel of their law enforcement
agencies if the personnel have immunity under this division.
(R.C. § 2935.28)
§ 70.09 LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS; BARRIERS ALONG; VEHICLES TO ENTER AND LEAVE AT
DESIGNATED INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall cut, injure, remove, or destroy
any fence or other barrier designed and erected to prevent traffic from
entering or leaving a limited access highway without the permission of the
Director of Transportation, except in a case of emergency where life or
property is in danger. No person, firm or corporation shall cause a vehicle of
any character to enter or leave a limited access highway at any point other
than intersections designated by the Director for such purposes, except in a
case of emergency where life or property is in danger.
(R.C. § 3767.201)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
§ 70.10 THROUGH HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs, or highway traffic signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no highway traffic signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under the Director’s jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs
or removes a stop sign under this division, the Director shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or highway
traffic signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no highway
traffic signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (C)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (D)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or highway traffic signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05)
§ 70.12 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (B)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(A) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (A) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         (b)   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         (c)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d) of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         (d)   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (C)   As used in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:
      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, university campus police department, park district police force, or
township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         (b)   A state highway patrol trooper;
         (c)   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         (d)   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions (a) to (c) of this definition;
         (e)   A natural resources officer or a wildlife officer.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (D)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (E)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (D) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (F)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (G)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (F) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.20 OBEYING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(R.C. § 4511.12(A))
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (C) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (C)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless of
the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (D)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (E)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.
(R.C. § 4511.121(A)-(C), (E))
   (F)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 4549.081(B))
   (G)   (1)    Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity
is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is
subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.081(C)) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Traffic-control devices to conform to the state manual and specifications,
see R.C. § 4511.11
   Placing traffic-control devices on state highways, permission required, see
R.C. § 4511.10
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. § 4511.09
§ 70.21 SIGNAL LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (A)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-turn
movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u- turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u- turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (B)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing arrow
movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will be
exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (C)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (C)(1), (C)(2), and (C)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         (b)   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one- way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (D)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (E)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination
with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such
movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same
time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or
making a u- turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right- of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (F)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right- of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)    When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
      (4)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing red arrow signal indication and if intending to turn in the direction
indicated by the arrow, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there
is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
   (G)   Transit vehicle signal indication.
      (1)   Light rail and mass transit system bus traffic, on an approach to
an intersection from a designated busway or other designated transit vehicle
lane or tracks shall do all of the following:
         (a)   Stop when facing a steady horizontal white line;
         (b)   Proceed straight ahead when facing a steady vertical white line;
         (c)   Only turn or proceed left when facing a steady diagonal white
line that begins in the lower right corner and angles up and to the left;
         (d)   Only turn or proceed right when facing a steady diagonal white
line that begins in the lower left corner and angles up and to the right;
         (e)   Prepare to stop when facing a flashing vertical white line.
      (2)   As used in division (G)(1) of this section, “mass transit system”
and “bus” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.78.
   (H)   In the event an official highway traffic signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (I)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 SIGNALS OVER REVERSIBLE LANES.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by highway traffic signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right- of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
   (B)   A steady yellow “X” means that the lane over which the signal
indication is located is about to be closed to vehicle traffic in that
direction and will be followed by a steady red “X” signal indication, either
within the same signal face or in a downstream signal face.
   (C)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow means that the lane over which
the signal indication is located is open to traffic making a left turn from
either direction of travel, but not for through travel.
   (D)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow means that the lane over which
the signal indication is located is open to traffic making a left turn in that
direction, without opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (E)   A steady red “X” means that the lane over which the signal indication
is located is closed to vehicle traffic in the direction viewed by the road
user.
(R.C. § 4511.131) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 AMBIGUOUS OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right- of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right- of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.132) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.24 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk,” or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (A)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (B)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don't
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (C)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (E)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(R.C. § 4511.14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.25 RESERVED.
§ 70.26 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.27 ALTERATION, DEFACEMENT, OR REMOVAL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper
with a manhole cover.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (3) of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (3) of this section causes
serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17)
§ 70.28 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (A)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE means any sign,
highway traffic signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (B)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (C)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.29 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal,
including a snow plow, when it is owned by a political subdivision and operated
by an employee of that political subdivision.
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71(A)(1), (A)(12),
(A)(14), and (A)(19).
      PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE. A device that, if activated by a
person, is capable of changing a highway traffic signal to green out of
sequence.
      PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1),
(E)(3), and (E)(4).
   (B)   Except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) of this section:
      (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of the highway traffic signal.
   (C)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons:
      (1)   A peace officer;
      (2)   A state highway patrol trooper;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle;
      (4)   The authorized employee operator of a highway maintenance vehicle.
   (D)   Division (B)(2) of this section does not apply under either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   When a person listed in divisions (C)(1) to (C)(3) of this section
is responding to an emergency call;
      (2)   When a person listed in division (C)(4) of this section is
responding to an emergency level two or level three weather event.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.031)
§ 70.30 BICYCLE SYMBOL SIGNAL INDICATIONS.
   Bicycle symbol signal indications have the following meanings:
   (A)   A steady green bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists are
permitted to enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the
lane- use arrow displayed on the bicycle signal sign that is located
immediately adjacent to the bicycle signal face. Bicyclists proceeding into the
intersection during the display of the indication shall yield the right-of-way
to both of the following:
      (1)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
      (2)   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
   (B)   A steady yellow bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists are
warned that the related green movement is being terminated and that a steady
red bicycle signal indication will be displayed immediately thereafter when
bicyclists shall not enter the intersection. The provisions governing bicyclist
operations under the movement being terminated continue to apply while the
steady yellow bicycle signal indication is displayed.
   (C)   (1)   A steady red bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the lane-
use arrow displayed on the bicycle signal sign that is located immediately
adjacent to the bicycle signal face. Unless the bicyclist is entering the
intersection to make another movement permitted by another bicycle symbol
signal indication, the bicyclist shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but
if there is no stop line, shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, shall stop before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a green bicycle
signal indication to proceed is displayed.
      (2)   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a turn
on red, bicyclists facing a steady red bicycle signal indication are permitted
to enter the intersection to turn right if there are no approach lanes for
motor vehicle traffic to their right. The right to proceed with the turn is
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
   (D)   A flashing green bicycle signal indication and a flashing yellow
bicycle signal indication have no meaning and shall not be used.
   (E)   A flashing red bicycle signal indication means that bicyclists shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, shall stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there
is no crosswalk, shall stop at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where
the bicyclists have a view of approaching traffic on that roadway before
entering the intersection. The right to make the movement indicated by the
lane-use arrow displayed on the bicycle signal sign that is located immediately
adjacent to the bicycle signal face is subject to the provisions that are
applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
(R.C. § 4511.15)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which no
penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99)
   (B)   Violations committed while distracted.
      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division (B)
(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         (a)   “Distracted” means doing either of the following while operating
a vehicle:
            1.   Using an electronic wireless communications device, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.204, in violation of that section.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         (b)   “Distracted” does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C. §
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (c)   “Distracted” does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (B)(1)(c):
            UTILITY means an entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D),
(E), or (G).
            UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE means a vehicle owned or operated by a
utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than $100 as follows:
         (a)   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (B) of this section.
         (b)   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the additional fine of not more
than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (B)(2)(a) of this section. If the offender
elects the course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the
offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender’s payment and such written evidence within 90 days of the
underlying violation that resulted in the imposition of the additional fine
under division (B) of this section.
      (3)    If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket,
citation, or summons for a violation of any of the sections of the Revised Code
listed in division (B)(2) of this section that indicates that the offender was
distracted while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was
a contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the officer shall do
both of the following:
         (a)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
         (b)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
(R.C. § 4511.991)
   (C)   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
130.99.
Cross-reference:
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see §
130.18
   Modification of sentence; community based correctional program, see §
130.20
   Multiple sentences, see §
130.19
Statutory reference:
   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
CHAPTER 71: LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
Motor Vehicle Licensing
   
71.01   Display of license plates or validation stickers; registration
   
71.02   Improper use of noncommercial motor vehicle
   
71.03   Operating motor vehicle ordered immobilized; forfeiture
   
71.04   Operation or sale without certificate of title
   
71.05   Display of certificate of registration
   
71.06   Use of unauthorized plates
   
71.07   Operating without dealer or manufacturer license plates
Driver’s Licenses
   
71.10   Prohibited acts
   
71.11   Permitting minor to operate vehicle prohibited; temporary instruction
permit; probationary license
   
71.12   License required as driver or commercial driver on public or private
property; nonresident exemption
   
71.13   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited
   
71.14   Restriction against owner lending vehicle for use of another
   
71.15   Suspension or revocation of driver’s licenses; license suspended or
revoked by court of record
   
71.16   Display of license
   
71.17   Prohibition against false statements
   
71.18   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction
   
71.19   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license
   
71.20   Driving under OVI suspension
   
71.21   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation;
driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
   
71.22   Failure to reinstate license
Commercial Driver’s Licenses
   
71.25   Definitions
   
71.26   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating
   
71.27   Prohibited acts
   
71.28   Prerequisites to operation of commercial motor vehicle
   
71.29   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
   
71.30   Criminal offenses
   
71.31   Application of federal regulations
   
71.32   Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Commercial driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4506
   Driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4507
   Motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. Chapter 4504
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Proof of financial responsibility required; civil penalties; peace officers
as agents of Registrar of Motor Vehicles; procedures and rules, see R.C. §§
4509.101 et seq.
   Suspension and revocation of driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4510
   Suspension of driver’s licenses; municipal power to suspend for a period not
to exceed time permitted or required by state law, see R.C. § 4510.05
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING
§ 71.01 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS; REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to R.C. § 4503.211, no person who is the owner or
operator of a motor vehicle shall fail to display in plain view on the rear of
the motor vehicle a license plate that displays the distinctive number and
registration mark assigned to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety, including any county identification sticker and any validation sticker
when required by and issued under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a
commercial tractor shall display the license plate on the front of the
commercial tractor.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (3)   Subject to R.C. § 4503.211, no person to whom a temporary motor
vehicle license registration has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle
under R.C. § 4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to
display the temporary motor vehicle license registration in plain view from the
rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or on an external rear surface of
the motor vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license
registration by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.107, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (C)    (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (C)(1) of this section, RESIDENT means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))
   (D)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (E)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (F)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (A) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B), (C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (G)(3)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 IMPROPER USE OF NONCOMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall use a motor vehicle registered as a noncommercial
motor vehicle for other than the purposes set forth in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4503.05)
§ 71.03 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE ORDERED IMMOBILIZED; FORFEITURE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the operation of a
motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that
the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an immobilization
order issued under R.C. § 4503.233.
   (B)   A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a violation of
division (A) of this section shall be criminally forfeited to the state in
accordance with the procedures contained in R.C. § 4503.234.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4503.236)
§ 71.04 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell
at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the
“Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act,” 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. § 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4505.18)
§ 71.05 DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a COMMERCIAL CAR, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01,
when the commercial car is required to be registered under state law, shall,
when operating the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer on the streets,
roads, or highways of this municipality display inside or on the vehicle the
certificate of registration for the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
provided for in R.C. § 4503.19, or shall carry the certificate on the
operator’s person and display it upon the demand of any peace officer.
      (2)   Every person operating a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
required to be registered under state law shall permit the inspection of the
certificate of registration upon demand of any peace officer.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
commercial car certificate of registration violation, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.18) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (2), or (3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and
a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.07 OPERATING WITHOUT DEALER OR MANUFACTURER LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)    No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon a public road or
highway a motor vehicle of a manufacturer or dealer unless the vehicle carries
and displays a placard, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.21, issued by the
Director of Public Safety that displays the registration number of its
manufacturer or dealer.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation of a manufacturer’s or dealer’s motor vehicle, a minor misdemeanor on
a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent
offense.
(R.C. § 4549.10)  Penalty, see §
70.99
DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.10 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended, or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)    In any application for an identification card, driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any statement
required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false or
fictitious.
   (B)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30) Penalty, see §
71.99
Statutory reference:
   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C. §
4510.33
§ 71.11 PERMITTING MINOR TO OPERATE VEHICLE PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION
PERMIT; PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a motor
vehicle upon a highway as an operator, unless the minor has first obtained a
license or permit to drive a motor vehicle under R.C. Chapter 4507.
(R.C. § 4507.31(A))
   (B)   (1)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(3)(b) of this section, no
holder of a temporary instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A)
and that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age
of 18 years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
         (b)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposed of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder
is accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent,
guardian, or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19
(A).
(R.C. § 4507.05(F))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to division (E)(1) of this section, division (C)(1)
(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s
license who is doing either of the following:
            1.    Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and
6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.    Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.    Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         (b)   Division (C)(1)(b) of this section does not apply to the holder
of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.    Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.    Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.    Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or
(C)(1)(b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency
existed that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to
operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this
section or the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (E)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six- month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (E)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section.
   (F)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (G)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (F) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      FAMILY MEMBER of a probationary license holder includes any of the
following:
         (a)   A spouse;
         (b)   A child or stepchild;
         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law;
         (d)   An aunt or uncle;
         (e)   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother- in-law, or a sister-in-law;
         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s
stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      MOVING VIOLATION means any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. MOVING
VIOLATION does not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4513.263.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (I))
   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.31(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C)(1), (C)(4), (E)(3), or (F) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4507.05(I), 4507.071(J))
§ 71.12 LICENSE REQUIRED AS DRIVER OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
PROPERTY; NONRESIDENT EXEMPTION.
   (A)   (1)   (a)    No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle
upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid
driver’s license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicle or a
deputy registrar under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license
issued under R.C. Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding
§
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle
operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
      (3)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority, together
with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (4)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move, or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the peace
corps, volunteers in service to America, or the foreign service of the United
States, is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
such person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (C)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
   (D)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card issued by another state to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a person intends to
operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall
apply for a temporary instruction permit or driver’s license in this state. If
the person fails to apply for a driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit or within 30 days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate
any motor vehicle in this state under a license or permit issued by another
state.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (D)(2)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213)
§ 71.13 EMPLOYMENT OF A MINOR TO OPERATE A TAXICAB PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the definition of CHAUFFEUR in R.C. § 4501.01, no
person shall employ any minor for the purpose of operating a taxicab.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.321)
§ 71.14 RESTRICTION AGAINST OWNER LENDING VEHICLE FOR USE OF ANOTHER.
   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C. §
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4)
or (A)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima-facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this
section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(1), (A)(3) or (A)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C) to (H) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)
(2), or (A)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (C)(3)(c) of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(c) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from
the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.15 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE; LICENSE SUSPENDED OR
REVOKED BY COURT OF RECORD.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other
provision of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of any provision of this code that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or non resident operating privileges for the period
of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed
for the violation of the provision of this code shall not exceed the period of
suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the violation of the
provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this code is
substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
   (B)   Whenever a person is found guilty under the laws of this state or any
ordinance of any political subdivision of this state, of operating a motor
vehicle in violation of any such law or ordinance relating to reckless
operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or
independent of all other penalties provided by law, may impose a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(5).
   (C)   Suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall
be concurrent with any period of suspension disqualification under R.C. §§
3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a
commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.
(R.C. § 4510.15) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.16 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.17 PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE STATEMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement to any matter or
thing required by the provisions of this traffic code.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.36) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.18 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (A)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, division (B)
of this section, §
71.21 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code, other than R.C. Chapter
4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which the
person's license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person's
driver's or commercial driver's license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b)2. or (A)(4)(b)3.
of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other
sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (B)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)    No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99,
4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (B)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (B)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (B)(3)
(a) or division (B)(3)(b) of this section.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)(1)
of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of division (B)
(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (C)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point suspension, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a
minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days
of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 71.19 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
registrar of motor vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the registrar, upon a driver's or
commercial driver's license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender's
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the offender’s license was
expired for more than six months at the time of the offense, the court may
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)
(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12)
§ 71.20 DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191, or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation
of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public
roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (3) of this
section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The
court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (C) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         (b)   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender's vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 10 consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The 10-day
mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (C) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization of the offender's
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall
not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring
in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender's name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender's vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that
is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the national
automobile dealers association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed shall be
distributed in accordance with division R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (C)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (B)(1) or (2) of this section unless,
within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written finding on
the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the
offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender will not be
able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (D)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (B)(1),
(2), or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the municipal indigent
drivers alcohol treatment fund under the control of that court, as created by
the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor's
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's
or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under R.C. § 4503.231, on the vehicle
driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver's license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
R.C. § 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding
a commercial driver's license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver's
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.
   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A) of
this section;
         (b)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (A) of this section.
      JAIL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 10, or 30
consecutive days that must be imposed under division (B)(1), (2), or (3) of
this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of this
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (H)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.21 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION;
DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (A)    No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509.
   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (B) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (D)    Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in division (D)(1) to (D)(3) of this section. Whoever
violates division (B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment
of judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (D)(1) to
(D)(3) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(2) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.22 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (A)   No person whose driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident's operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the bureau of motor vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s blood,
breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of alcohol per
the following:
      (1)   100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma;
      (2)   210 liters of breath;
      (3)   100 milliliters of urine.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE.A license issued in accordance with R.C. Chapter
4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor Vehicle
Safety Act of 1986,” 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any motor
vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A
or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act,” 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. § 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that a
person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   DISQUALIFICATION. Means any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person’s
privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. § 391.
   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to which
an individual intends to return.
   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that
authorizes an individual to drive.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in R.C. §
4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, or over-the-counter
medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can
result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.
   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township, or county that has a
population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent federal
census.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state, and a
political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s license that
is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial
motor vehicle.
   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used for breeding,
feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the
truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the
operations of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle accident
occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by death
or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer as the
maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross vehicle
weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight rating of
the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed unit.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as hazardous
under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Part
172, Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin
in 42 C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a substantial
likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury, or a
substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or endangerment.
   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued a
medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or uses any
commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20, except that
mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio services.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of
a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that the
driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor carrier operation is out
of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5.
   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be loaded
onto or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids, mountings,
or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical means.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1) and
(E)(3).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with standards
prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (2)(b) of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially similar law of another state or political subdivision of another
state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         (b)   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         (a)   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         (b)   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or 4511.201 or any substantially
equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of
another state or political subdivision of another state;
         (c)   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         (d)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         (e)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         (f)   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         (g)   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of Columbia.
   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to transport any
liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are either permanently
or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and have an individual
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of
1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial motor vehicle
transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed for
transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   TESTER. Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text from, an
electronic device. Texting includes short message service (SMS), e-mail,
instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
Texting does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor vehicle,
with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because of
traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   UNITED STATES. Means the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-certified
status as described in division R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the ability
of a current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial motor
vehicles under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE. Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the
driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or restrained by a seat belt
that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 393.93 and adjusted in
accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01)
§ 71.26 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011)
§ 71.27 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state, or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of- service order while the person’s driving privilege
is suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07.
      (5)   Knowingly provide false statements or engage in any fraudulent act
related to testing for a commercial driver’s license as required in R.C. §
4506.09.
   (B)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the state Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’
(R.C. § 4506.12(I))
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (C) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.12(J)) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.28 PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) or (C) of this section, the
following shall apply:
      (1)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in
this state unless the person holds, and has in the person’s possession, any of
the following:
         (a)   A valid commercial driver’s license with proper endorsements for
the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or by
another jurisdiction recognized by this state;
         (b)   A valid examiner’s commercial driving permit issued under R.C. §
4506.13;
         (c)   A valid restricted commercial driver’s license and waiver for
farm- related service industries issued under R.C. § 4506.24;
         (d)   A valid commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is accompanied by an
authorized state driver’s license examiner or tester or a person who has been
issued and has in the person’s immediate possession a current, valid commercial
driver’s license and who meets the requirements of R.C. § 4506.06(B).
      (2)   No person’s commercial driver’s license temporary instruction
permit shall be upgraded, and no commercial driver’s license shall be upgraded,
renewed, or issued to a person until the person surrenders to the registrar of
motor vehicles all valid licenses and permits issued to the person by this
state or by another jurisdiction recognized by this state. If the license or
permit was issued by any other state or another jurisdiction recognized by this
state, the Registrar shall report the surrender of a license or permit to the
issuing authority, together with information that a license or permit is now
issued in this state. The Registrar shall destroy any such license or permit
that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person who has been a resident of this state for 30 days or
longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a
commercial driver’s license issued in another jurisdiction.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section applies to any qualified
person when engaged in the operation of any of the following:
      (1)   A farm truck;
      (2)    Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or nonvolunteer
fire company, fire district, joint fire district, or the State Fire Marshal;
      (3)   A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation or emergency
medical service for ill or injured persons;
      (4)   A recreational vehicle;
      (5)   A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an eligible
unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible unit of
local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for the purpose
of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or salting, but
only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver’s license issued
under R.C. Chapter 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial motor vehicle for
these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the employing eligible unit
of local government determines that a snow or ice emergency exists that
requires additional assistance;
      (6)   A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member or uniformed
employee of the armed forces of the United States or their reserve components,
including the Ohio National Guard. This exception does not apply to United
States reserve technicians;
      (7)   A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for nonbusiness
purposes. “Operated for nonbusiness purposes” means that the commercial motor
vehicle is not used in commerce as “commerce” is defined in 49 C.F.R. § 383.5,
as amended, and is not regulated by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923;
      (8)   A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the transportation
of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being used for the
occasional transportation of personal property by individuals not for
compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise;
      (9)   A police SWAT team vehicle;
      (10)   A police vehicle used to transport prisoners.
   (C)   Nothing contained in division (B)(5) of this section shall be
construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule or regulation of this
state concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles.
(R.C. § 4506.03(A) - (C))
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may drive a
commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality if all of the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person has a valid commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit issued by any state or
jurisdiction in accordance with the minimum standards adopted by the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration under the “Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety
Act of 1986,” 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App., for issuance of commercial
driver’s licenses;
      (2)   The person’s commercial driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit is not suspended, revoked, or canceled, and the person has the
appropriate endorsements for the vehicle that is being driven;
      (3)   The person is not disqualified from driving a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (4)   The person is not subject to an out-of-service order;
      (5)   The person is medically certified as physically qualified to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506.
         (a)   A person who submitted a medical examiner’s certificate to the
Registrar in accordance with R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) and whose medical
certification information is maintained in the commercial driver’s license
information system is not required to have the medical examiner’s certificate
in the person’s possession when on duty.
         (b)   A person whose medical certification information is not
maintained in the commercial driver’s license information system shall have in
the person’s possession when on duty the original or a copy of the current
medical examiner’s certificate that was submitted to the Registrar. However,
the person may operate a commercial motor vehicle with such proof of medical
certification for not more than 15 days after the date the current medical
examiner’s certificate was issued to the person.
         (c)   A person who has a medical variance shall have in the person’s
possession the original or copy of the medical variance documentation at all
times while on duty.
   (E)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this
municipality if the person does not meet the conditions specified in division
(D) of this section.
   (F)   Except as set forth in 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.62, 391.67,
and 391.68, no person holding a commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit or a commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter
4506 may drive a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce until the
person is at least 21 years of age.
(R.C. § 4506.05(A) - (C))
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under divisions (D), (E) and (F) of this
section are strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4506.03(D), 4506.05(D))
§ 71.29 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         (a)   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to
and meets the requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non- excepted interstate and shall provide the
Registrar with the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and
each subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from all or
parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant
shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is not
required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         (b)   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and
is subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall
self- certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E)) Penalty, see §
71.99
§ 71.30 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath, or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal
OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191,
or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to
4549.03, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 through 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance
pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)    Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense a controlled substance;
      (14)   Use a commercial motor vehicle in the commission of a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32 or any other substantially equivalent offense established under
federal law or the laws of another state.
(R.C. § 4506.15(A))
   (B)   No person shall refuse to immediately surrender the person’s
commercial driver’s license or permit to a peace officer when required to do so
by R.C. § 4506.17.
(R.C. § 4506.17(H))
   (C)   (1)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority,
any peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating division (A)
of this section without obtaining a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to
believe that a violation of division (A) of this section has been committed and
a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or blood serum,
breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the person to an
appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a test after
being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test that
discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol concentration of
0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol concentration of .048% or
more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol concentration of .056% or
more by urine, the peace officer shall require that the person immediately
surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to the peace officer.
      (2)   As used in this division (C), JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the
limits within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a
warrant under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers
of the State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person
who, in the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C.§§ 4506.15(B), 4506.17(N))
   (E)   The offenses established under division (A) of this section are strict
liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of these
offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4506.15(C))
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
R.C. § 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
§ 71.31 APPLICATION OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. part 383, subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19)
§ 71.32 EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
10 years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (B)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked, or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (C)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
   (D)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision violated is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.99, 4507.99)
Cross-reference:
   For misdemeanor penalty provisions, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Lanes of travel upon roadways
   
72.02   Driving through safety zone
   
72.03   Vehicles traveling in opposite directions
   
72.04   Rules governing overtaking and passing of vehicles
   
72.05   Permission to overtake and pass on the right
   
72.06   Driving to left of center line
   
72.07   Prohibition against driving upon left side of roadway
   
72.08   Hazardous zones
   
72.09   One-way highways and rotary traffic islands
   
72.10   Rules for driving in marked lanes
   
72.11   Space between moving vehicles
   
72.12   Divided roadways
   
72.13   Rules for turns at intersections
   
72.14   U-turns and turning in roadway prohibited
   
72.15   Starting and backing vehicles
   
72.16   Turn and stop signals
   
72.17   Hand and arm signals
   
72.18   Toy vehicles, roller skates, and the like prohibited
Right-of-Way
   
72.20   Right-of-way at intersections
   
72.21   Right-of-way when turning left
   
72.22   Right-of-way at through highways; stop signs; yield signs
   
72.23   Stop at sidewalk area; stop signs on private roads
   
72.24   Right-of-way on public highway
   
72.25   Pedestrian on sidewalk has right-of- way
   
72.26   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
   
72.27   Funeral procession has right-of-way
   
72.28   Pedestrians yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle
   
72.29   Pedestrian on crosswalk has right-of- way
   
72.30   Right-of-way yielded to blind person
   
72.31   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian
Pedestrians
   
72.35   Pedestrian movement in crosswalks
   
72.36   Pedestrian walking along highway
   
72.37   Prohibition against soliciting rides; riding on outside of vehicle
   
72.38   Pedestrian on bridge or railroad crossing
   
72.39   (Reserved)
   
72.40   Intoxicated or drugged pedestrian hazard on highway
   
72.41   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
   
72.42   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks
   
72.43   Low-speed micromobility devices
Grade Crossings
   
72.45   Stop signs at grade crossings
   
72.46   Driving vehicle across railroad grade crossing
   
72.47   Vehicles required to stop at grade crossings
   
72.48   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment crossing railroad tracks
Prohibitions
   
72.55   Obstruction and interference affecting view and control of driver
   
72.56   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion
   
72.57   Driving upon closed highway prohibited
   
72.58   Driving upon sidewalk area or paths exclusively for bicycles
   
72.59   Obstructing passage of other vehicles
   
72.60   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited; approaching
stationary public safety vehicle and certain other vehicles with caution
   
72.61   Driving over unprotected fire hose
   
72.62   Placing injurious material on highway or depositing litter from motor
vehicle
   
72.63   Transporting child not in child- restraint system prohibited
   
72.64   Occupant restraining devices
   
72.65   (Reserved)
   
72.66   Operating motor vehicle while wearing earphones or earplugs
   
72.67   Chauffeured limousines and livery services
   
72.68   Operating traction engine upon improved highway
   
72.69   Texting while driving prohibited
   
72.70   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited
School Buses
   
72.80   Regulations concerning school buses
   
72.81   Violation of regulations; report; investigation; citation; warning
   
72.82   Restrictions on the operation of school buses
   
72.83   School bus inspection
   
72.84   School bus not used for school purposes
   
72.85   Licensing by Department of Public Safety
   
72.86   Registration and identification of school buses
   
72.87   School bus marking
   
72.88   Flashing light signal lamps
   
72.89   Occupant restraining device for operator
Statutory reference:
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right- hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;
         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (A)(2) of this section. This division shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a
left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.25)
§ 72.02 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.60) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 VEHICLES TRAVELING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.26)
§ 72.04 RULES GOVERNING OVERTAKING AND PASSING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (A)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. §
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.27)
§ 72.05 PERMISSION TO OVERTAKE AND PASS ON THE RIGHT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.28)
§ 72.06 DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER LINE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.29)
§ 72.07 PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.30)
§ 72.08 HAZARDOUS ZONES.
   (A)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.31)
§ 72.09 ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.32)
§ 72.10 RULES FOR DRIVING IN MARKED LANES.
   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.33)
§ 72.11 SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division does not prevent overtaking and passing
nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.34)
§ 72.12 DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.35)
§ 72.13 RULES FOR TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right- hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections,
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn
the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by the
markers, buttons, or signs.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.36)
§ 72.14 U-TURNS AND TURNING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) of this section,
no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.37)
§ 72.15 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         (a)   In a rest area;
         (b)   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         (c)   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown
of a motor vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.38)
§ 72.16 TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)    When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.39)
§ 72.17 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (B)    As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.40) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.18 TOY VEHICLES, ROLLER SKATES, AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person on roller skates, or riding in or by
means of any coaster, toy vehicle, or similar device, to go on any roadway
other than the roadway of a play street, except while crossing a highway on a
crosswalk.
('74 Code, § 70.08)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.20 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or
R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.41) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.21 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.42) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.22 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of- way.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.43) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.23 STOP AT SIDEWALK AREA; STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private
road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.431(A))
   (B)   The owner of a private road located in a private residential area
containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at places where the
road intersects with another private road in the residential area, in
compliance with all of the following requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. §
4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road
that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road that they
are entering private property, stop signs have been posted and must be obeyed,
and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers under state law. The
sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be incorporated with the
sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (C)   The provisions of R.C. § 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the
driver of a vehicle on a private road where a stop sign is placed in accordance
with division (B) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road at
an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (D)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (B) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (E)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. §
4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:
      INTERSECTION means:
         (a)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads which join one another at, or approximately at,
right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different
private roads joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
         (b)   Where a private road includes two roadways 30 feet or more
apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such private roads shall be
regarded as a separate intersection.
      OWNER and PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      ROADWAY. Means that portion of a private road improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel and parking lanes, not including the berm,
sidewalk, or shoulder, even if the berm, sidewalk, or shoulder is used by a
person operating a bicycle or other human-powered vehicle. If a private road
includes two or more separate roadways, the term means any such roadway
separately but not all such roadways collectively.
(R.C.§ 4511.432(A) - (C), (E))
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B), 4511.432(D))
   (G)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.431(B)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.24 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON PUBLIC HIGHWAY.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any
place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic
approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.44) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.25 PEDESTRIAN ON SIDEWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right- of-way to any
pedestrian on a sidewalk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.441) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.26 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to, and as close
as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE means a vehicle
used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust
whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (E), whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense. On a second offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and, on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45)
   (E)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (A) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of a report under division (E)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         (b)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (A) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         (c)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may
issue a written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section based on a
report filed under division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         (b)   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(A) of this section based on a report filed under division (E)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (E):
         LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public safety
vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person
sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle used
by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules
of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
§ 72.27 FUNERAL PROCESSION HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles
accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the
daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying
a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any
direction.
   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. §
4511.45 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.451)
§ 72.28 PEDESTRIANS YIELD RIGHT-OF- WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452)
§ 72.29 PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)    When highway traffic signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if
required by R.C. § 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is
upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.46) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.30 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED TO BLIND PERSON.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20°.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (B)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.47) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.31 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (C)    Between adjacent intersections at which highway traffic signals are
in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48) Penalty, see §
70.99
PEDESTRIANS
§ 72.35 PEDESTRIAN MOVEMENT IN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.36 PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG HIGHWAY.
   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially similar municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.37 PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITING RIDES; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance
of a permit to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of
the organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a
vehicle by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in R.C. §
4511.051(A)(1), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit
shall be valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the
permit, in any calendar year. The Legislative Authority also may specify the
locations where contributions may be solicited and may impose any other
restrictions on or requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations
are to be conducted that the Legislative Authority considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in subsection (2) of this division, CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION
means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt
status of the organization pursuant to Internal Revenue Code § 501(c)(3).
   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) to (D) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) or (F) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.51) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.38 PEDESTRIAN ON BRIDGE OR RAILROAD CROSSING.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.39 (RESERVED)
§ 72.40 INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED PEDESTRIAN HAZARD ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.41 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)    Electric personal assistive mobility devices, as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01, may be operated on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths and portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in
accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (C)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS.”
   (E)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park district
commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or board, as applicable.
   (F)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be fined $10;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to imposing
the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) of this section, shall do one of the
following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but not more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.    If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (F)(1)(b)1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
   (G)   As used in this Code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE
means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))
§ 72.42 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ELIGIBLE ENTITY. Means a corporation, partnership, association, firm,
sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. Means an electrically powered device to which
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         (b)   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         (c)   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         (d)   The device is equipped with technology that enables the
operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without
active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active
control or monitoring by a person.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. Means an agent of an eligible entity
who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the navigation
and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not include, with
respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal delivery device,
the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase also does not
include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal delivery
device for a delivery or other service.
   (B)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact
information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a
unique identification number;
         (b)   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         (c)   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (D)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         (a)   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         (b)   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction,
in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by
divisions (C)(1) to (C)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.43 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared- use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   No operator of a low- speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (D)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (F)   Notwithstanding division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low- speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low-speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514) Penalty, see §
70.99
GRADE CROSSINGS
§ 72.45 STOP SIGNS AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   As used in this section, GRADE CROSSING WARNING SYSTEM means the
flashing-light signals, with or without automatic gates together with the
necessary control equipment that is used to inform road users of the approach
and presence of rail traffic at a grade crossing.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
   (C)   (1)   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at a
railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
         (a)   New warning devices that are not grade crossing warning systems
are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were the
only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the new
warning devices.
         (b)   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013, and only
warning devices that are not grade crossing warning devices systems are
installed at the grade crossing.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
   (D)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (B) or (C) of this
section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less than
15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise due
care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.61)
§ 72.46 DRIVING VEHICLE ACROSS RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet, but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train or other on-track equipment.
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered.
         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train or other on-track equipment.
         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or trains,
notwithstanding any highway traffic signal indication to proceed.
         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely
negotiate the crossing.
         (g)   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other on-track equipment.
         (h)   Approaching on-track equipment is emitting an audible signal or
is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
      (2)   (a)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(f) of this section exist at the
crossing.
         (b)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not recklessly proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in division (A)(1)(g) or (A)(1)(h) of this section exist at the
crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
      (2)   In lieu of a fine or jail term for a violation of this section, a
court may instead order the offender to attend and successfully complete a
remedial safety training or presentation regarding rail safety that is offered
by an authorized and qualified organization that is selected by the court. The
offender shall complete the presentation within a time frame determined by the
court, not to exceed 180 days after the court issues the order. The offender
shall notify the court of the successful completion of the presentation. When
the offender notifies the court of the successful completion of the
presentation, the court shall waive any fine or jail term that it otherwise
would have imposed for a violation of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.62)
§ 72.47 VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the operator of
any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting a material or
materials required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 185,
before crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle and,
while so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window and look in
both directions along the track for any approaching train or other on-track
equipment, and for signals indicating the approach of a train or other on-
track equipment, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after
stopping, looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding,
the operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure
there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing and
shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
   (B)   This section does not apply at grade crossings when any local
authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities Commission
requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public Utilities
Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided in R.C. §
4511.63(B).
   (C)   As used in this section:
      BUS. Means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
      EXEMPT CROSSING. Means a highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B)  at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
      SCHOOL VEHICLE. Means any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils
to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79, or
a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63)
§ 72.48 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.
   (A)    No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon
or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with
divisions (A)(1) and (2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped the
person shall listen and look in both directions along such track for any
approaching train or other on-track equipment and for signals indicating the
approach of a train or other on- track equipment, and shall proceed only upon
exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal or crossing gates or a flagperson or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a train or car or other on-track equipment.
   (B)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating, or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.64)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 72.55 OBSTRUCTION AND INTERFERENCE AFFECTING VIEW AND CONTROL OF DRIVER.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 72.56 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      FIFTH WHEEL TRAILER, MOBILE HOME, and TRAVEL TRAILER. Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      MANUFACTURED HOME. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3781.06(C)(4).
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (C)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         (a)   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         (b)   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, “viable communication” includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.701)
§ 72.57 DRIVING UPON CLOSED HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (B)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (B) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 9.60.
      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D))
§ 72.58 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK AREA OR PATHS EXCLUSIVELY FOR BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)    No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an
electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to a law enforcement officer, or
other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, using
an electric bicycle with the motor engaged while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
(R.C. § 4511.711(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 4511.713(A))
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.711(B), 4511.713(B))
§ 72.59 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or trains, notwithstanding any highway traffic signal
indication to proceed.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a bicyclist using a two- stage bicycle
turn box.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.712)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.60 FOLLOWING AN EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC VEHICLE PROHIBITED; APPROACHING
STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.
   (A)   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited. The driver of any
vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle on official
business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle
traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park
the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to
a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer or a firefighter.
(R.C. § 4511.72(A))
   (B)   Approaching stationary public safety vehicle with caution.
      (1)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway
that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
         (b)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described
in division (B)(1)(a) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a
highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so
would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed
with due caution, reduce the speed of the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe
speed for the road, weather, and traffic conditions.
      (2)   This division (B) does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle,
vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle
inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway
maintenance vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of
all persons and property upon the highway.
      (3)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section when so required by division
(B) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.213(A) - (C))
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding § 130.99 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a
person operated a motor vehicle in violation of division (B)(3) of this
section, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall
impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.213(D), 4511.72(B))
   (D)   The offense established under division (B) of this section is a strict
liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this
offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.213(E))  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.61 DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.73) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.62 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails,
or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (B)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles
which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or
upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway
by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
(R.C. § 4511.74(A), (B))
   (C)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (D)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road, or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (E)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture,
glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
(R.C. § 4511.82(A), (B), (D))
   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.74(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82(C)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.63 TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (B)    When any child who is in either or both of the following categories
is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or child care
center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (A) or (B) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (A), (B), or (C)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(C) or (D) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat or an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (H)    This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731, a clinical nurse specialist or certified nurse
practitioner licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4723, or a
chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that
states that the child who otherwise would be required to be restrained under
this section has a physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint
system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining device impossible or
impractical, provided that the person operating the vehicle has safely and
appropriately restrained the child in accordance with any recommendations of
the physician, nurse, or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this section.
   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(1)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $75.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A)-(H), (K), (L))
§ 72.64 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AUTOMOBILE. Any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car, or
truck that is
required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining device for the
operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United States Secretary
of Transportation pursuant to the “National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety
Act of 1966,” 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. § 1392.
      COMMERCIAL TRACTOR, PASSENGER CAR, and COMMERCIAL CAR have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness,
or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or
passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is
occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss to
person or property. TORT ACTION includes a product liability claim, as defined
in R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91, but
does not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or another
agreement between persons.
      VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms set
forth above, VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (C)   Exceptions. Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person
who is required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially similar municipal
ordinance to be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat. Division
(B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is an employee of the
United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery service, during
any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of an automobile to
deliver mail or newspapers to addressees. Divisions (B)(1) and (3) of this
section do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed by a physician
licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor
licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the
person has a physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impractical.
   (D)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (B) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (E)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (B) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (F)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (F)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (B)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action
that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car;
         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (G)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) shall be subject to the penalty
set forth in §
70.99(B).
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (B)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263)
Cross-reference:
   Child restraint systems, see §
72.63
   Installation and sale of seat safety belts, see §
74.33
   School bus operators, restraining devices, see §
72.89
§ 72.65 (RESERVED)
§ 72.66 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE WEARING EARPHONES OR EARPLUGS.
   (A)    As used in this section:
      EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
      EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that are
built into protective headgear.
      EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (C)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84)
§ 72.67 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES AND LIVERY SERVICES.
   (A)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall
not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance with
any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
   (B)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (C)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Chauffeured limousine, motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. § 4503.24
   Proof of financial responsibility, see R.C. § 4509.80
§ 72.68 OPERATING TRACTION ENGINE UPON IMPROVED HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. TRACTION ENGINE or TRACTOR, as used in this section, applies to
all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (B)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (A), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 72.69 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person’s body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person’s duties;
      (3)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person’s motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a highway traffic signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person’s ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person’s body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person’s body.
   (C)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (A) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication device, an
unclassified misdemeanor, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (D)(1)
to (D)(5) of this section.
      (1)   The offender shall be fined, and is subject to a suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in divisions (D)(1)(b), (D)(1)(c), (D)(1)(d),
and (D)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of
not more than $150.
         (b)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         (c)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         (d)    Notwithstanding divisions (D)(1)(a) to (D)(1)(c) of this
section, if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the
violation in a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with
R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law,
shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the
violation under division (D)(1)(a), (D)(1)(b), or (D)(1)(c) of this section, as
applicable.
      (2)   If the offender is in the category of offenders to whom division
(D)(1)(a) of this section applies, in lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under
division (D)(1)(a) of this section and the assessment of points under division
(D)(4) of this section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted
driving safety course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends
and successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender’s driver’s license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court within 90 days of the violation of division (A) of this
section. However, successful completion of the course does not result in a
dismissal of the charges for the violation, and the violation is a prior
offense under divisions (D)(1)(b) and (D)(1)(c) of this section if the offender
commits a subsequent violation or violations of division (A) of this section
within two years of the offense for which the course was completed. This
division does not apply with respect to any offender in the category of
offenders to whom division (D)(1)(b), (D)(1)(c), or (D)(1)(d) of this section
applies.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (D)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (A) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (E)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (F)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person’s body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (A) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator’s electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         (a)   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         (b)   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant
to access the device;
         (c)   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Includes any of the following:
         (a)   A wireless telephone;
         (b)   A text- messaging device;
         (c)   A personal digital assistant;
         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
         (e)   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
         (f)   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed
or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or exchange
information or data.
      An “electronic wireless communications device” does not include a two-way
radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the federal
communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E), or (G).
      UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE FEATURE OR FUNCTION. A feature or function
that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications device
without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the
feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 72.70 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A) of this section shall be fined $150. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (D)    The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (E)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205)
SCHOOL BUSES
§ 72.80 REGULATIONS CONCERNING SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (B) of this section.
   (B)    Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped
or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school
children, persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending
programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate
the visual signals or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading
areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when
children or persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading
at curbside or at buildings when children attending programs offered by head
start agencies are loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and
stop warning sign shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by
the Ohio Administrative Code.
   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) above.
   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed $500. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (A) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty
and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in a trial but instead
must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or clerk of the
court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
      SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program offered
by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a head start
agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce, is painted the
color and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is equipped
with amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any
time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.81 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS; REPORT; INVESTIGATION; CITATION; WARNING.
   (A)   As used in this section, LICENSE PLATE includes but is not limited to
any temporary motor vehicle license registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182
or substantially equivalent law of another jurisdiction.
   (B)   When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has
violated R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
operator shall report the license plate number and general description of the
vehicle and of the operator of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency
exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged violation occurred. The
information contained in the report relating to the license plate number and to
the general description of the vehicle and the operator of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation may be supplied by any person with first-hand
knowledge of the information. Information of which the operator of the school
bus has first-hand knowledge also may be corroborated by any other person.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the report of the alleged violation of R.C. § 4511.75
(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the law enforcement
agency shall conduct an investigation to attempt to determine the identity of
the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. If the
identity of the operator at the time of the alleged violation is established,
the reporting of the license plate number of the vehicle shall establish
probable cause for the law enforcement agency to issue a citation for the
violation of R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. However, if the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency
shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, except in the case of a leased or rented vehicle when the warning
shall be issued to the lessee at the time of the alleged violation.
(R.C. § 4511.751)
§ 72.82 RESTRICTIONS ON THE OPERATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle used for pupil transportation within
this municipality in violation of the rules of the Ohio Department of Education
and Workforce or the Ohio Department of Public Safety. No person, being the
owner thereof, or having the supervisory responsibility therefor, shall permit
the operation of a vehicle used for pupil transportation within this
municipality in violation of the rules of the Ohio Department of Education and
Workforce or the Ohio Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   As used in this section, VEHICLE USED FOR PUPIL TRANSPORTATION means
any vehicle that is identified as such by the Ohio Department of Education and
Workforce by rule and that is subject to O.A.C. Chapter 3301-83.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.76, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.76(C), (H)(2), (I)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.83 SCHOOL BUS INSPECTION.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof,
or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation of, a
school bus within this municipality, unless there is displayed thereon the
decals issued by the state highway patrol bearing the proper date of inspection
for the calendar year for which the inspection decals were issued.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.761, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.761) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.84 SCHOOL BUS NOT USED FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person who is
the owner of a bus that previously was registered as a school bus that is used
or is to be used exclusively for purposes other than the transportation of
children shall operate the bus or permit it to be operated within this
municipality unless the bus has been painted a color different from that
prescribed for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance and painted in such a way that the words “stop” and “school
bus” are obliterated.
   (B)   Any church bus that previously was registered as a school bus and is
registered under R.C. § 4503.07 may retain the paint color prescribed for
school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance if the bus complies with all of the following:
      (1)   The words “school bus” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or obliterated and the
bus is marked on the front and rear with the words “church bus” painted in
black lettering not less than ten inches in height.
      (2)   The automatically extending stop warning sign required by R.C. §
4511.75 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is removed and the
word “stop” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance is covered or obliterated.
      (3)   The flashing red and amber lights required by R.C. § 4511.771 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or removed.
      (4)   The inspection decal required by R.C. § 4511.761 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or removed.
      (5)   The identification number assigned under R.C. § 4511.764 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance and marked in black lettering on
the front and rear of the bus is covered or obliterated.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.762, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.762) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.85 LICENSING BY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (A)   No person, partnership, association, or corporation shall transport
pupils to or from school on a school bus or enter into a contract with a board
of education of any school district for the transportation of pupils on a
school bus without being licensed by the Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.763) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.86 REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof
or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation of a school
bus within this municipality unless there is displayed thereon an identifying
number in accordance with R.C. § 4511.764.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. §§ 4511.63,
4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that
is substantially similar to any of those sections, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.764) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.87 SCHOOL BUS MARKING.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof
or having supervisory responsibility therefor permit the operation of, a school
bus within this municipality unless it is painted national school bus yellow
and is marked on both front and rear with the words “school bus” in black
lettering not less than eight inches in height and on the rear of the bus with
the word “stop” in black lettering not less than ten inches in height.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.77, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend, for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.77) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.88 FLASHING LIGHT SIGNAL LAMPS.
   (A)   Every school bus shall, in addition to any other equipment and
distinctive markings required pursuant to R.C. §§ 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764
and 4511.77, and any substantially similar municipal ordinances, be equipped
with signal lamps mounted as high as practicable, which shall display to the
front two alternately flashing red lights and two alternately flashing amber
lights located at the same level and to the rear two alternately flashing red
lights and alternately flashing amber lights located at the same level, and
these lights shall be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight. The alternately
flashing red lights shall be spaced as widely as practicable, and the
alternately flashing amber lights shall be located next to them.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.771) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.89 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE FOR OPERATOR.
   (A)   On and after May 6, 1986, no person, school board, or governmental
entity shall purchase, lease, or rent a new school bus unless the school bus
has an occupant restraining device, as defined in R.C. § 4513.263, installed
for use in its operator’s seat.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.772) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 73: MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
Section
General Provisions
   
73.01   Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
   
73.011   Implied consent
   
73.012   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence
   
73.02   Driving commercial vehicle with impaired alertness or ability; use of
drugs
   
73.03   Immobilizing or disabling device violation
   
73.04   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles
Reckless Operation
   
73.05   Reckless operation of vehicles
   
73.06   Reckless operation off streets and highways; competitive operation
   
73.07   Operator to be in reasonable control
Speed Regulations
   
73.10   Speed limits
   
73.11   Slow speed or stopping
   
73.12   Emergency vehicles excepted from speed limitation
   
73.13   Street racing, stunt driving and street takeovers prohibited
   
73.14   Speed regulations on bridges
Resisting Officer
   
73.15   Prohibition against resisting officer
   
73.16   Presenting false name or information to officer
Stopping After Accident
   
73.20   Failure to stop after accident
   
73.21   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways
   
73.22   Accident involving damage to realty
   
73.23   Failure to report accident
Statutory reference:
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.01 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality,
if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them.
         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         (j)   Except as provided in division (K) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least 10 nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 10 nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least 10 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least 10 nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least 2 nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               A.    The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least 5 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               B.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 10 nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s w hole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley within this state, the rule is in
effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A
of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the
person’s whole blood, or in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or any other
equivalent offense shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the
officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission
to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate any vehicle within this
municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (C)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged
with a violation of division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) and a violation of division
(B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section, but the person may not be convicted
of more than one violation of these divisions.
   (D)   (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for a violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood, oral
fluid, or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined
in R.C. § 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with
any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence
of the defendant.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) or
(B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the presence and concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, urine, oral fluid, or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged
violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three
hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified
in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect
the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period
of time during which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as
described in that section. The court may admit evidence on the presence and
concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as described
in this division when a person submits to a blood, breath, urine, oral fluid,
or other bodily substance test at the request of a law enforcement officer
under R.C. § 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a
blood or urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a
physician, a registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an
emergency medical technician- paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath, oral fluid, or urine
specimens. A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse
to withdraw blood under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the
physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood.
The bodily substance withdrawn under this division (D)(1)(b) shall be analyzed
in accordance with methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual
possessing a valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(b) of this section, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN- PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (A)(1)(b), (A)(1)
(c), (A)(1)(d) and (A)(1)(e) of this section or less than the applicable
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance specified for a violation of division (A)(1)(j) of this
section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in
determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. This division does not
limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (B) of this
section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (D)(1)(b) of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician,
chemist, or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical
test or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under §
73.011, shall state that the person may have an independent test performed at
the person’s expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical
test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the
chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   (a)   As used in division (D)(4)(b) and (D)(4)(c) of this section,
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. §
105.
         (b)    In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (D)(4)(b)1. or (D)(4)(b)2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         (c)   Division (D)(4)(b) of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (D)(4)(b) of this section.
   (E)   (1)   Subject to division (E)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (A)(1)(b),
(A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), (A)(1)(e), (A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g), (A)(1)(h), (A)(1)(i), or
(A)(1)(j) or (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section or for an
equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions,
a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director of a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         (d)   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (E)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (E)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician- paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (F)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-
INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 4765.01.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (A)(1)(a) through
(A)(1)(i) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (A)(1)(j) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) of this section:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(b), (G)(1)(c),
(G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of this section, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to
all of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i)
through (G)(1)(a)(iv).
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (A) of this section
or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) through (G)(1)(b)(v).
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (A) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) through (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (A) of
this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years
of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or
more violations of that nature, or an offender who previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C.
§ 2941.1413, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
         (e)   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. §
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   (a)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         (b)   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (G) of
this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (A) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of this section is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (G)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division
(G) of this section.
      (8)    A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement
agency for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or
tests administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) of this section.
         (b)   The test or tests were of the offender’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, oral fluid, or urine.
         (c)   The test or tests indicated that the offender had one of the
following at the time of the offense:
            1.   A prohibited concentration of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance in the offender’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine;
            2.   A drug of abuse or a metabolite of a drug of abuse in the
offender’s oral fluid.
      (9)   A court may warn any person who is convicted of or who pleads
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or an equivalent offense
that a subsequent violation of this section or an equivalent offense that
results in the death of another or the unlawful termination of another’s
pregnancy may result in the person being guilty of aggravated vehicular
homicide under R.C. § 2903.06. The court may warn the person of the applicable
penalties for that violation under R.C. §§ 2903.06 and 2929.142.
      (10)   As used in division (G) of this section, ELECTRONIC MONITORING has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as
follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege form the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021
and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition
interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of
suspension as authorized under R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited
driving privileges under R.C. § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term
imposed under division (H)(1) of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (A)
of this section or other equivalent offenses, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for
the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to § 130.99
(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing
the violation of division (B) of this section.
   (I)   (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment
program under this section unless the treatment program complies with the
minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. Chapter
5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s indigent drivers’ alcohol
treatment fund.
   (J)   If a person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section or R.C. §
4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person’s trial or sentence,
the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.
   (K)   Division (A)(1)(j) of this section does not apply to a person who
operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount
specified in that division, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (L)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in division (A)(1)(j) of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the
same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.
   (M)   All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to this section. If the
meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of the
same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as defined in R.C.
§ 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (M))
   (N)   As used in this section, §
73.011 and §
73.012:
      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION, CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING, JAIL,
MANDATORY PRISON TERM, MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION, PRISON TERM, and
SANCTION have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      DRUG OF ABUSE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A)
         (b)   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;
         (c)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender
was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         (d)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or R.C. § 2903.08 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those
divisions;
         (e)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4), R.C. §
2903.08(A)(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a
case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (f)   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A)
         (g)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         (h)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         (i)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or R.C. § 1547.11(A).
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. Means an equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         (a)   A violation described in division (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of
the definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (N);
         (b)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         (c)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 6, 10, 20, 30,
or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)(b), or
(G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of that
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      MUNICIPAL OVI ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL OVI OFFENSE mean any municipal
ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting
a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
(R.C. § 4511.181)
Cross-reference:
   Endangering children, see §
135.14
   Power to suspend or revoke driver’s license, see §
33.05
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Trial judge to suspend or revoke driver’s license, see R.C. § 4507.16
§ 73.011 IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section:
         ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Means any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5119.01.
         PHYSICAL CONTROL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)    Any person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking within this
municipality or who is in physical control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have
given consent to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine to determine the alcohol, drug of
abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
oral fluid, or urine if arrested for a violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance.
      (3)   The chemical test or tests under division (A)(2) of this section
shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having
reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control
of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance identified in
division (A)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by which the
officer is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Any person who is dead or unconscious, or who otherwise is in a
condition rendering the person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed to have
consented as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, and the test or tests
may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 to 313.16.
      (5)   (a)    If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance and if the person
if convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c),
(d), or (e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit,
and the person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine for the purpose of
determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine. A law enforcement officer who
makes a request pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical
test or tests is not required to advise the person of the consequences of
submitting to, or refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required
to give the person the form described in division (C) of this section, but the
officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person
refuses to take a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable
means are necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise
the person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. Divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) of
this section apply to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant
to this division.
         (b)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (A)(5)(a) of this section, the law enforcement
officer who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to
this division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, the arresting
law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance with this section to
any person under arrest for a violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), §
73.012, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance. The officer shall
give that advice in a written form that contains the information described in
division (C) of this section and shall read the advice to the person. The form
shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest
and read to the person by the arresting officer. One or more persons shall
witness the arresting officer’s reading of the form, and the witnesses shall
certify to this fact by signing the form. The person must submit to the
chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of the arresting officer,
within two hours of the time of the alleged violation and, if the person does
not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour time limit, the failure to
submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.
   (C)    Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, if a person is
under arrest as described in division (B) of this section, before the person
may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to determine the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine, the arresting officer shall read the
following form to the person:
      “You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state
law or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
      “If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio
driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a
fee to have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of OVI or
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or municipal law
within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state OVI, and, if
you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased penalties if you
subsequently are convicted of the state OVI.
      (Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any
chemical test required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set
by law, your Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you
will have to pay a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
      If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test
taken at your own expense.”
   (D)   If the arresting law enforcement officer does not ask a person under
arrest as described in division (B) of this section or division (A)(5) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit of the person and immediately forward it
to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the
arrested person is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is
not in the person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it
to the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after
the arrest, and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the
license or permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge.
Upon receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
   (E)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (A)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (B) of this section
to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, if
the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the person
refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of § 73.012, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the test results
indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a
metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, the arresting
officer shall do all of the following:
         (a)   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the person
that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person, the
person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension will last at
least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which will be held
within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the issuance of a
citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the suspension at the
initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30 days after that
initial appearance;
         (b)   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
         (c)   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
         (d)   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
            1.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OVI ordinance or for being
in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance;
            3.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that the
officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests, advised
the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of submitting
to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the form
described in division (C) of this section;
            4.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged
offense.
            5.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (A)(5)
of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
      (2)    Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
arrested for a violation of §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who
is asked by a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests
under this section, and who submits to the test or tests, regardless of the
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance that the test results indicate is present in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, oral fluid, or urine.
   (F)   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that is
completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the arrest,
or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person by
regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report, but
not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give an
unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest provided the
report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is sworn
to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48 hours
after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy of the
sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the
charge for which the person was arrested.
   (G)   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this section
is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it contains. It
shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the information and
statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197 relative to any
suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege that results from the arrest covered by the
report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
   (H)   (1)   A suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under this section for the
time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) is effective immediately from the
time at which the arresting officer serves the notice of suspension upon the
arrested person. Any subsequent finding that the person is not guilty of the
charge that resulted in the person’s being requested to take the chemical test
or tests under division (A) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (2)   If a person arrested for operating a vehicle in violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other municipal OVI
ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle in violation of §
73.012 or R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
regardless of whether the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. §
4511.191(B) or (C) or R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the
charge resulting from the arrest shall be held within five days of the persons’
arrest or the issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any
continuance granted by the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the
issues specified in that section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
Statutory reference:
       Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. §
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and indigent drivers
alcohol treatment funds, see R.C. § 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
§ 73.012 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, PHYSICAL CONTROL means being in the driver’s
position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the vehicle’s
ignition key or other ignition device.
   (B)   No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the time of
the physical control, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), or (A)(1)(e).
      (3)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, the person has
a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j).
   (C)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect what were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         (b)   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         (c)   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (C)(1)(a) or (b) of this section and if the testimony or evidence is
admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or
evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact
considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court,
in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (C)(1) of this section.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having physical control of
a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In
addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
   (E)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is in
physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the
person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds
the amount specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j) if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194)
§ 73.02 DRIVING COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WITH IMPAIRED ALERTNESS OR ABILITY; USE OF
DRUGS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue,
illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive such
vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s
ability or alertness.
   (B)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a
driver in any such condition described in division (A) of this section to drive
such vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, or
4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79)
§ 73.03 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44)
§ 73.04 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER- SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section, LOW-SPEED VEHICLE, MINI- TRUCK, UNDER-SPEED
VEHICLE, and UTILITY VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         (a)   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (F) of this section;
         (b)   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor- driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
   (F)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under- speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or highways to submit the
vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (G)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini- trucks on its streets and
highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
   (H)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (G) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.112.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (I)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (I) and divisions (F) and
(G) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (I) shall be penalized as provided
in division (E) of this section.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
RECKLESS OPERATION
§ 73.05 RECKLESS OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.20)
Cross-reference:
   License suspension, see §
71.15
§ 73.06 RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; COMPETITIVE OPERATION.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of
vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property
knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.201)
Cross-reference:
   License suspension, see §
71.15
§ 73.07 OPERATOR TO BE IN REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202)
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 73.10 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface, and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (B)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   (a)   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess
and while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (B)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of- way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (B)(10) and (B)(11) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic- Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         (b)   As used in this section, SCHOOL means all of the following:
            1.   Any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16;
            2.   Any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed
with the Ohio Department of Education and Workforce in compliance with O.A.C. §
3301-35-08, a copy of the school’s report for the parents of the school’s
pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for
nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to
the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a school
zone;
            3.   Any special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of such written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs;
            4.   Any preschool education program operated by an educational
service center that is located on a street or highway with a speed limit of 45
miles per hour or more, when the educational service center in writing requests
that either the Director of Transportation or the County Engineer, as
applicable based on who has jurisdiction of the street or highway, to create a
school zone at the location of that program. Upon receipt of such a written
request, the Director of Transportation or the County Engineer shall create a
school zone at that location by erecting the appropriate signs.
         (c)   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (B)(1)(c)1. through (B)(1)(c)3.
below shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (B)
(1)(a) and (B)(1)(c) of this section.
         (e)   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the meaning given that
term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         (f)   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the Legislative
Authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic,
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         (g)   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts, and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (B)(4) and (B)(6) of this section;
      (4)    Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality, except as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)
(14), (B)(15), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (B)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (B)(9) and (B)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (B)
(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour on freeways with paved shoulders inside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (B)(14) and (B)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty miles per hour on rural expressways with traffic control
signals and on all portions of rural divided highways, except as provided in
divisions (B)(13) and (B)(14) of this section;
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all rural expressways without traffic
control signals;
      (14)   Seventy miles per hour on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt, except as provided in division (B)(16) of this section;
      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways without traffic control signals in urbanized areas.
   (C)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)
(8) and (B)(9) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (D) of this section. No
person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the
same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section
may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and
(B)(16) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (B)(12) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (B)(13) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (B)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(B)(14) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (B)(14) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (E)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (C) of this section also the speed which division (B)(1)(a), (B)
(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (F)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (D) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4),
(B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of this section, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (D) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6),
(B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to,
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of
conviction under such division and dismiss the charge under division (D) of
this section. If it finds no violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3),
(B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the
evidence supports a conviction under division (D) of this section.
   (G)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (D) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (H)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.
   (I)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL BUS means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      DIVIDED. Means a roadway having two or more travel lanes for vehicles
moving in opposite directions and that is separated by a median of more than
four feet, excluding turn lanes.
      INTERSTATE SYSTEM has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
      NONCOMMERCIAL BUS includes but is not limited to a school bus, or a motor
vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated with a
charitable or nonprofit organization.
      OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate system
and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or group
of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      RURAL. Means an area outside urbanized areas and outside of a business or
urban district, and areas that extend within urbanized areas where the roadway
characteristics remain mostly unchanged from those outside the urbanized areas.
      URBANIZED AREA. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O))
   (J)   Speed limits for private roads.
      (1)   The owner of a private road located in a private residential area
containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed limit on the road by
complying with all of the following requirements:
         (a)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is
indicated by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be
seen by an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the
basic speed limit sign included in the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;
         (b)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road
that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road that they
are entering private property, a speed limit has been established for the road,
and the speed limit is enforceable by law enforcement officers under state law.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road as provided
in division (J)(1) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit
established and posted pursuant to division (J)(1).
      (3)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (J)(1) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a
person violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of
the means described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of
determining the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person
with exceeding the speed limit.
      (4)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for
violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division
(J)(1) of this section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   As used in this division (J):
         OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to the
real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
         PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Does
not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
(R.C. § 4511.211(A) - (E))
   (K)   Penalties.
      (1)   Divisions (A) through (I).
         (a)   A violation of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of
this section is one of the following:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(1)(a)2., (K)(1)
(a)3., (K)(1)(b), and (K)(1)(c) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of
divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of
any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision
of that section, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any
provision of any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to
any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (b)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an
hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour
in other portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a
school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school’s opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. This division does not apply if penalties may be imposed under division
(K)(1)(a)2. or (K)(1)(a)3. of this section.
         (c)    Notwithstanding division (K)(1)(a) of this section, if the
offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then
posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times
the usual amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the
offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
         (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
      (2)   Division (J).
         (a)   A violation of division (J)(2) of this section is one of the
following:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(2)(a)2. and (K)
(2)(a)3. of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (J)(2) of
this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division
(J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.211(F))
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of speed limits with approval of Director, see R.C. § 4511.21(H)
through (M)
   Arrest or citation of driver based on radar, timing device or radio message
from another officer, see R.C. § 4511.091
§ 73.11 SLOW SPEED OR STOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (B)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be
less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective
until the provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and local
authorities have obtained the approval of the Director.
   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.22)
§ 73.12 EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED FROM SPEED LIMITATION.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24)
§ 73.13 STREET RACING, STUNT DRIVING AND STREET TAKEOVERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      BURNOUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
vehicle is kept in a stationary position, but the wheels of the vehicle are
spun, which may cause the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit smoke
from the friction.
      DOUGHNUT. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
front or rear of the vehicle is rotated around the opposite set of wheels in a
continuous motion, which may cause a circular skid-mark pattern of rubber on
the driving surface, or the tires of the vehicle to become heated and emit
smoke from the friction, or both.
      DRIFTING. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the
vehicle is driven in a manner that causes a controlled, sideways skid during a
turn, with the front wheels pointing in a direction that is the opposite of the
direction of the turn.
      STREET RACING. The operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by
side at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to out- distance each
other or the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course,
from the same point to the same point, wherein timing is made of the
participating vehicles involving competitive accelerations or speeds. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima-facie lawful speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) to (B)(9) or
rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such
prima-facie lawful speeds shall be prima- facie evidence of street racing.
      STREET TAKEOVER. Blocking or impeding the regular flow of vehicle or
pedestrian traffic on a public road, street, or highway or on private property
that is open to the general public for the purpose of street racing or stunt
driving.
      STUNT DRIVING. Performing or engaging in burnouts, doughnuts, drifting,
or wheelies, or allowing a passenger to ride either partially or fully outside
of the vehicle while operating that vehicle.
      WHEELIE. A maneuver performed while operating a vehicle whereby the front
wheel or wheels of the vehicle are raised off of the ground or whereby two
wheels that are on the same side of the vehicle are raised off of the ground.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly participate in street racing, stunt driving,
or street takeover upon any public road, street, or highway, or on private
property that is open to the general public.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to
any other sanctions, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege for not less than 30 days or more
than three years. No judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of
an offender’s license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.
   (D)   Persons rendering assistance in any manner to street racing, stunt
driving, or street takeover shall be equally charged as the participants.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of vehicles
on public or private property when the political subdivision with jurisdiction
of the location or owner of the property knowingly permits such operation
thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.251)
§ 73.14 SPEED REGULATIONS ON BRIDGES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this
section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic travelling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which such structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third  degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.23)
RESISTING OFFICER
§ 73.15 PROHIBITION AGAINST RESISTING OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any sheriff,
constable, or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this Title. No person shall interfere with any
person charged under any provision of this Title with the enforcement of the
law relative to public highways.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.36)
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 73.16 PRESENTING FALSE NAME OR INFORMATION TO OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally communicate a
false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361)
STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT
§ 73.20 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         (a)   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         (b)   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         (c)   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (A)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.21 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (A)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (A)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021)
§ 73.22 ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting
in damage to the property, within 24 hours after accident, shall forward to the
police department of the municipality the same information required to be given
to the owner or person in control of the property and give the location of the
accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is known.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03)
§ 73.23 FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   (A)   No person shall fail to report a motor vehicle accident as required
under state or local law.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4509.74)
CHAPTER 74: EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
74.01   Unsafe vehicles, prohibition against operation
   
74.02   Bumpers on motor vehicles
   
74.03   Lighted lights required
   
74.04   Headlights
   
74.05   Tail lights and illumination of rear license plate
   
74.06   Red reflectors required
   
74.07   Safety lighting of commercial vehicles
   
74.08   Stoplight regulations
   
74.09   Obscured lights on vehicles
   
74.10   Red light or flag required
   
74.11   Lights on parked vehicles
   
74.12   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles
   
74.13   Spotlight and auxiliary driving lights
   
74.14   Cowl, fender, and back-up lights
   
74.15   Two lights displayed
   
74.16   Headlights required
   
74.17   Lights of less intensity
   
74.18   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
   
74.19   Standards for lights on snow removal equipment and oversize vehicles
   
74.20   Flashing lights permitted for certain types of vehicles
   
74.21   Lights and sign on transportation for preschool children
   
74.22   Focus and aim of headlights
   
74.23   Brake equipment; specifications
   
74.24   Brake fluid
   
74.25   Minimum standards for brakes and components
   
74.26   Horns, sirens, and warning devices
   
74.27   Mufflers; excessive smoke or gas
   
74.28   Rearview mirrors
   
74.29   Windshields and wipers
   
74.30   Solid tire requirements
   
74.31   Requirements for safety glass in motor vehicles; use of tinted glass or
reflectorized material
   
74.32   Directional signals
   
74.33   Installation and sale of seat safety belts required; definition
   
74.34   Requirements for extra signal equipment
   
74.35   Display of warning devices on disabled vehicles
   
74.36   Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives
   
74.37   Studded tires; seasonal use permitted
   
74.38   Safety inspection decals for buses
   
74.39   Air bags
   
74.391   Use of engine brakes prohibited
Loads
   
74.40   Permit required to exceed load limits
   
74.41   Limitation of load extension on left side of vehicle
   
74.42   All loads shall be properly secured
   
74.43   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
   
74.44   Weighing of vehicle; removal of excess load
   
74.45   Operation of vehicle exceeding weight limits prohibited
   
74.46   Load limits
   
74.47   Maximum width, height, and length
   
74.48   Statement of gross vehicle weight
   
74.49   Wheel protectors required on heavy commercial vehicles
   
74.50   Liability for damages; prosecution; application of monies
   
74.51   Weight exceptions for certain vehicles
Statutory reference:
   Exemption of certain vehicles from emission, noise control and fuel
standards, see R.C. § 4513.41
   Exemption of collector’s or historical vehicles from equipment standards,
see R.C. § 4513.38
   Motorcycles, protective eye devices required for operators and passengers;
helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. § 4501-17-01
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, equipment,
see O.A.C. § 4501-29-01
   Vehicle lighting, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-15
EQUIPMENT
§ 74.01 UNSAFE VEHICLES, PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.02 BUMPERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING means the manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight
rating established for that vehicle.
      MANUFACTURER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE means a motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed
either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road
operation.
      PASSENGER CAR means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      TRUCK means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (C)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
   (D)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs:
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not
apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.021) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 74.03 LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by sections 4513.04 to 4513.37 of the Revised Code during
all of the following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (B)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03)
§ 74.04 HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04)
§ 74.05 TAIL LIGHTS AND ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05)
§ 74.06 RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors as
required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and
so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to
50 feet from such vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06)
§ 74.07 SAFETY LIGHTING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any
such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a
distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially
similar municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07)
§ 74.08 STOPLIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to
the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
      (4)    A historical motor vehicle that was not originally manufactured
with stop lights or a replica motor vehicle that replicates a motor vehicle
that was not originally manufactured with stop lights is not subject to this
section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (C)   As used in this section, REPLICA MOTOR VEHICLE means a replica motor
vehicle for which a certificate of title is issued under R.C. § 4505.072.
(R.C. § 4513.071)
§ 74.09 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08)
§ 74.10 RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09)
§ 74.11 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.12 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BOAT TRAILER. Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm machinery,
road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the manufacturer to
operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does not include a
bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (B)(2) of this section:
         (a)   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         (b)   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (B)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   (a)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi- wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         (b)   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (B)(3)(a) of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (B)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (B) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (C)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         (a)   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         (b)   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (C)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         (a)   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance
work in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         (b)   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(C) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         (b)   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         (c)   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (D)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         (a)   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         (b)   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.    Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         (a)   The SMV emblem;
         (b)   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (E)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal- drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         (a)   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         (b)   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro- prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower
beams of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         (c)   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   (a)   Divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         (b)   No operator described in division (E)(4)(a) of this section
shall operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with
and displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         (c)   As used in division (E)(4) of this section, “animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an
animal that is used solely for agricultural purposes. “Animal- drawn
agricultural equipment” includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (E) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (F)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115)
§ 74.13 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12)
§ 74.14 COWL, FENDER, AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
    (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13)
§ 74.15 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (A)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14)
§ 74.16 HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15)
§ 74.17 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided that
such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15)
§ 74.18 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         (a)   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         (b)   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         (c)   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         (d)   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
         (e)   A vehicle being used for emergency preparedness, response, and
recovery activities, as those terms are defined in R.C. § 5502.21, that is
equipped with and displays, when used on a street or highway for the special
purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber
or red and white light, provided that the vehicle is being operated by a person
from one of the following and the vehicle is clearly marked with the applicable
agency’s or authority’s insignia:
            1.   The Ohio Emergency Management Agency;
            2.   A countywide emergency management agency established under
R.C. § 5502.26;
            3.   A regional authority for emergency management established
under R.C. § 5502.27;
            4.   A program for emergency management established under R.C. §
5502.271.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (D)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), an emergency management agency vehicle, as described in
division (C)(2)(e) of this section, or a school bus, no person shall operate,
move, or park upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public
street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying
a flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
   (F)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle
operated by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle
or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a
distance of not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing,
oscillating or rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of
the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor
vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the
stoppage of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
      (2)   This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.171)
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4513.17(F), 4513.171(B))
§ 74.19 STANDARDS FOR LIGHTS ON SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT AND OVERSIZE VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway unless
the lights thereon comply with and are lighted when and as required by the
standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Transportation pursuant
to R.C. § 4513.18.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.18)
§ 74.20 FLASHING LIGHTS PERMITTED FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.
   Rural mail delivery vehicles, state highway survey vehicles, and funeral
escort vehicles are permitted to use flashing lights.
(R.C. § 4513.181)
§ 74.21 LIGHTS AND SIGN ON TRANSPORTATION FOR PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten, or child care center, while transporting
preschool children to or from such an institution unless the motor vehicle is
equipped with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar
attached to the top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution
– children”, which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing
lights in such a manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind
the vehicle. The lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications
adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.22 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19)
§ 74.23 BRAKE EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         (b)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight
of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above
means, capable of being used alternatively, may be employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         (a)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         (b)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.24 BRAKE FLUID.
   (A)   No hydraulic brake fluid for use in motor vehicles shall be sold in
this municipality if the brake fluid is below the minimum standard of
specifications for heavy duty type brake fluid established by the society of
automotive engineers and the standard of specifications established by 49
C.F.R. § 571.116, as amended.
   (B)   All manufacturers, packers, or distributors of brake fluid selling
such fluid in this municipality shall state on the containers that the brake
fluid meets or exceeds the applicable minimum SAE standard of specifications,
and the standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.116, as
amended.
(R.C. § 4513.201)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.25 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BRAKES AND COMPONENTS.
   (A)   No brake lining, brake lining material, or brake lining assemblies for
use as repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall be sold in this
municipality if these items do not meet or exceed the minimum standard of
specifications established by the Society of Automotive Engineers and the
standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.105, as amended, and
49 C.F.R. § 571.135, as amended.
   (B)   All manufacturers or distributors of brake lining, brake lining
material, or brake lining assemblies selling these items for use as repair and
replacement parts in motor vehicles shall state that the items meet or exceed
the applicable minimum standard of specifications.
   (C)   As used in this section, MINIMUM STANDARD OF SPECIFICATIONS means a
minimum standard for brake system or brake component performance that meets the
need for motor vehicle safety and complies with the applicable SAE standards
and recommended practices, and the federal motor vehicle safety standards that
cover the same aspect of performance for any brake lining, brake lining
material, or brake lining assemblies.
(R.C. § 4513.202)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.26 HORNS, SIRENS, AND WARNING DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21)
§ 74.27 MUFFLERS; EXCESSIVE SMOKE OR GAS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22)
§ 74.28 REARVIEW MIRRORS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.23)
§ 74.29 WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster, or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster, or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24)
§ 74.30 SOLID TIRE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every solid tire, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, on a vehicle shall
have rubber or other resilient material on its entire traction surface at least
one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery.
(R.C. § 4513.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.31 REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFETY GLASS IN MOTOR VEHICLES; USE OF TINTED GLASS OR
REFLECTORIZED MATERIAL.
   (A)   Safety glass.
      (1)   No person shall sell any new motor vehicle nor shall any new motor
vehicle be registered, and no person shall operate any motor vehicle, which is
registered in this state and which has been manufactured or assembled on or
after January 1, 1936, unless the motor vehicle is equipped with safety glass,
wherever glass is used in the windshields, doors, partitions, rear windows, and
windows on each side immediately adjacent to the rear window.
      (2)   SAFETY GLASS means any product composed of glass so manufactured,
fabricated, or treated as substantially to prevent shattering and flying of the
glass when it is struck or broken, or such other or similar product as may be
approved by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
      (3)   Glass other than safety glass shall not be offered for sale, or
sold for use in, or installed in any door, window, partition, or windshield
that is required by this section to be equipped with safety glass.
(R.C. § 4513.26)
   (B)   Tinted or reflectorized material.
      (1)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
      (2)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle, any glass or
other material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or
of any rule adopted under that section.
      (3)   (a)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform
to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
         (b)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in
R.C. § 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C.
Chapter 4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to
the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
      (4)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.
      (5)   This division (B) does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or
glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance
with or permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.
      (6)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (B) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division, CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
      (7)   This division (B) does not apply to any school bus that is to be
sold and operated outside the municipality.
      (8)   (a)    This division (B) does not apply to a motor vehicle used by
a law enforcement agency when the motor vehicle is used by the law enforcement
agency for a purpose within the scope of the law enforcement agency’s duties.
         (b)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1), (3)(b) or (4) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3)(a) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         (b)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         (c)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (B)(2) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is
subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of
not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K)) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 74.32 DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with
electrical or mechanical directional signals.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the vehicle is
equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.
   (B)   DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS means an electrical or mechanical signal device
capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn either to the right or to
the left and which shall be visible from both the front and rear.
   (C)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self- illuminating devices when
in use at the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.261) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.33 INSTALLATION AND SALE OF SEAT SAFETY BELTS REQUIRED; DEFINITION.
   (A)   As used in this section and in R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the component parts of a SEAT SAFETY BELT
include a belt, anchor attachment assembly, and a buckle or closing device.
   (B)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate any passenger car, as
defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this
state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1962, unless
the passenger car is equipped with sufficient anchorage units at the attachment
points for attaching at least two sets of seat safety belts to its front seat.
Such anchorage units at the attachment points shall be of such construction,
design, and strength to support a loop load pull of not less than 4,000 pounds
for each belt.
   (C)   No person shall sell, lease, or rent any passenger car, as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this state and
that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1966, unless the
passenger car has installed in its front seat at least two seat safety belt
assemblies.
   (D)   After January 1, 1966, neither any seat safety belt for use in a motor
vehicle nor any component part of any such seat safety belt shall be sold in
this municipality unless the seat safety belt or the component part satisfies
the minimum standard of specifications established by the society of automotive
engineers for automotive seat belts and unless the seat safety belt or
component part is labeled so as to indicate that it meets those minimum
standard specifications.
   (E)   Each sale, lease, or rental in violation of this section constitutes a
separate offense.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.262) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.34 REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA SIGNAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor truck, bus, or commercial tractor
upon any highway at any time from sunset to sunrise unless there is carried in
such vehicle, except as provided in division (B) of this section, the following
equipment which shall be of the types approved by the Director of
Transportation.
      (1)   At least three flares or three red reflectors or three red electric
lanterns, each of which is capable of being seen and distinguished at a
distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions at nighttime;
      (2)   At least three red-burning fusees, unless red reflectors or red
electric lanterns are carried;
      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than two inches square, with
standards to support them;
      (4)   The type of red reflectors shall comply with such standards and
specifications in effect on September 16, 1963, or later established by the
Interstate Commerce Commission and must be certified as meeting such standards
by Underwriters Laboratories.
   (B)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions stated in
this section any motor vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, unless there is carried in such
vehicle three red electric lanterns or three red reflectors meeting the
requirements stated in division (A) of this section. There shall not be carried
in any such vehicle any flare, fusee, or signal produced by a flame.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person who operates any motor
vehicle in a work area designated by protection equipment devices that are
displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.
(R.C. § 4513.27)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.35 DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer, or pole trailer is disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway
and connecting, entering, or exiting ramps within the municipality, at any time
when lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the operator of such vehicle shall
display the following warning devices upon the highway during the time the
vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided in division (B) of
this section:
      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the
traffic side of such vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or red reflectors
are displayed.
      (2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly as possible,
three lighted flares or pot torches, or three red reflectors or three red
electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows:
         (a)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet in
advance of the vehicle;
         (b)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the
rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this section, each in the center of
the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle;
         (c)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a highway at
any time or place mentioned in division (A) of this section, the driver of such
vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning devices:
      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be immediately
placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle;
      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or two other red reflectors shall
be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same manner prescribed
for flares in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) of this section is
disabled, the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by flame as warning
signals is prohibited.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled
upon any freeway, expressway, thruway, and connecting, entering, or exiting
ramps within the municipality, at any time when the display of fusees, flares,
red reflectors, or electric lanterns is not required, the operator of such
vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the lane of traffic
occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distance of 40 paces or
approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a distance of 40
paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle, except as provided
in this section.
   (E)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors, and flags to be
displayed as required in this section shall conform with the applicable
requirements of R.C. § 4513.27 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (F)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a hill, or
other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector, or lantern in that
direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the
highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or approximately
100 feet nor more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from the disabled
vehicle.
   (G)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in a work
area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and used in
accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation under
R.C. § 4511.09.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.28)
§ 74.36 REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than
24 inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches
high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with Section 177.823 of the
United States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.37 STUDDED TIRES; SEASONAL USE PERMITTED.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear- resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is
snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or the
immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.38 SAFETY INSPECTION DECALS FOR BUSES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BUS.
         (a)   BUS means any vehicle used for the transportation of passengers
that meets at least one of the following:
            1.   Was originally designed by the manufacturer to transport more
than 15 passengers, including the driver;
            2.   Either the gross vehicle weight rating or the gross vehicle
weight exceeds 10,000 pounds.
         (b)   BUS does not include a church bus as defined in R.C. § 4503.07
or a school bus unless the church bus or school bus is used in the
transportation of passengers by a motor carrier.
         (c)   BUS also does not include any of the following:
            1.   Any vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails;
            2.   A trolley bus operated by electric power derived from a fixed
overhead wire furnishing local passenger transportation similar to street-
railway service;
            3.   Vehicles owned or leased by government agencies or political
subdivisions.
      MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01
(R.C. § 4513.50)
   (B)   Safety inspection decals.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, on and after
July 1, 2001, no person shall operate a bus, nor shall any person being the
owner of a bus or having supervisory responsibility for a bus, permit the
operation of any bus unless the bus displays a valid, current safety inspection
decal issued by the State Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4513.52.
      (2)   For the purpose of complying with the requirements of this section
and R.C. § 4513.52, the owner or other operator of a bus may drive the bus
directly to an inspection site conducted by the State Highway Patrol and
directly back to the person’s place of business without a valid registration
and without displaying a safety inspection decal, provided that no passengers
may occupy the bus during such operation.
(R.C. § 4513.51(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4513.51(D)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.39 AIR BAGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
      COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or similar to
the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the authorization of
the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
         (a)   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         (b)   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         (c)   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (B)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (D) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(R.C. § 4549.20)
§ 74.391 USE OF ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The non-emergency use of engine brakes within the city limits is
prohibited.
   (B)   As used in this ordinance, ENGINE BRAKES shall be defined to include
but is not limited to Jake Brakes, Jacobs Brakes, C Brakes, Tek Brakes, and any
other type of engine retarders commonly used within the trucking industry.
   (C)   This section does not apply to emergency vehicles operated by fire,
police or military units.
   (D)   Whoever violates this ordinance is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(Ord. 09-1562, passed 12-1-09) Penalty, see §
70.99
LOADS
§ 74.40 PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCEED LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
         (a)   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.
         (b)   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
         (c)   For regional trips at distances of 150 miles or less from a
facility stated on the application as the applicant’s point of origin.
         (d)   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
      (2)   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a permit
under division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality, with respect to
highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good cause
shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   (1)    Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
permit issued by the Ohio Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may
move the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any
highway that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly
within and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local
authority shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee
or other charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4513.34(B)(3), permits may be issued
for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its
discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public construction
project.
   (C)   (1)   The application for a permit issued under this section shall be
in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe a
permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a
nondivisible load.
      (3)   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director
under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle,
are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules establishing
requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to the
requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1.
   (D)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling permit
under division (A)(1) of this section upon application and payment of the
applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (A)(2) of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the
vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
   (E)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle
or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection
by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting the permit.
No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
   (F)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
   (G)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
   (H)   (1)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to gross load limits.
      (2)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
      (3)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
   (I)    A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Oversized vehicles, state permit regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1
§ 74.41 LIMITATION OF LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.42 ALL LOADS SHALL BE PROPERLY SECURED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or
water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.43 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a
white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.   
      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         (a)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         (b)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (C)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)    The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to a any of the following:
         (a)   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         (b)   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         (c)   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (C)(1)(a) of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.44 WEIGHING OF VEHICLE; REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.
   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and its load is unlawful may require the driver of the vehicle to stop
and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact, self-contained, portable,
sealed scale specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed location, having a
load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
highway vehicles; a sealed scale, permanently installed in a fixed location,
having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the combined
load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive axles of a highway
vehicle; or a sealed scale adapted to weighing highway vehicles, loaded or
unloaded.
   (B)   The driver of the vehicle shall, if necessary, be directed to proceed
to the nearest available sealed scales to accomplish the weighing, provided the
scales are within three miles of the point where the vehicle is stopped.
   (C)   Any vehicle stopped in accordance with this section may be held by the
police officer for a reasonable time only to accomplish the weighing as
prescribed by this section.
   (D)   All scales used in determining the lawful weight of a vehicle and its
load shall be annually compared by a municipal, county or state sealer with the
state standards or standards approved by the state, and the scales shall not be
sealed if they do not conform to the state standards or standards approved by
the state.
   (E)   At each end of a permanently installed scale, there shall be a
straight approach in the same plane as the platform, of sufficient length and
width to insure the level positioning of vehicles during weight determinations.
During determination of weight by compact, self-contained, portable, sealed
scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways, they shall always be used on a level terrain of sufficient length and
width to accommodate the entire vehicle being weighed. Such terrain shall be
level, or if not level, it shall be of such elevation that the difference in
elevation between the wheels on any one axle does not exceed two inches and the
difference in elevation between axles being weighed does not exceed one-quarter
inch per foot of the distance between such axles.
   (F)   In all determinations of all weights, except gross weight, by compact,
self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the
wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all successive axles, 12 feet or less
apart, shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale under the
outside wheel of each such axle. In determinations of gross weight by the use
of compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to
determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all axles shall be weighed
simultaneously by placing one such scale under the outside wheel of each axle.
   (G)   Whenever an officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that
the weight is unlawful, he or she may require the driver to stop the vehicle in
a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed
as is necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted
under R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.14 and this chapter.
(R.C. § 4513.33) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of weight limits, approval of Director required, see R.C. §
4513.33
§ 74.45 OPERATION OF VEHICLE EXCEEDING WEIGHT LIMITS PROHIBITED.
   (A)    No person shall operate or move a traction engine, steam roller, or
other vehicle, load, object or structure, whether propelled by muscular or
motor power, over or upon the improved public streets, highways, bridges, or
culverts in this municipality, that weighs in excess of the weights prescribed
in this subchapter or R.C. §§ 5577.01 et seq., unless the person has been
issued a permit under R.C. § 4513.34, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. The prohibition in this section applies regardless of whether the
weight is moved upon wheels, rollers, or otherwise. Any weight determination
shall include the weight of the vehicle, object, structure, contrivance, and
load.
(R.C. § 5577.02)
   (B)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be fined
$80 for the first 2,000 pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload; for overloads
in excess of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds, such person shall
be fined $100, and in addition thereto $1 per 100 pounds of overload; for
overloads in excess of 5,000 pounds but not in excess of 10,000 pounds, such
person shall be fined $130, and in addition thereto $2 per 100 pounds of
overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For all overloads in
excess of 10,000 pounds, such person shall be fined $160, and in addition
thereto $3 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both. Whoever violates the weight provisions of vehicle and load relating to
gross load limits shall be fined not less than $100. No penalty prescribed in
this division (B)(2) shall be imposed on any vehicle combination if the
overload on any one axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds, and if the immediately
preceding or following axle, excepting the front axle of the vehicle
combination, is underloaded by the same or greater amount. For purposes of this
division (B)(2), two axles on one vehicle less than eight feet apart shall be
considered as one axle.
(R.C. § 5577.99(A))
§ 74.46 LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   Weight of load; width of tire. No person, firm or corporation shall
transport over the improved public streets, alleys, intercounty highways, state
highways, bridges or culverts in this municipality, in any vehicle propelled by
muscular, motor or other power, any burden, including weight of vehicle and
load, greater than the following:
      (1)   (a)   In vehicles having metal tires three inches or less in width,
a load of 500 pounds for each inch of the total width of the tire on all
wheels;
         (b)   When the tires on such vehicles exceed three inches in width, an
additional load of 800 pounds shall be permitted for each inch by which the
total width of the tires on all wheels exceeds 12 inches.
      (2)   In vehicles having tires of rubber or other similar substance, for
each inch of the total width of tires on all wheels, as follows:
      Tire Width         Load Limit
      (in inches)         (in pounds)
      (3)   The total width of tires on all wheels shall be, in the case of
solid tires of rubber or other similar substance, the actual width in inches of
all such tires between the flanges at the base of the tires, but in no event
shall that portion of tire coming in contact with the road surface be less than
two-thirds the width so measured between the flanges.
      (4)   In the case of pneumatic tires, of rubber or other similar
substance, the total width of tires on all wheels shall be the actual width of
all such tires, measured at the widest portion thereof when inflated and not
bearing a load.
      (5)   In no event shall the load, including the proportionate weight of
vehicle that can be concentrated on any wheel, exceed 650 pounds to each inch
in width of the tread as defined in this division (A) for solid tires, or each
inch in the actual diameter of pneumatic tires measured when inflated and not
bearing a load.
(R.C. § 5577.03)
   (B)   Vehicles with pneumatic tires, load limits.
      (1)   The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of any vehicle, load,
object or structure operated or moved upon improved public highways, streets,
bridges or culverts shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of pneumatic
tire, measured as prescribed by division (A) of this section.
      (2)   The weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that
is part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not
exceed any of the following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;
         (b)   On any tandem axle, 34,000 pounds;
         (c)   On any two or more consecutive axles, the maximum weight as
determined by application of the formula provided in division (B)(3) of this
section.
      (3)   (a)   For purposes of division (B)(2)(c) of this section, the
maximum gross weight on any two or more consecutive axles shall be determined
by application of the following formula:
            W = 500[(LN/N-1) + 12N + 36]
         (b)   In this formula, W equals the overall gross weight on any group
of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L equals the
distance in rounded whole feet between the extreme of any group of two or more
consecutive axles, and N equals the number of axles in the group under
consideration. However, two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross
load of 34,000 pounds each, provided the overall distance between the first and
last axles of such consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (B)(9) of this section, the weight
of vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that is not part of the
interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not exceed any of the
following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds.
         (b)   On any two successive axles:
            1.   Spaced four feet or less apart, and weighed simultaneously,
24,000 pounds;
            2.   Spaced more than four feet apart, and weighed simultaneously,
34,000 pounds, plus 1,000 pounds per foot or fraction thereof, over four feet,
not to exceed 40,000 pounds.
         (c)   On any three successive load- bearing axles designed to equalize
the load between such axles and spaced so that each such axle of the three-axle
group is more than four feet from the next axle in the three-axle group and so
that the spacing between the first axle and the third axle in the three- axle
group is no more than nine feet, and with such load-bearing three-axle group
weighed simultaneously as a unit:
            1.   48,000 pounds, with the total weight of the vehicle and load
not exceeding 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900 pounds for each foot of
spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the vehicle;
            2.   As an alternative to division (B)(4)(c)1. of this section,
42,500 pounds, if part of a six-axle vehicle combination with at least 20 feet
of spacing between the front axle and rearmost axle, with the total weight of
the vehicle and load not exceeding 54,000 pounds plus an additional 600 pounds
per each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle.
         (d)   The total weight of the vehicle and load utilizing any
combination of axles, other than as provided for three-axle groups in division
(B)(4) of this section, shall not exceed 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900
pounds for each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of
the vehicle.
      (5)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, the
maximum overall gross weight of a vehicle and load imposed upon the road
surface shall not exceed 80,000 pounds.
      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between nearest axles of the respective vehicles
to a distance not in excess of 12½ feet.
      (7)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section, TANDEM AXLE means two
or more consecutive axles whose centers may be included between parallel
transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches but not more than 96
inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to passenger bus type vehicles
operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through
306.54.
      (9)   Either division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section applies to the
weight of a vehicle and its load imposed upon any road surface that is not a
part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires. As between
divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, only the division that yields the
highest total gross vehicle weight limit shall be applied to any such vehicle.
Once that division has been determined, only the limits contained in the
subdivisions of that division shall apply to that vehicle.
(R.C. § 5577.04)
   (C)   Axle and wheel load, gross weights and towing connection length for
solid rubber tires.
      (1)   No vehicle, load, object or structure having a maximum axle load
greater than 16,000 pounds when such vehicle is equipped with solid rubber
tires shall be operated or moved upon the improved public highways, streets,
bridges or culverts. The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of such vehicle
shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of tire, measured as prescribed by
division (A) of this section, nor shall any solid tire or rubber or other
resilient material, on any wheel of any such vehicle, be less than one inch
thick when measure from the top of the flanges of the tire channel.
      (2)   The weight of vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface by any
two successive axles, spaces four feet or less apart, shall not exceed 19,000
pounds for solid tires; or by any two successive axles spaced more than four
feet but less than eight feet apart, shall not exceed 24,000 pounds for solid
tires; or by any two successive axles, spaced eight feet or more apart, shall
not exceed 28,000 pounds for solid tires; nor shall the total weight of vehicle
and load exceed, for solid rubber tires, 28,000 pounds plus an additional 600
pounds for each foot or fraction thereof of spacing between the front axle and
the rear-most axle of the vehicle; nor shall the weight of the vehicle and load
imposed upon the road surface by any vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires
exceed 80% of the permissible weight of vehicle and load as provided for
pneumatic tires.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between the nearest axles of the respective
vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet. If the provisions of this
division (C) are held to exceed the weight limitations or other provisions set
forth in the “Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1958,” 72 Stat. 902, 23 U.S.C. § 127,
this division (C) shall become null and void to the extent of such
inconsistency.
(R.C. § 5577.041)
   (D)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be
punished as set forth in §
74.45(B).
   (E)   Modification of load limits. The load limits established in this
section may be modified or waived upon special permission granted as provided
in R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 74.47 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT, AND LENGTH.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width in excess of:
      (1)   104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated exclusively
within the municipality.
      (2)   102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are required by law,
for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and such other state
roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads or portions
of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by order of the
Director of Transportation.
      (3)   132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety devices and
retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in width and
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch recreational
vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles, except that the
Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on such state highways
or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length in excess of:
      (1)   66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated passenger
bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to R.C. §§
306.30 to 306.54.
      (2)   45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that the Director may
prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-semitrailer combination
on such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director
designates.
      (4)   28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer- trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer- trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   (a)   97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route, or state
route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a distance
not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route, or state
route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one
fullmount;
         (b)   75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an interstate,
United States route, or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted
vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled together,
with or without load, except as provided in division (C)(3) and (4), and in
division (E) below.
      (7)   45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and semitrailers,
with or without load.
   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) to (C)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo- carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by such department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares.
   (H)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
§ 74.48 STATEMENT OF GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.
   (A)   No person shall issue or aid in issuing any bill of lading or other
document of like nature in lieu thereof, which bill or document is to accompany
a shipment of goods or property by truck, trailer, semitrailer, commercial
tractor, or any other commercial vehicle used for the transportation of
property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, with intent
to defraud by misrepresentation thereon the weight of such goods of property to
be so transported.
   (B)   Any driver or operator of a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer may
obtain from any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association,
including the owner, lessee, or operator of such commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer, owning and operating sealed scales in this state, a written
“statement of gross vehicle weight” showing the gross weight of the vehicle
including the cargo on the vehicle, the name and address of the person issuing
the statement, and the date and place where the vehicle and its cargo were
weighed. The driver or operator of the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
shall retain such statement of gross vehicle weight on his or her person, and
any law enforcement officer may request that such driver or operator exhibit it
to him or her. If, upon examining the statement of gross vehicle weight, the
law enforcement officer has reason to believe that the information contained
therein is correct in every respect, he or she shall indorse it with his or her
name and the date and place where it was exhibited to him or her. The law
enforcement officer may then permit such driver or operator to proceed without
weighing by a law enforcement officer. No person shall willfully issue a
written statement of gross vehicle weight and knowingly give any false
information in such statement.
(R.C. § 5577.10)
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not more
than $5,000 or imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than six months,
or both.
(R.C. § 5577.99(D))
§ 74.49 WHEEL PROTECTORS REQUIRED ON HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the
municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or
combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following
vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more
than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the
center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they
shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is
so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of
fenders, body construction, or other means of enclosure, then no such
protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by
fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by
protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 74.50 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; PROSECUTION; APPLICATION OF MONIES.
   Any person violating any law relating to or regulating the use of the
improved public roads shall be liable for all damage resulting to any such
street, highway, bridge or culvert by reason of such violation. In case of any
injury to such street, highway, bridge or culvert, such damages shall be
collected by civil action for recovery of such damages brought by the proper
authorities of the municipality. All damages collected under this section shall
be paid into the treasury of the municipality and credited to any fund for the
repairs of streets, highways, roads, bridges or culverts.
(R.C. § 5577.12)
§ 74.51 WEIGHT EXCEPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COAL TRUCK. A truck transporting coal from the site where it is mined
when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      FARM COMMODITIES. Includes livestock, bulk milk, corn, soybeans, tobacco
and wheat.
      FARM MACHINERY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      FARM TRUCK. A truck used in the transportation from a farm of farm
commodities when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      LOG TRUCK. A truck used in the transportation of timber from the site of
its cutting when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3743.01.
      SOLID WASTE HAUL VEHICLE. A vehicle hauling solid waste for which a bill
of lading has not been issued.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under the
described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight provisions of
R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance,
and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially similar
municipal ordinance, shall be imposed:
         (a)   A coal truck transporting coal, from the place of production to
the first point of delivery where title to the coal is transferred;
         (b)   A farm truck or farm machinery transporting farm commodities,
from the place of production to the first point of delivery where the
commodities are weighed and title to the commodities is transferred;
         (c)   A log truck transporting timber, from the site of its cutting to
the first point of delivery where the timber is transferred;
         (d)   A solid waste haul vehicle hauling solid waste, from the place
of production to the first point of delivery where the solid waste is disposed
of or title to the solid waste is transferred.
      (2)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of
this section and operated under the conditions described in that division does
not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
does not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than
7.5%, no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.
   (C)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of this section and
operated under the conditions described in that division exceeds the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to
the allowance provided by this division (B) of this section:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to the operation of
a farm truck, log truck, or farm machinery transporting farm commodities during
the months of February and March.
      (2)   Regardless of when the operation occurs, division (B) of this
section does not apply to the operation of a vehicle on either of the
following:
         (a)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;
         (b)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.042)
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under the described
conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and no
penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall be imposed:
      (1)   A surface mining truck transporting minerals from the place where
the minerals are loaded to any of the following:
         (a)   The construction site where the minerals are discharged;
         (b)   The place where title to the minerals is transferred;
         (c)   The place of processing.
      (2)   A vehicle transporting hot mix asphalt material from the place
where the material is first mixed to the paving site where the material is
discharged;
      (3)   A vehicle transporting concrete from the place where the material
is first mixed to the site where the material is discharged;
      (4)   A vehicle transporting manure, turf, sod, or silage from the site
where the material is first produced to the first place of delivery;
      (5)   A vehicle transporting chips, sawdust, mulch, bark, pulpwood,
biomass, or firewood from the site where the product is first produced or
harvested to first point where the product is transferred.
   (F)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this
section and operated under the conditions described in that division do not
exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01
to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and do not
exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than 7.5%, no
penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.
   (G)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this section and
operated under the conditions described in that division exceed the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(E) or (F) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to the
allowance provided by division (E) or (F) of this section:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (H)   Divisions (E) and (F) of this section do not apply to the operation of
a vehicle listed in division (E) of this section on either of the following:
      (1)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;
      (2)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.043)
   (I)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a vehicle fueled solely by compressed natural
gas may exceed by not more than 2,000 pounds the gross vehicle weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or the axle load limits of those sections.
   (J)   If a vehicle described in division (I) of this section exceeds the
weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the allowance provided for in
division (I) of this section, both of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (K)    Division (I) of this section does not apply to the operation of a
vehicle on a highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.044)
   (L)   Fire engine weight exemptions. 
      (1)   As used in this division (L), FIRE ENGINE means a fire engine, fire
truck, or other vehicle or apparatus belonging to or used by any municipal,
township, or volunteer fire department, while in the discharge of its
functions.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a person may do both of the following without a
written permit issued under R.C. § 4513.34, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
         (a)   Operate a two-axle fire engine, with a front axle maximum weight
of 24,000 pounds and a rear axle maximum weight of 33,500 pounds and a minimum
wheelbase of 15 feet, on all roadways in the state;
         (b)   Operate a fire engine with a maximum gross vehicle weight of
86,000 pounds on the interstate highway system and within one road mile of an
interstate highway system entrance or exit ramp.
      (3)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4513.34, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for any fire engine that requires a permit, the Ohio
Director of Transportation or local authority shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Issue the permit at no cost to the municipal, township, or
volunteer fire department;
         (b)   Issue a permit that expires five years after the date of
issuance.
(R.C. § 5577.045)
CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
75.01   Bicycles; application of Title VII
   
75.02   Operation of motorized bicycle
   
75.03   Rules for bicycles, motorcycles, and snowmobiles
   
75.04   Prohibition against attaching bicycles and sleds to vehicles
   
75.05   Riding bicycles; motorcycles abreast
   
75.06   Equipment of bicycles
   
75.07   Electric bicycles
Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and All-Purpose Vehicles
   
75.25   Definitions
   
75.26   Equipment
   
75.27   Code application; prohibited operation
   
75.28   Permitted operation
   
75.29   Licensing requirements of operator
   
75.30   Maintenance of vehicles for hire
   
75.31   Accident reports
   
75.32   Impounding of vehicle
   
75.33   Local control within police power
   
75.34   Registration of vehicles
   
75.35   Display of registration number on snowmobiles
   
75.36   Certificate of title; prohibitions
Statutory reference:
   Protective eye devices required for motorcycle operators and passengers;
helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. § 4501-17-01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 75.01 BICYCLES; APPLICATION OF TITLE VII.
   (A)    The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles and
electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated upon
any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this title
described in division (A) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under R.C. §
4510.036.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this title described in division (A) of this
section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to violations of
R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4511.52)
§ 75.02 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this
section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person
is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this
section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (B) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator to
give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (C)    Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (A)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (B) of this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A), (D), or (E) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C.
§ 4510.34
§ 75.03 RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given
that term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (B)   (1)    No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon such bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(C)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         (b)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03
(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)(a) of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or
(C)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53)
§ 75.04 PROHIBITION AGAINST ATTACHING BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)    No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self
to any vehicle upon a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy
vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.54)
§ 75.05 RIDING BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.
   (A)    Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.55)
§ 75.06 EQUIPMENT OF BICYCLES.
   (A)    Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be
equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (A) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (D)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.56)
§ 75.07 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (A)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (B)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (C)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (4)   Divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section do not apply to a law
enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic
laws of the state, using an electric bicycle while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (D)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (C) of this
section and whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (E)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4511.522)
SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
§ 75.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all- terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The
term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any
vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and any
vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   ELECTRONIC and ELECTRONIC RECORD. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4501.01.
   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles designates
under R.C. § 4519.511.
   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as defined
in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
5511.02.
   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a
seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that
is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street or highway.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.
   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having title
to a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or other
right to the possession thereof.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self- propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow
or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01)
§ 75.26 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles
shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment
specified in division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not be required
on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles operated
during the daylight hours.
(R.C. § 4519.20(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, lease, rent or otherwise furnish
for hire in this municipality any new snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all- purpose vehicle that fails to comply with any rule adopted by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4519.20 after the effective date of the
rule.
(R.C. § 4519.22(A))
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (B)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (B) of this
section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20(C))
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (C) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (C)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.22(A), whoever violates this section shall be
fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not more than three
days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.22(B))
§ 75.27 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (A)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all- purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.40)
Cross-reference:
   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or utility
vehicles, see §
73.04
§ 75.28 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all- purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (A)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (B)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (C)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (D)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (E)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (F)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all- purpose
vehicles, on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including
limited access highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the
thirtieth day of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(R.C. § 4519.41)
§ 75.29 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid,
current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (B)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (A) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on
state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16
years of age but is 12 years of age or older and is accompanied by a parent or
guardian who is a licensed driver 18 years of age or older.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.44)
§ 75.30 MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Any dealer who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire shall maintain the vehicle
in safe operating condition. No dealer, or agent or employee of a dealer, shall
rent, lease or otherwise furnish a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle for hire to any person who does not hold a license as required
by R.C. § 4519.44(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or to
any person whom the dealer or an agent or employee of the dealer has reasonable
cause to believe is incompetent to operate the vehicle in a safe and lawful
manner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500.
(R.C. § 4519.45)
§ 75.31 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (B)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46)
§ 75.32 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever a person is found guilty of operating a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of any rule authorized
to be adopted under R.C. § 4519.21 or 4519.42, the trial judge of any court of
record, in addition to or independent of any other penalties provided by law,
may impound for not less than 60 days the certificate of registration and
license plate, if applicable, of that snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle. The court shall send the impounded certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles, who shall retain the certificate of registration and license plate,
if applicable, until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
   (B)   If a court impounds the certificate of registration and license plate
of an all-purpose vehicle pursuant to R.C. § 2911.21, the court shall send the
impounded certificate of registration and license plate to the Registrar, who
shall retain them until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
(R.C. § 4519.47)
§ 75.33 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and all-
purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power,
except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under
R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48)
§ 75.34 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B), (C) and (D) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off- highway
motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance
with R.C. §§ 4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off- highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(B)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all- purpose
vehicle that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (C)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle,
or all- purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 shall
comply with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (D)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle,
or all- purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (E)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapter 1547 and R.C.
Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or transfer of vehicle; lost or destroyed registration, see R.C.
§ 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
   Temporary license registration, see R.C. § 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 75.35 DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION NUMBER ON SNOWMOBILES.
   Upon receipt of a certificate of registration for a snowmobile, the owner
shall paint upon each side of the forward cowling of the snowmobile the
identifying registration number, in block characters of not less than two
inches in height and of such color as to be distinctly visible and legible.
(R.C. § 4519.04(B))
§ 75.36 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C. Chapter 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off- highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle is a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66)
Statutory reference:
   Certificate of title: rules and procedures, see R.C. §§ 4519.51 et seq.
   Stolen vehicles and restrictions on sale or transfer, felony provisions, see
R.C. § 4519.67
CHAPTER 76: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
76.01   Prohibition against parking on highways
   
76.02   Condition when motor vehicle left unattended
   
76.03   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle
   
76.04   Parking prohibitions
   
76.041   Parking on cul-de- sacs prohibited
   
76.05   Parking near curb; privileges for persons with disabilities
   
76.06   Parking on private property in violation of posted prohibition
   
76.07   Parking of unlicensed vehicles prohibited
   
76.08   Unlawful display of vehicles
   
76.09   Repairing vehicles on highway unlawful
   
76.10   Conducting business from parked vehicle unlawful
   
76.11   Revocable overnight parking privileges
   
76.12   Prohibiting parking areas in front yards in residential zones
   
76.13   Time limit for parking in municipal lots
   
76.14   Truck and trailer parking
   
76.15   Time limit for continuous parking
   
76.16   Regulating parking at municipal park entrances
   
76.17   Fire lanes on private property
   
76.18   Snow emergency routes
   
76.19   Allowing parking in a certain city owned alleyway
Cross-reference:
   Unclaimed and abandoned vehicles, see
Ch. 98
Statutory reference:
   Noncriminal parking infractions, local option to create, see R.C. Chapter
4521
§ 76.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such
vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a
clear and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle
shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such
stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.02 CONDITION WHEN MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED.
   (A)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         (b)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is
parked;
         (c)   An emergency vehicle;
         (d)   A public safety vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.03 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
such officer may move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved
or main traveled part of such highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67)
§ 76.04 PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On or across a sidewalk, or the area between the curb and the
sidewalk, except a bicycle; (Ord. 21-1945, passed 4- 20-21)
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)    Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any yield sign, stop
sign, or highway traffic signal;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
           (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or
within a highway tunnel;
           (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
           (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
           (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or thruway;
      (17)   On a bicycle lane.
   (B)   A person is permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand or park
on a sidewalk a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine not
larger than 150 cubic centimeters, a low-speed micromobility device, or a
bicycle or electric bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor
scooter, low-speed micromobility device, bicycle, or electric bicycle does not
impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division does not authorize
any person to operate a vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.711, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.68) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.041 PARKING ON CUL-DE-SACS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon any cul-de-sac
within the city except while actually loading and unloading and then only for a
period not to exceed 30 minutes.
   (B)   All cul-de-sacs within the city are hereby designated as fire lanes.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(Ord. 25-2062, passed 3-3-25)
§ 76.05 PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (B)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one- way roadway.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle
facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the
road or highway.
         (b)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in division (C)(2) of
this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution, or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or
park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the
Director of Transportation.
   (E)   Accessible parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided and
designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at all publicly owned parking
garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators,
and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C.
§ 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating an accessible parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the designated accessible parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
accessible parking locations provided under division (E) of this section, or at
accessible clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or accessible license plates;
or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible
license plates.
         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in an accessible marked parking
location in violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section
may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law
enforcement agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or
removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of
ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally
imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor
vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the
lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and
pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for
towing and storing motor vehicles.
         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that
the person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the
person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the
person meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)    No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to an accessible parking location
provided under division (E) of this section or at an accessible clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or accessible license plates, or when
a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a person with a
disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible license plates, the
motor vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the
legal parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local
ordinances or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in
such a manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.
   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where accessible
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (E)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the accessible parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the
accessible locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or accessible license
plates if the parking card or accessible license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      ACCESSIBLE LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Mean any
license plates, standard removable windshield placard, permanent removable
windshield placard, or temporary removable windshield placard issued under R.C.
§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any substantially similar license plates or
removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Means any person who has lost the use of one or
both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or unable to move without
the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a
permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary, or other disabling condition.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO WALK. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   (K)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (A) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (K)(2)(a) and (b) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (K)(2)(a) of this section, an offender who violates division (F)(1)
(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more
than $500. An offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section shall be fined not more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing,
proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or accessible license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (F)(1)(a)1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or accessible
license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person neglected to
display the card or license plates as described in division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section.
         (b)   In no case shall an offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         (c)   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need
not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any
inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right
or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         (d)   The clerk of the court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section, the municipality shall
use the fine moneys it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this
section to pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (E) of this section. The municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under division (K)(2) of this section to
pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support, and assistive technology
programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements within the
municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if governmental
agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender who violates
division (F)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An
arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(2) of this section does
not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application
for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection
with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (H) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking
location that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly
maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates, see §
138.17
Statutory reference:
   Buildings, access for disabled persons, see R.C. § 3781.111
§ 76.06 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN VIOLATION OF POSTED PROHIBITION.
   (A)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Towing from private property, requirements, see §
98.01
§ 76.07 PARKING OF UNLICENCED VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park any vehicle which
is required by law to bear license plates on any street or highway or public
property unless license plates legally registered and issued for that vehicle
are displayed thereon.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of a vehicle which is required by
law to bear license plates, and which does not bear license plates legally
registered and issued for it, to permit that vehicle to remain parked or
standing on any street or highway or public property for any period of time.
('74 Code, § 76.06) (Ord. 564-A, passed 7-18-78) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.08 UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park on a highway any vehicle
displayed for sale, or to operate or to park on any highway any vehicle for the
primary purpose of displaying advertising.
('74 Code, § 76.07) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.09 REPAIRING VEHICLES ON HIGHWAY UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful to repair, wash, polish, or clean any vehicle on any
highway or to park any vehicle for the purpose of so doing. This section shall
not be construed to prohibit the making of those necessary emergency repairs as
will permit a vehicle to proceed.
('74 Code, § 76.08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.10 CONDUCTING BUSINESS FROM PARKED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any vehicle to use that
vehicle or permit the same to be used on the streets and public places of the
municipality for the manufacture or repair of shoes, clothing, furniture, metal
ware, tools, or other articles of personal or household use.
('74 Code, § 76.09) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.11 REVOCABLE OVERNIGHT PARKING PRIVILEGES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police is authorized to issue permits to city residents,
granting them the privilege of parking passenger-type motor vehicles only on
city streets. The issuance of these permits and the exercise of the privilege
granted thereby shall be limited by the terms and restrictions of this section.
   (B)   Each resident of the city who wishes to obtain a permit for the
privilege of parking his or her passenger-type motor vehicle on the streets of
the municipality for periods of time longer than those presently permitted
shall complete and submit an application to the City Manager on a form to be
made available for that purpose. The completed application shall require
certain information of the applicant, including a statement of the applicant's
present possession or lack of parking facilities. On the basis of the
information submitted by the applicant, the City Manager shall have the power
to issue or deny said parking privilege to the applicant.
   (C)   Each applicant who is granted this parking privilege shall be issued a
parking privilege sticker. This sticker shall be displayed prominently on the
lower left corner rear window of the vehicle. The stickers shall be issued for
a period of six months. The parking privileges so granted shall be exercised
only in the areas where parking is presently allowed.
   (D)   The hours during which the special permit parking shall apply shall be
overnight.
   (E)   The parking privileges provided for herein shall not apply to any
street or portion of any street on which parking is otherwise prohibited.
   (F)   The parking privileges where granted shall be applicable only to the
vehicle listed in the applicant's application, and for his use in the proximity
of his residence as shown on the application. This privilege shall cease on the
sale of the vehicle bearing the parking privilege, or on change of residence of
the privilege holder. In either of these events, the privilege holder may make
application to the City Manager for parking privileges for use in connection
with a subsequently acquired vehicle or a different address.
   (G)   Any person who shall use the parking privileges contrary to the terms
of this section, or who shall violate any other existing law of this city while
exercising said privilege, shall be subject to immediate revocation of the
privilege.
('74 Code, § 76.10) (Ord. 347-A, passed 5-21-68; Am. Ord. 547-A, passed 3-21-
78)
§ 76.12 PROHIBITING PARKING AREAS IN FRONT YARDS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, directly or
indirectly, or any owner or occupant of land in the residential zone, to
construct, operate, or maintain a parking area, either paved or unpaved, in the
front yard of any lot. For the purpose of this section, front yard shall mean
and include that area between the sidewalk, or street line in the event there
is no sidewalk, and the front line of the principal building, extending in both
directions to the side lot lines.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to use that portion of a vacant lot within 30
feet of the sidewalk lines for parking in the residential zone.
   (C)   No person, being the owner or having control of any building, shall
violate or fail to conform to any provision of this section, or fail to obey
any lawful order of an officer charged with its enforcement. Each and every day
on which any person continues to violate the provisions of this section, after
having been notified of the violation, shall constitute a separate offense.
This conviction shall not relieve any person from thereafter complying with the
provisions of this section, and shall be sufficient cause for the Chief
Building Official to refuse further building permits to the offender until a
time as the orders have been complied with.
('74 Code, § 76.11) (Ord. 238-A, passed 5-15-61; Am. Ord. 434-A, passed 6-5-73;
Am. Ord. 91-1002, passed 1-21-92; Am. Ord. 92-1002, passed 1-21-92) Penalty,
see §
70.99
§ 76.13 TIME LIMIT FOR PARKING IN MUNICIPAL LOTS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to
park any vehicle on any city parking lot for a period of more than 72
consecutive hours.
   (B)   Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed at the
owner's expense and liability.
('74 Code, § 76.12) (Ord. 504-A, passed 10-7-75; Am. Ord. 548-A, passed 3-21-
78; Am. Ord. 578-A, passed 12-19-78; Am. Ord. 19- 1877, passed 2-5-19; Am. Ord.
19- 1877, passed 2-5-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.14 TRUCK AND TRAILER PARKING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning. The parking, storage, or use of trucks, trailers, mobile
homes, motorized homes, or major recreational equipment as defined below shall
be controlled by this section.
      BOAT AND BOAT TRAILER. Includes boats, floats, rafts, or any structures
capable of being operated on water and the normal equipment to transport the
same on the highway.
      BUSINESS TRAILER or COMMERCIAL TRAILER. A vehicle or structure
constructed in such a manner as to permit the conduct of any business, trade,
or occupation or use as a selling or advertising device, or used for storage or
conveyance for tools, equipment, or machinery, and so designed that it is or
may be mounted on wheels.
      FOLDING TENT TRAILER. A folding or retractable structure, of canvas or
other material, mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use.
      MOBILE HOME. A portable structure built on a chassis designed to be used
as a dwelling for residence, travel, recreational, or vacation use and
propelled or drawn by motive power, other than its own.
      MOTORIZED HOME. A portable dwelling designed and constructed as an
integral part of a self- propelled vehicle.
      OTHER MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT. Any other vehicle or portable
structure designed as a temporary dwelling or for recreational use, including,
but not limited to, watercraft, aircraft, and tents.
      PICK-UP CAMPER. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pick-up
or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as
a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, or vacation use.
      TRAILER. Any vehicle or structure so designed that it is or may be
mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance and propelled or driven by motive
power other than its own.
      TRAVEL-TRAILER. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and
vacation uses.
      TRUCK. Any truck rated at more than one ton by the manufacturer.
   (B)   Use and occupancy. No truck, trailer, mobile home, motorized home, or
major recreational equipment, shall be occupied as living quarters, or sleeping
accommodations for longer than five days in any 60-day period in any district
in the city. No fixed connections for electricity, water, gas, or sanitary
sewers shall be permitted. Time extensions may be granted by the City Manager
when requested in writing. Upon the approval and regulation of the City
Manager, a business or commercial trailer may be permitted on a temporary basis
during construction or other special circumstances.
   (C)   Storage. All trucks, trailers, mobile homes, motorized homes, or major
recreational equipment, when not in a carport or garage shall be stored,
parked, or erected to the rear of the front building line but not in the front
yard or front of the house.
   (D)   Parking. Parking on any public street, alley, or other public property
for more than four hours by trucks, trailers, mobile homes, motorized homes, or
major recreational equipment is prohibited, other than temporary parking for
the purpose of and while actually involved in loading or unloading.
   (E)   Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be fined
not more than $100.
(Ord. 96-1201, passed 9-3-96; Am. Ord. 96-1202, passed 10-1-96)
§ 76.15 TIME LIMIT FOR CONTINUOUS PARKING.
   (A)   No owner, agent, operator, or other person in charge of any vehicle
shall permit the vehicle to remain parked, standing, or abandoned on any street
for a continuous period longer than 72 hours.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed as affecting any other parking
regulation now in effect or that may hereafter become effective but shall be
construed as an additional parking limitation. The purpose of this section is
to prohibit continuous long term parking and the storage of vehicles on the
streets of the city.
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be fined not more
than $100.
('74 Code, § 76.14) (Ord. 83-757, passed 1-3-84)
§ 76.16 REGULATING PARKING AT MUNICIPAL PARK ENTRANCES.
   (A)   Parking at the entrances to the Mt. Healthy Municipal Park by other
than the residents of properties abutting the park is prohibited.
   (B)   The entrances to the park which are affected by this chapter are those
entrances at Hill and Joseph, at Hill and Perry, at Hickman and Adams and at
Perry and Hastings.
('74 Code, § 76.15) (Ord. 90-931, passed 6-5-90)
§ 76.17 FIRE LANES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   City Council shall have the power and authority to designate, by
resolution, fire lanes upon
private property in the city which is regularly used by third parties not the
owner or owners thereof.
   (B)   The designation shall not be made with respect to any such parcel
until Council shall have determined that it is in the best interest of the
residents of the city to make such designation with respect to such parcel.
   (C)   The designation shall not be made with respect to any parcel until
Council shall have given written notice to the owner or owners of such parcel
and an opportunity for a public hearing thereon, or until Council shall have
received written consent from, or on behalf of, such owner or owners.
   (D)   The notice referred to in division (C) of this section shall be
sufficient if sent certified mail, return receipt requested, to the tax mailing
address of such owner or owners, or to such other address of which the owner or
owners may have notified the city in writing.
   (E)   The notice referred to in division (C) of this section shall contain a
statement describing the proposed resolution, and the date upon which the
public hearing will be held.
   (F)   Upon passage of any such resolution designating fire lanes upon
private property, the city shall cause and direct the City Fire Chief or, if
the City Fire Chief is unavailable, the City Fire Inspector, to inspect such
private property to determine the location of the fire lanes and the location
of signs designating such fire lanes and prohibiting parking therein, and to
advise Council of such determination.
   (G)   The city shall inform the property owner or owners of the location of
the fire lanes and fire lane signs as determined above, and thereupon the
property owner or owners shall be obligated to erect signs designating fire
lanes and prohibiting parking therein, at the locations designated as set out
in division (F) of this section, at the expense of the property owner or
owners.
   (H)   After erection of the signs referred to in division (G) of this
section, the police may enter such private property from time to time to
inspect and enforce compliance with the parking prohibition. Violation of such
parking prohibition shall be treated as, and be deemed an offense in the same
manner as, a violation of such a parking prohibition on a public street in the
city.
('74 Code, § 76.16) (Ord. 91-981, passed 5-21-91)
§ 76.18 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   (A)   There are established snow emergency routes in the city which are
designated by official signs.
   (B)   The streets designated as snow emergency routes on the snow emergency
route map on file in the office of the City Manager are those streets which
should be kept open and clear in times of a snow emergency for the safety and
convenience of the public.
   (C)   The Mayor or his designated representative may declare a snow
emergency when snow, sleet, freezing rain, or other weather conditions cause or
appear likely to cause, in the judgment of the Mayor or his designated
representative, slippery or hazardous conditions which might lead to serious
congestion or hazard.
   (D)   The snow emergency conditions exist in the city whenever a declaration
of snow emergency is made by the Mayor or his designated representative.
   (E)   No person shall park on that portion of any street designated as a
snow emergency route during any period that is declared to be a snow emergency.
   (F)   The Mayor or his designated representative shall declare termination
of such snow emergency as soon as conditions permit.
   (G)   Anyone who violates the prohibition of parking in an area marked snow
emergency after a declaration of the snow emergency shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 97-1234, passed 12-16-97)
Cross-reference:
   Snow emergency routes, see
Chapter 77, Schedule X
§ 76.19 ALLOWING PARKING IN A CERTAIN CITY OWNED ALLEYWAY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, parking shall be allowed in the alleyway
that runs from Harrison Avenue east to the north/south alleyway that runs
between Compton Road and Kinney Avenue; that borders on the city owned parking
lot just south of the property at 7516 Harrison Avenue and allowing access to
the property located at 7508 Harrison Avenue.
   (B)   Parking regulations in this area shall be the same as if it were a
city owned parking lot, or as otherwise directed by the city.
(Ord. 19-1885, passed 8-20-19)
CHAPTER 77: TRAFFIC AND PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Parking time limited or prohibited
      
II.   Fire lanes
      
III.   Left turns
      
IV.   School crossings
      
V.   Four-way stop streets
      
VI.   Three-way stop streets
      
VII.   Right turns on red prohibited on school days
      
VIII.   One-way streets
      
IX.   Stop streets
      
X.   Snow emergency routes
SCHEDULE I. PARKING TIME LIMITED OR PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Parking on the following streets shall be limited to the specified
times listed.
Street Side From Time Limit
Street        Side           From                     Time Limit
Adams Rd.     Both           Hamilton Ave. to west    Never
                             corporate limit
                                                      15 minutes limited
Adams Rd.     North          Hamilton Ave. to         parking for loading and
                             Harrison Ave.            unloading at motel
                                                      permitted
Compton Rd.   North          West corporation limits  Never
                             to a point 928 feet east
Compton Rd.   North          West corporation limits  Never
                             to a point 928 feet east
                             Compton Rd. from         1 hour limit between 7:00
Compton Rd.   Both           Hamilton Ave. to a point a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday
                             151 feet east ending at  through Saturday
                             the alleyway
                             East corporation line    4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Compton Rd.   North          west to east line of     Monday through Friday
                             Perry St.
                             Intersection of Compton
Compton Rd.   South          Rd. and Martin St. to a  Never
                             point 40 feet west
Compton Rd.   Both           Harrison Ave. to a point 2 hours
                             160 feet east
                             North of Compton Rd. to
Elizabeth St. Both           50 feet north of the     Never
                             north line of Compton
                             Rd.
                             Intersection of Compton
Forest Ave.   West           Rd. and Forest Ave. for  Never
                             a distance of 216 feet
                             south
                                                      Never (15 minutes limited
Hamilton Ave. North          Adams Rd. to corporate   parking for loading and
                             limits                   unloading at motel
                                                      permitted)
                             Intersection of Hamilton
Hamilton Ave. East           Ave. and Adams Rd. for a Never
                             distance of 153 feet
                             north
                             Hill Ave. north to a     No parking, except
Hamilton Ave. East           point 500 feet north of  Sunday, between 9:00 a.m.
                             Adams Rd.                and 6:00 p.m
Hamilton Ave. West           Hill Ave. north to Adams 2 hours
                             Rd.
                             North line of Kinney     No parking between 6:00
Hamilton Ave. Both           Ave. to South line of    a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
                             McMakin Ave.
                                                      No parking weekdays
Hamilton Ave. West           South of Madison Ave.    between 7:00 a.m. and 9:
                                                      00 a.m.
                                                      No parking weekdays
Hamilton Ave. East           South of Madison Ave.    between 4:00 p.m. and 6:
                                                      00 p.m.
                                                      2 hour parking limit
Hamilton Ave. -              -                        between 6:00 a.m. and 6:
                                                      00 p.m.
                             Stevens Ave. to McMakin  1 hour limit between 7:00
Hamilton Ave. Both           St.                      a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Monday
                                                      through Saturday
                             Hamilton Ave. to         Never (2 hours limit for
Hill Ave.     Both           Harrison Ave.            loading and unloading
                                                      permitted)
Hill Ave.     Both           Hamilton Ave. east to    Never
                             Perry St.
                             Easterly line of the
                             alley west of Hamilton   No parking between 6:00
Kinney Ave.   Both           Ave. to the westerly     a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
                             line of the alley east
                             of Hamilton Ave.
                             101 foot section of the
                             north side of Kinney
                             Ave. between Maple Ave.
Kinney Ave.   North          and Werner Ave. across   No parking Fridays from
                             from the alleyway        6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.
                             running south off of
                             Kinney between Maple
                             Ave. and Werner Ave.
                             Along a circle at the
                             terminus that proceeds
Martin St.    -              southwardly and then     Never
                             eastwardly from its
                             intersection with
                             Hoffner Street
                             Easterly line of the
                             alley west of Hamilton   No parking between 6:00
McMakin Ave.  Both           Ave. to the westerly     a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
                             line of the alley east
                             of Hamilton Ave.
Park Avenue   East           Madison Avenue south to  Never
                             the city limits
                             Between McMakin Ave. and 2 hour limit between 8:00
Perry St.     Both           Compton Rd.              a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday
                                                      through Friday
                             Along a curve between
Rambler Place West and South the driveways at 7955    Never
                             Rambler Place and 7959
                             Rambler Place
Werner Ave.                 Between Compton and      School days between 8:00
                             Kinney Ave.              a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
                             Running east and west
                             between Elizabeth St.
Alley         Both           and Joseph St. in the    Never
                             block immediately north
                             of Compton Rd.
                                                    
 
   (B)   The City Manager shall, upon direction of Council, have the power and
authority to cause parking signs to be placed in city parking lots and upon
city streets, designating limitations upon the permitted time periods for
continuous parking, and it shall be unlawful to place or park an automobile,
truck, or other vehicle for longer than the period designated by any such
signs.
   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this schedule, for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined not more than $50 for each
offense committed.
('74 Code, Chapter 77, Schedule I) (Am. Ord. 87-825, passed 8-4-87; Am. Ord.
94-1089, passed 3-15-94; Am. Ord. 95-1165, passed 11-7-95; Am. Ord. 17-1824,
passed 9-19-17; Am. Ord. 21-1946, passed 4-20-21; Am. Ord. 21-1951, passed 6-
15-21)
Cross-reference:
   Prohibitions at municipal park entrances, see §
76.16
SCHEDULE II. FIRE LANES.
   (A)   The following streets in the municipality have fire lanes established
as follows:
Street Side From
Street              Side                         From
Adams Rd.           South                        Hamilton Ave. west to the
                                                 corporate limits
Adams Rd.           North                        Hamilton Ave. east to the
                                                 corporate limits
                                                 Compton Rd. to a point where
Bernard Ave.        East                         Bernard Ave. makes a turn to
                                                 the left and thence on the
                                                 south side of Clovernook Ave.
Bernard Ave.        West                         Compton Rd. to south side of
                                                 Clovernook Ave.
Clovernoll Ave.                                 Entire portion of circle that
                                                 lies within the city limits
Elizabeth St.       East                         Between Rugg and St. Clair
Elizabeth St.       East                         From Compton Rd. south to the
                                                 dead-end at Rugg St.
Elizabeth St.       East                         North of Adams Rd. to the
                                                 north end of the public street
Elizabeth St.       Both                         7941 Elizabeth St. to the
                                                 north end of the public street
Evencrest Drive     North                         
Forest Ave.         East                         Entire length
Hastings Ave.       North                        Harrison Ave. to Lincoln Ave.
Hastings Ave.       West                         South on Hamilton
Hastings Ave.       East                         North on Hamilton
Hickman St.         East                         Kinney Ave. south to St. Clair
                                                 On the north end of Hickman
Hickman St.         West                         St. from Adams Rd. to north of
                                                 the dead end
Hill Ave.           North                        Between Hamilton and Perry
Hoffner St.         North                        Martin St. to Huntridge
Hoffner St.         South                        West of Martin St.
Hoy Court           East                          
Huntridge           East                          
Kemper Ave.         North                        Entire length
Kemper Ave.         North                        Harrison Ave. west to terminus
Kinney Ave.         South                        Hickman St. and Martin St.
Lincoln Ave.        East                         Entire length
Madison Ave.        North                        Harrison Ave. to Werner Ave.
Madison Ave.        North                        Between Elizabeth and Hamilton
Maple Ave.          West                         From Kinney Ave. north to the
                                                 dead end of Maple Ave.
Martin St.          West                         Compton Rd. south to Martin
                                                 Terrace
                                                 From the existing fire lane at
Martin St.          Both                         the cul-de-sac, west and north
                                                 to 7400 Martin St.
Martin Terrace      South                         
North Lynndale      South                        Entire length
Phoenix Ave.        East                         Kinney Ave south to the dead
                                                 end
Rambler Place       North                         
Roettele Place      West; also circle around the Stevens Ave. south to southern
                    southern terminus            terminus
Rugg St.            South                         
Seward Ave.         East                          
South Hampton Court East                          
South Lynndale      North                        Entire length
Van Fleet           South                         
Werner Ave.         West                         North of Compton Rd.
Werner Ave.         East                         Between Kemper and Stevens
Werner Ave.         West                         Between Kemper and Stevens
                                                
 
   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this schedule for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be fined not more than $50 for each
offense committed.
   (C)   The City Manager shall cause said fire lanes to be marked with proper
signs so indicating the fire lanes.
('74 Code, Chapter 77, Sched. II) (Am. Ord. 94-1103, passed 7-5-94; Am. Ord.
94-1126, passed 12-6-94; Am. Ord. 98-1257, passed 7-21-98; Am. Ord. 03-1413,
passed 3-18-03; Am. Ord. 03-1435, passed 10-7-03; Am. Ord. 05-1467, passed 7-
19-05; Am. Ord. 19-1898, passed 12-17-19)
SCHEDULE III. LEFT TURNS.
   (A)   Left turn prohibited at all times. It shall be unlawful to turn any
vehicle to the left at the intersections designated hereunder:
Street Direction of Travel Street Intersecting
Street                      Direction of Travel Street Intersecting
Compton Rd.                 East                North on Hamilton Ave.
Compton Rd.                 West                South on Hamilton Ave.
Hamilton Ave.               North               West on McMakin St.
Hamilton Ave.               South               East on McMakin St.
Hamilton Ave.               North               West on Compton Rd.
Hamilton Ave.               South               East on Compton Rd.
Hamilton Ave.               North               West on Kinney Ave.
Hamilton Ave.               South               East on Kinney Ave.
Hamilton Ave.                                   From Hastings Ave.
Driveway south of U.S. Bank East                North on Hamilton Ave.
 
(Am. Ord. 95-1141, passed 3-21-95; Am. Ord. 14-1702, passed 6-3-14)
   (B)    Limited left turn permitted. It shall be unlawful to turn any vehicle
to the left at the intersections designated hereunder during the hours from 4:
00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. (Monday through Friday) and hours from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. (Monday through Friday).
Street Direction of Travel Street Intersecting
Street        Direction of Travel Street Intersecting
Compton Rd.   West                South on Hamilton Ave.
Compton Rd.   East                North on Hamilton Ave.
Hamilton Ave. North               West on McMakin St.
Hamilton Ave. South               East on McMakin St.
Hamilton Ave. North               West on Compton Rd.
Hamilton Ave. South               East on Compton Rd.
Hamilton Ave. North               West on Kinney Ave.
Hamilton Ave. South               East on Kinney Ave.
Hamilton Ave. North               West on Madison Ave.
Hamilton Ave. South               East on Madison Ave.
 
   (C)   Any violation of (A) or (B) above this schedule shall be punishable by
a fine of not more than $50.
('74 Code, Chapter 77, Schedule III; Am. Ord. 14-1702, passed 6-3-14)
SCHEDULE IV. SCHOOL CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The City Manager is authorized and directed to place school signs and
crosswalk signs at the following intersections.
   (B)   Every operator of a vehicle shall stop at such sign or at a clearly
marked stop line before entering the intersection except when directed to
proceed by a police officer.
 
Street      Intersected With
Compton Rd. Harrison Ave.
Compton Rd. Elizabeth St.
 
   (C)   Any violation of this schedule shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $10.
('74 Code, Chapter 77, Schedule IV)
SCHEDULE V. FOUR-WAY STOP STREETS.
   (A)   The City Manager is instructed to erect stop signs at all four
entrances to the following intersections. Every stop sign shall be located as
near as practicable at the entrances to which the stop must be made or at the
nearest line of the crosswalk thereat.
   (B)   Every operator of a vehicle shall stop at such sign or at a clearly
marked stop line before entering said intersection except when directed to
proceed by a police officer.
 
Street     Intersected With
Adams Rd.  Rambler Place
Joseph St. McMakin Ave.
Seward St. Rambler Place
 
   Two unnamed alleys east of Hamilton Avenue between Hastings Avenue, Perry
Street and Hill Avenue.
   (C)   Any violation of this schedule shall be punishable by a fine of $15
for each offense.
('74 Code, Chapter 77, Schedule V)
SCHEDULE VI. THREE-WAY STOP STREETS.
   (A)   The City Manager shall install stop signs at the following
intersections as near as practicable to the property line of the streets at the
entrance to which the stop must be made.
   (B)   Every operator of a vehicle shall stop in obedience to a stop sign at
an intersection at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line.
 
Street       Intersected With
Adams Rd.    Clovernook Ave.
Hill Ave.    Harrison Ave.
Maple Ave.   Kinney Ave.
Perry St.    Hill Ave.
Phoenix Ave. Kinney Ave.
 
   (C)   Any violation of this schedule shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $25.
('74 Code, Chapter 77, Schedule VI)
SCHEDULE VII. RIGHT TURNS ON RED PROHIBITED ON SCHOOL DAYS.
   (A)   The City Manager is authorized and directed to install proper signs at
certain intersections indicating right turn restrictions.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person in any vehicle to make a right
turn on a red light on Mondays through Fridays on school days between 7:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. at the following intersections.
 
Street        Intersected With
Elizabeth St. Compton Rd.
Hamilton Ave. Compton Rd.
Harrison Ave. Compton Rd.
McMakin Ave.  Hamilton Ave.
Seward Ave.   Compton Rd.
 
   (C)   Whoever violates this schedule shall be subject to a penalty not to
exceed $50.
('74 Code, Chapter 77, Schedule VII) (Am. Ord. 87-837, passed 12-1-87; Am. Ord.
95-1141, passed 3-21-95; Am. Ord. 95-1164, passed 11-21-95)
SCHEDULE VIII. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   The following streets and alleys in the municipality have traffic traveling
in one direction only:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle in the opposite direction on
the streets or alleys designated hereunder:
 
Street or Alley                                           Direction of Travel
Alley, between Hamilton and Harrison Avenues, center line
of which is 185.12 feet west of Hamilton, and from 304.24 South
feet south of Kinney Ave.
Alley, running 20 feet west of Hamilton Ave., which is
142.12 feet south of the intersection of Hamilton and     West
Kinney Avenues.
 
   (B)   Any violation of (A) of this schedule shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $10 nor more than $50.
('74 Code, Chapter 77, Schedule VIII)
SCHEDULE IX. STOP STREETS.
   The City Manager is hereby directed to place stop signs at the following
intersections.
Street Intersected With
Street                               Intersected With
Hoy Court                            Rambler Place
Seward Avenue                        Rambler Place
Northbound alleyway located west of
Hamilton Avenue and east of Harrison Adams Road
Avenue
                                     Hastings Avenue
                                     Hill Avenue
                                     East/west alleyway located south of Hill
                                     Avenue and north of McMakin Avenue
 
('74 Code, Chapter 77, Schedule IX) (Ord. 84-780, passed 10-16-84; Am. Ord. 88-
846, passed 4-5-88; Am. Ord. 06-1487, passed 6-20-06) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE X. SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   Parking is prohibited on the following streets during a period of snow
emergency as regulated by §
76.18.
   Adams Road
   Bernard Avenue
   Clovernook Avenue
   Compton Road
   Forest Avenue from Compton to Stevens Avenue
   Hamilton Avenue
   Harrison Avenue from Kemper to Adams Road
   Hastings Avenue from Perry to Harrison Avenue
   Kinney Avenue from Harrison to Hickman Street
   Madison Avenue from Harrison Avenue to Perry Street
   McMakin Street from Harrison to Perry Street
   Park Avenue
   Perry Street
   Rambler Avenue from Adams to Seward Avenue
   Seward Avenue
   Stevens Avenue
(Ord. 97-1234, passed 12-16-97) Penalty, see §
76.18
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
         
90.   ANIMALS
         
91.   CEMETERY REGULATIONS
         
92.   FIREWORKS, EXPLOSIVES, FIRE PREVENTION
         
93.   HEALTH AND SANITATION
         
94.   INTOXICATING LIQUORS
         
95.   NUISANCES
         
96.   PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
         
97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
         
98.   UNCLAIMED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
         
99. PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS
         
100. SWIMMING POOLS
         
101. CITY TREE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
Animals Running at Large
   
90.01   Dogs or other animals running at large; nuisance, dangerous or vicious
dogs; hearings
   
90.02   (Reserved)
   
90.03   Confining animal found at large; publication of notice; lien
   
90.04   Unavoidable escapes
   
90.05   Fees
   
90.06   Rabies quarantine orders of Mayor
   
90.07   Interfering with enforcement
   
90.08   (Reserved)
   
90.09   Dogs may be killed for certain acts
   
90.10   Killing or injuring birds
Offenses Relating to Animals
   
90.20   Abandoning animals
   
90.21   Injuring animals
   
90.22   Poisoning animals
   
90.23   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals
   
90.24   Animal fights
   
90.25   Trapshooting
   
90.26   Loud dog
   
90.27   Dog tags
   
90.28   Nuisance, dangerous and vicious dog defined; transfer of ownership
certificate; form stating dog’s prior behavior
   
90.29   Failure to register dog
   
90.30   Hindering the capture of unregistered dog
   
90.31   Unlawful tag
   
90.32   Assistance dogs with blind, deaf, or hearing impaired person, or person
with a mobility impairment, or trainer
   
90.33   Retail sale and transportation of dogs
   
90.34   Coloring rabbits or baby poultry
   
90.35   Jacklighting prohibited
   
90.36   Restrictions on dog ownership for certain convicted felons
   
90.37   Sexual conduct with an animal
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Assaulting police dog, horse or handicapped assistance dog, see §
136.15
   Dead animals, improper disposal as nuisance, see §
95.43
   Disposal of dead animals, see §
50.06
   Nuisances, see §
95.07
Statutory reference:
   Hunting and fishing regulations, see R.C. Chapter 1533
   Law enforcement canine registration, see R.C. § 955.012
   Nuisance wild animal trapping, see O.A.C. § 1501:31-15-03
   Possession of dangerous wild animals and restricted snakes, requirements and
licensing, see R.C. Chapter 935
   Rabies: report of dog bite, confinement of animal, report of suspected rabid
animal, see O.A.C. §§ 3701-3-28 through 3701-3-30
ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE
§ 90.01 DOGS OR OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; NUISANCE, DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS
DOGS; HEARINGS.
   (A)   Animals running at large.
      (1)   No person, who is the owner or keeper of horses, mules, cattle,
bison, sheep, goats, swine, llamas, alpacas, or geese, shall permit them to run
at large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or upon
unenclosed land, or cause the animals to be herded, kept, or detained for the
purpose of grazing on premises other than those owned or lawfully occupied by
the owner or keeper of the animals.
(R.C. § 951.02)
      (2)   Whoever recklessly violates division (A)(1) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 951.99)
      (3)   The owner or keeper of an animal described in division (A)(1) of
this section who negligently permits it to run at large in violation of
division (A)(1) of this section is liable for all damages resulting from
injury, death, or loss to person or property caused by the animal in any of the
places specified in division (A)(1) of this section or upon the premises of
another without reference to the fence that may enclose the premises.
      (4)   The running at large of any animal specified in division (A)(1) of
this section in or upon any of the places specified in division (A)(1) of this
section is prima facie evidence in a civil action for damages under division
(A)(3) of this section that the owner or keeper of the animal negligently
permitted the animal to run at large in violation of division (A)(1) of this
section.
(R.C. § 951.10)
      (5)   No person shall allow a dog under his or her control to be upon
public property or upon the property of another, absent the consent of the
owner or occupant of the property, without some device for the removal and
containment of such dog's excrement; nor shall any person fail to remove any
excrement deposited by any dog under his or her control on public or private
property. Whoever violates this division (6) shall be fined not more than $50.
(Ord. 90-948, passed 9-4-90)
   (B)   Dogs running at large; dangerous dogs; debarked or surgically silenced
dangerous dogs.
      (1)   As used in this division (B), DANGEROUS DOG has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 955.11.
      (2)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to
go beyond the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer at any time the dog is
in heat unless the dog is properly in leash.
      (3)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by
the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or
harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following:
         (a)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises
of the owner, keeper, or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence,
supervision, or secure enclosure to prevent escape;
         (b)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person.
      (4)   Except when a dangerous dog is lawfully engaged in hunting or
training for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the owner, keeper,
harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous
dog shall fail to do either of the following:
         (a)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper, or
harborer, securely confine it at all times in a locked pen that has a top,
locked fenced yard, or other locked enclosure that has a top.
         (b)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper, or
harborer, keep that dog on a chain-link leash or tether that is not more than
six feet in length and additionally do at least one of the following: keep the
dog in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked
enclosure that has a top; have the leash or tether controlled by a person who
is of suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash
or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is
adequately restrained and station a person in close enough proximity to that
dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person; or muzzle that dog.
      (5)   No person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or
more violations of division (B)(3) of this section involving the same dog and
no owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to do the
following:
         (a)   Obtain liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write
liability insurance in this state providing coverage in each occurrence because
of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person caused by the dangerous dog
if so ordered by a court and provide proof of that liability insurance upon
request to any law enforcement officer, county dog warden, or public health
official charged with enforcing this section;
         (b)   Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate from the County
Auditor pursuant to division (B)(9) of this section, affix a tag that
identifies the dog as a dangerous dog to the dog’s collar, and ensure that the
dog wears the collar and tag at all times;
         (c)   Notify the local dog warden immediately if any of the following
occurs:
            1.   The dog is loose or unconfined.
            2.   The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on the property of
the owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is unlawfully trespassing or
committing a criminal act within the boundaries of that property.
            3.   The dog attacks another animal while the dog is off the
property of the owner of the dog.
         (d)   If the dog is sold, given to another person, or dies, notify the
County Auditor within ten days of the sale, transfer, or death.
      (6)   No person shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person knows or has
reason to believe is a dangerous dog;
         (b)   Possess a dangerous dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
         (c)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian
under division (B)(7) of this section that the person’s dog is not a dangerous
dog or otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
      (7)   Before a veterinarian debarks or surgically silences a dog, the
veterinarian may give the owner of the dog a written waiver form that attests
that the dog is not a dangerous dog. The written waiver form shall include all
of the following:
         (a)   The veterinarian’s license number and current business address;
         (b)   The number of the license of the dog if the dog is licensed;
         (c)   A reasonable description of the age, coloring, and gender of the
dog as well as any notable markings on the dog;
         (d)   The signature of the owner of the dog attesting that the owner’s
dog is not a dangerous dog;
         (e)   A statement that division (F) of R.C. § 955.22 prohibits any
person from doing any of the following:
            1.   Debarking or surgically silencing a dog that the person knows
or has reason to believe is a dangerous dog;
            2.   Possessing a dangerous dog if the person knows or has reason
to believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
            3.   Falsely attesting on a waiver form provided by the
veterinarian under R.C. § 955.22(G) that the person’s dog is not a dangerous
dog or otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
      (8)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division
(B)(6) of this section that the veterinarian who is charged with the violation
obtained, prior to debarking or surgically silencing the dog, a written waiver
form that complies with division (B)(7) of this section and that attests that
the dog is not a dangerous dog.
      (9)   (a)   The County Auditor shall issue a dangerous dog registration
certificate to a person who is the owner of a dog, who is 18 years of age or
older, and who provides the following to the County Auditor:
            1.   A fee of $50;
            2.   The person’s address, phone number, and other appropriate
means for the local dog warden or County Auditor to contact the person;
            3.   With respect to the person and the dog for which the
registration is sought, all of the following:
               a.   Either satisfactory evidence of the dog’s current rabies
vaccination or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that a rabies
vaccination is medically contraindicated for the dog;
               b.    Either satisfactory evidence of the fact that the dog has
been neutered or spayed or a statement from a licensed veterinarian that
neutering or spaying of the dog is medically contraindicated;
               c.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that the person has
posted and will continue to post clearly visible signs at the person’s
residence warning both minors and adults of the presence of a dangerous dog on
the property;
               d.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that the dog has been
permanently identified by means of a microchip and the dog’s microchip number.
         (b)   Upon the issuance of a dangerous dog registration certificate to
the owner of a dog, the County Auditor shall provide the owner with a uniformly
designed tag that identifies the animal as a dangerous dog. The owner shall
renew the certificate annually for the same fee and in the same manner as the
initial certificate was obtained. If a certificate holder relocates to a new
county, the certificate holder shall follow the procedure in division (B)(9)
(c)2. of this section and, upon the expiration of the certificate issued in the
original county, shall renew the certificate in the new county.
         (c)   1.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a registration
certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new address within the
same county, the owner shall provide notice of the new address to the County
Auditor within ten days of relocating to the new address.
            2.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a registration
certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new address within
another county, the owner shall do both of the following within ten days of
relocating to the new address:
               a.   Provide written notice of the new address and a copy of the
original dangerous dog registration certificate to the County Auditor of the
new county;
               b.   Provide written notice of the new address to the County
Auditor of the county where the owner previously resided.
         (d)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall present the dangerous dog
registration certificate upon being requested to do so by any law enforcement
officer, dog warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this
section.
(R.C. § 955.22)
   (C)   Hearing.
      (1)   The municipal court or county court that has territorial
jurisdiction over the residence of the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog
shall conduct any hearing concerning the designation of the dog as a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog.
      (2)   If a person who is authorized to enforce this chapter has
reasonable cause to believe that a dog in the person’s jurisdiction is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the person shall notify the owner,
keeper, or harborer of that dog, by certified mail or in person, of both of the
following:
         (a)   That the person has designated the dog a nuisance dog, dangerous
dog, or vicious dog, as applicable;
         (b)   That the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog may request a
hearing regarding the designation in accordance with this division (C). The
notice shall include instructions for filing a request for a hearing in the
county in which the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer resides.
      (3)   If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog disagrees with the
designation of the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as
applicable, the owner, keeper, or harborer, not later than ten days after
receiving notification of the designation, may request a hearing regarding the
determination. The request for a hearing shall be in writing and shall be filed
with the municipal court or county court that has territorial jurisdiction over
the residence of the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer. At the hearing, the
person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog
has the burden of proving, by clear and convincing evidence, that the dog is a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of
the dog or the person who designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog,
or vicious dog may appeal the court’s final determination as in any other case
filed in that court.
      (4)   A court, upon motion of an owner, keeper, or harborer or an
attorney representing the owner, keeper, or harborer, may order that the dog
designated as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog be held in the
possession of the owner, keeper, or harborer until the court makes a final
determination under this section or during the pendency of an appeal, as
applicable. Until the court makes a final determination and during the pendency
of any appeal, the dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the
provisions of division (B)(4) that apply to dangerous dogs regardless of
whether the dog has been designated as a vicious dog or a nuisance dog rather
than a dangerous dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog shall not be
required to comply with any other requirements established in this Code or the
Ohio Revised Code that concern a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog,
as applicable, until the court makes a final determination and during the
pendency of any appeal.
      (5)   If a dog is finally determined under this division (C), or on
appeal as described in this division (C), to be a vicious dog, § 90.28(D) and
divisions (B)(4) to (B)(9) of this section apply with respect to the dog and
the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the dog were a dangerous dog,
and § 90.36 applies with respect to the dog as if it were a dangerous dog, and
the court shall issue an order that specifies that those provisions apply with
respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer in that manner. As part
of the order, the court shall require the owner, keeper, or harborer to obtain
the liability insurance required under division (B)(5)(a) in an amount
described in division (D)(4)(b) of this section.
      (6)   As used in this division (C), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS DOG, and
VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
(R.C. § 955.222)
   (D)   Penalty.
      (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (B)(3) of this section that involves a dog that is not a
nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog shall be fined not less than $25 or
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 or more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
         (b)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (D)(1)(a) of
this section, if the offender is guilty of a violation of division (B)(2) of
this section or a violation of division (B)(3) of this section that involves a
dog that is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the court may
order the offender to personally supervise the dog that the offender owns,
keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to
do both.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
      (2)   (a)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section that involves a nuisance dog is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the
first offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each subsequent
offense involving the same dog. Upon a person being convicted of or pleading
guilty to a third violation of division (B)(3) of this section involving the
same dog, the court shall require the offender to register the involved dog as
a dangerous dog.
         (b)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, if a violation of division (B)(3) of this section involves a
nuisance dog, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the
nuisance dog that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to
complete dog obedience training, or to do both.
(R.C. § 955.99(F))
      (3)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3) of this section that
involves a dangerous dog, or a violation of division (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and of a
misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense. Additionally, the
court may order the offender to personally supervise the dangerous dog that the
offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience
training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to obtain
liability insurance pursuant to division (B)(5) of this section. The court, in
the alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed by a
licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county humane society at
the owner’s expense. With respect to a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section that involves a dangerous dog, until the court makes a final
determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of that
division and at the discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be confined or
restrained in accordance with division (B)(4) of this section or at the county
dog pound at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(G))
      (4)   (a)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section that involves a vicious dog is guilty of one of the following:
            1.   A felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the
dog kills or seriously injures a person. Additionally, the court shall order
that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the
county dog warden, or the county humane society at the owner’s expense.
            2.   A misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog causes serious
injury to a person. Additionally, the court may order the vicious dog to be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society at the owner’s expense.
         (b)   If the court does not order the vicious dog to be destroyed
under division (D)(4)(a)2. of this section, the court shall issue an order that
specifies that § 90.28(D) and divisions (B)(4) to (B)(9) of this section apply
with respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the
dog were a dangerous dog and that § 90.36 applies with respect to the dog as if
it were a dangerous dog. As part of the order, the court shall order the
offender to obtain the liability insurance required under division (B)(5)(a) of
this section in an amount, exclusive of interest and costs, that equals or
exceeds $100,000. Until the court makes a final determination and during the
pendency of any appeal of a violation of division (B)(3) of this section and at
the discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in
accordance with the provisions described in division (B)(4) of this section or
at the county dog pound at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(H))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(5)(b) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(J))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(6)(a), (B)(6)(b), or (B)(6)(c) of
this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. Additionally, the court shall order that the dog involved in the violation
be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society. Until the court makes a final determination and during
the pendency of any appeal of a violation of division (B)(6)(a), (B)(6)(b), or
(B)(6)(c) of this section and at the discretion of the dog warden, the dog
shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the provisions of division
(B)(4) of this section or at the county dog pound at the owner’s expense.
(R.C. § 955.99(L))
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(5)(a), (B)(5)(c), or (B)(5)(d) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(M))
      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(9)(d) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(N))
      (9)   (a)   If a dog is confined at the county dog pound pursuant to
division (D)(3), (D)(4), or (D)(6) of this section, the county dog warden shall
give written notice of the confinement to the owner of the dog. If the county
dog warden is unable to give the notice to the owner of the dog, the county dog
warden shall post the notice on the door of the residence of the owner of the
dog or in another conspicuous place on the premises at which the dog was
seized. The notice shall include a statement that a security in the amount of
$100 is due to the county dog warden within ten days to secure payment of all
reasonable expenses, including medical care and boarding of the dog for 60
days, expected to be incurred by the county dog pound in caring for the dog
pending the determination. The county dog warden may draw from the security any
actual costs incurred in caring for the dog.
         (b)   If the person ordered to post security under division (D)(9)(a)
of this section does not do so within ten days of the confinement of the
animal, the dog is forfeited, and the county dog warden may determine the
disposition of the dog unless the court issues an order that specifies
otherwise.
         (c)   Not more than ten days after the court makes a final
determination under division (D)(3), (D)(4), or (D)(6) of this section, the
county dog warden shall provide the owner of the dog with the actual cost of
the confinement of the dog. If the county dog warden finds that the security
provided under division (D)(9)(a) of this section is less than the actual cost
of confinement of the dog, the owner shall remit the difference between the
security provided and the actual cost to the county dog warden within 30 days
after the court’s determination. If the county dog warden finds that the
security provided under division (D)(9)(a) of this section is greater than that
actual cost, the county dog warden shall remit the difference between the
security provided and the actual cost to the owner within 30 days after the
court’s determination.
(R.C. § 955.99(P))
      (10)   As used in this division (D), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS DOG, and
VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.
(R.C. § 955.99(Q)) (‘74 Code, § 90.01)
§ 90.02 (RESERVED).
§ 90.03 CONFINING ANIMAL FOUND AT LARGE; PUBLICATION OF NOTICE; LIEN.
   A person finding an animal at large in violation of §
90.01(A)(1) may, and a law enforcement officer of the municipality on view or
information shall, take and confine that animal, promptly giving notice of the
taking and confining of the animal to the owner or keeper, if known, and if not
known, by publishing a notice describing the animal once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the county or municipality where the animal was found.
If the owner or keeper does not appear and claim the animal and pay the
compensation prescribed in §
90.05 for so taking, advertising, and keeping it within ten days from the date
of the notice, that person or the county shall have a lien for that
compensation and the animal may be sold at public auction as provided in R.C. §
1311.49. The residue of the proceeds of sale shall be paid and deposited by the
Treasurer in the General Funds of the county.
(R.C. § 951.11)
§ 90.04 UNAVOIDABLE ESCAPES.
   If it is proven that an animal running at large in violation of §
90.01(A)(1) escaped from its owner or keeper without the owner's or keeper's
knowledge or fault, the animal shall be returned to its owner or keeper upon
payment of the compensation prescribed in §
90.05 for its taking, advertising and keeping.
(R.C. § 951.12)
§ 90.05 FEES.
   (A)   The person or municipality whose law enforcement officer takes an
animal running at large in violation of §
90.01(A)(1) is entitled to receive from the owner or keeper of the animal the
following compensation:
      (1)   For taking and advertising each animal, $5; and
      (2)   Reasonable expenses actually incurred for keeping each animal.
   (B)   Compensation for taking, advertising, and keeping a single herd or
flock shall not exceed $50 when the flock or herd belongs to one person.
(R.C. § 951.13)
§ 90.06 RABIES QUARANTINE ORDERS OF MAYOR.
   (A)   Whenever, in the judgment of the Mayor or his or her designee, rabies
is prevalent, he or she shall declare a quarantine of all dogs in the
municipality or a part thereof. During the quarantine, the owner, keeper, or
harborer of any dog shall keep it confined on the premises of the owner,
keeper, or harborer or in a pound, kennel, or other suitable place, at the
expense of the owner, keeper, or harborer, except that a dog may be permitted
to leave the premises of its owner, keeper, or harborer if it is under leash or
under the control of a responsible person. The quarantine order shall be
considered an emergency and need not be published.
   (B)   When the quarantine has been declared, the Mayor or his or her
designee may require the vaccination for rabies of all dogs within the
municipality or part thereof.
(R.C. § 955.26)
   (C)   No person shall violate a rabies quarantine order issued under this
section or R.C. § 955.26.
(R.C. § 955.39)
   (D)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense; for each subsequent offense such person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(C))
§ 90.07 INTERFERING WITH ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   No person shall hinder, obstruct, resist or interfere with any
enforcing officer while engaged in enforcing an order issued under §
90.06.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
   (C)   No person shall molest or interfere with any officer while engaged in
enforcing an order which may be issued to enforce a provision of this chapter.
(‘74 Code, § 90.06)
Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 RESERVED.
§ 90.09 DOGS MAY BE KILLED FOR CERTAIN ACTS.
    Subject to R.C. § 955.261(A)(2) and (3), a dog that is chasing or
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack that attempts
to bite or otherwise endanger, or that kills or injures a person, or a dog that
chases, threatens, harasses, injures, or kills livestock, poultry, other
domestic animal, or other animal that is the property of another person, except
a cat or another dog, can be killed at the time of that chasing, threatening,
harassment, approaching, attempt, killing or injury. If, in attempting to kill
such a dog, a person wounds it, the person is not liable to prosecution under
the criminal laws or ordinances that punish cruelty to animals. Nothing in this
section precludes a law enforcement officer from killing a dog that attacks a
police dog as defined in R.C. § 2921.321.
(R.C. § 955.28(A))
§ 90.10 KILLING OR INJURING BIRDS.
   No person shall kill or injure any wild bird, nor throw, fire or shoot a
bullet, stone, arrow, or other missile, at such bird, or break, tear down, or
destroy any bird’s nest or the eggs or other contents of such nest, or catch or
capture any wild bird, set traps, or spread nets or snares, with intent to
catch or capture the same, or follow or pursue the same, with intent to catch
or injure such birds.
(‘74 Code, § 90.03) Penalty, see §
90.99
OFFENSES RELATING TO ANIMALS
§ 90.20 ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat, or other domestic animal shall
abandon the animal.
(R.C. § 959.01)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(3))
§ 90.21 INJURING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, kill or injure a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another. This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(R.C. § 959.02)
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts to $300 or more,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(B))
   (C)   This section does not apply to a person killing or injuring an animal
or attempting to do so while endeavoring to prevent it from trespassing upon
his or her enclosure, or while it is so trespassing, or while driving it away
from his or her premises; provided within 15 days thereafter, payment is made
for damages done to such animal by killing or injuring, less the actual amount
of damage done by such animal while so trespassing, or a sufficient sum of
money is deposited with the nearest judge of a county court or judge of a
municipal court having jurisdiction within such time to cover the damages. The
deposit shall remain in the custody of such judge until there is a
determination of the damage resulting from such killing or injury and from the
trespass. The judge and his or her bondsmen shall be responsible for the
safekeeping of such money and for the payment thereof as for money collected
upon a judgment.
(R.C. § 959.04)
§ 90.22 POISONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such
capacity, to a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(R.C. § 959.03) (‘74 Code, § 90.07)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. (R.C. § 959.99(C))
   (C)   This section does not apply to a person killing or injuring an animal
or attempting to do so while endeavoring to prevent it from trespassing upon
his or her enclosure, or while it is so trespassing, or while driving it away
from his or her premises; provided that within 15 days thereafter, payment is
made for damages done to such animal by killing or injuring, less the actual
amount of damage done by such animal while so trespassing, or a sufficient sum
of money is deposited with the nearest judge of a county court or judge of a
municipal court having jurisdiction within such time to cover the damages. The
deposit shall remain in the custody of such judge until there is a
determination of the damage resulting from such killing or injury and from the
trespass. The judge and his or her bondsmen shall be responsible for the
safekeeping of such money and for the payment thereof as for money collected
upon a judgment.
(R.C. § 959.04)
§ 90.23 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer. This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of this
section, SHELTER means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or natural
windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development, or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep, or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water, and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound, or kill each other.
   (B)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor. Division (A) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (C)   All fines collected for violations of division (A) of this section
shall be paid to the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the general fund.
(R.C. § 959.13) (‘74 Code, § 90.02)
   (D)   Cruelty to companion animals.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         ANIMAL RESCUE FOR DOGS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         BOARDING KENNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.
         CAPTIVE WHITE- TAILED DEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
         COMPANION ANIMAL. Means any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet
store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. COMPANION ANIMAL does not include livestock
or any wild animal.
         CRUELTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         DOG KENNEL. Means an animal rescue for dogs, a boarding kennel, or a
training kennel.
         FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. Means the “Laboratory Animal Act of 1966,”
Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. 2131 et seq., as amended by
the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970,” Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970), the
“Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976,” Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417
(1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985,” Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354
(1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         LIVESTOCK. Means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle, sheep,
goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas; llamas;
captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or maintained
domestically for food or fiber.
         PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4741.01.
         RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. Means a structure or shelter or the portion of a
structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a
habitation.
         SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain;
         TORMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         TORTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.
         TRAINING KENNEL. Means an establishment operating for profit that
keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the dogs in
return for a fee or other consideration.
         WILD ANIMAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty
against a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall recklessly deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (8)   Divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), (D)(4), (D)(5), (D)(6), and (D)(7) of
this section do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act and related
regulations;
         (b)   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under R.C. Chapter 4741;
         (c)   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         (d)   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         (e)   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (9)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (D) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
society agents under R.C. § 1717.061 or to provide additional training for
humane society agents.
(R.C. § 959.131)
   (E)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender
to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition
including, but not limited to, the sale of the animal or livestock. If an
animal or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the
proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with
regard to the care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of
the former owner. The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be
paid to the former owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (D)(2) or (D)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(3) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (D)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D)(6) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (D)(7) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   (a)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section to forfeit to an
impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the companion
animals in that person’s ownership or care. The court also may prohibit or
place limitations on the person’s ability to own or care for any companion
animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.
         (b)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a violation of division (A) of this section or division (D) of this section
to reimburse an impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred
by the agency for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a
result of the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the
costs were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.
      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section has a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. § 959.132
§ 90.24 ANIMAL FIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Engage in cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against
another;
      (2)   Use, train, or possess any animal for seizing, detaining, or
maltreating a domestic animal.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Be employed at cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal
against another;
      (2)   Do any of the following regarding an event involving cockfighting,
bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against another:
         (a)   Wager money or anything else of value on the results of the
event;
         (b)   Pay money or give anything else of value in exchange for
admission to or being present at the event;
         (c)   Receive money or anything else of value in exchange for the
admission of another person to the event or for another person to be present at
the event;
         (d)   Use, possess, or permit or cause to be present at the event any
device or substance intended to enhance an animal’s ability to fight or to
inflict injury on another animal;
         (e)   Permit or cause a minor to be present at the event if any person
present at or involved with the event is conducting any of the activities
described in division (B)(1) or (B)(2)(a), (B)(2)(b), (B)(2)(c), or (B)(2)(d)
of this section.
   (C)   A person who knowingly witnesses cockfighting, bearbaiting, or an
event in which one animal is pitted against another when a violation of
division (B) of this section is occurring at the cockfighting, bearbaiting, or
event is an aider and abettor and has committed a violation of this division.
(R.C. § 959.15)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 959.99(C), (I))
Statutory reference:
   Dogfighting, felony provisions, see R.C. § 959.16
§ 90.25 TRAPSHOOTING.
   (A)   Live birds or fowl shall not be used as targets in trapshooting.
(R.C. § 959.17)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 959.99(C))
§ 90.26 LOUD DOG.
   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog shall permit or allow such dog to
annoy or disturb one or more of the inhabitants of a residence of this
municipality by the frequent or habitual howling, yelping, barking, or making
of any other unreasonably loud and disturbing noises of such character,
intensity, and duration as to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of the
municipality. Upon an initial complaint in the police officers confirmation of
the disturbance, it shall be police officer’s duty to warn the individual in
writing in violation. Upon a second such complaint within 30 days, the officer
shall have the discretion to cite the person to Mayor’s Court. Any person who
shall allow any animal habitually to remain, be lodged or fed within any
dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or occupied by such person shall be
considered as keeping or harboring such animal.
(‘74 Code, § 90.04) (Am. Ord. 00-1336, passed 1-2-01) Penalty, see §
90.99
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances generally, see
Chapter 95
§ 90.27 DOG TAGS.
   (A)   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under R.C. Chapter 956, shall
fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection
with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any time a valid
tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any
dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or destruction.
(R.C. § 955.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 90.28 NUISANCE, DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOG DEFINED; TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP
CERTIFICATE; FORM STATING DOG’S PRIOR BEHAVIOR.
   (A)   As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DANGEROUS DOG.
         (a)   A dog that, without provocation, and subject to division (b) of
this definition, has done any of the following:
            1.   Caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person;
            2.   Killed another dog;
            3.   Been the subject of a third or subsequent violation of R.C. §
955.22(C) or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   “Dangerous dog” does not include a police dog that has caused
injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any person or has killed
another dog while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law
enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      MENACING FASHION. A dog that would cause any person being chased or
approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to
that person.
      NUISANCE DOG.
         (a)   Subject to division (b) of this definition, “nuisance dog” means
a dog that without provocation and while off the premises of its owner, keeper,
or harborer has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion or
an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger
any person.
         (b)   “Nuisance dog” does not include a police dog that, while being
used to assist one or more law enforcement officers in the performance of
official duties, has chased or approached a person in either a menacing fashion
or an apparent attitude of attack or has attempted to bite or otherwise
endanger any person.
      POLICE DOG. A dog that has been trained and may be used to assist one or
more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      SERIOUS INJURY. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
         (b)   Any physical harm that involves a permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or a temporary, substantial incapacity;
         (c)   Any physical harm that involves a permanent disfigurement or a
temporary, serious disfigurement;
         (d)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or any degree of prolonged or intractable
pain.
      VICIOUS DOG.
         (a)   A dog that, without provocation and subject to division (b) of
this definition, has killed or caused serious injury to any person.
         (b)   “Vicious dog” does not include either of the following:
            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist one or more law enforcement
officers in the performance of their official duties;
            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog.
      WITHOUT PROVOCATION. A dog acts WITHOUT PROVOCATION when it was not
teased, tormented, or abused by a person, or it was not coming to the aid or
the defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and
who was not using the dog as a means of carrying out such activity.
   (B)   Upon the transfer of ownership of any dog, the seller of the dog shall
give the buyer a transfer of ownership certificate that shall be signed by the
seller. The certificate shall contain the registration number of the dog, the
name of the seller, and a brief description of the dog. Blank forms of the
certificate may be obtained from the County Auditor. A transfer of ownership
shall be recorded by the Auditor upon presentation of a transfer of ownership
certificate that is signed by the former owner of a dog and that is accompanied
by a fee of $5.
   (C)   Prior to the transfer of ownership or possession of any dog, upon the
buyer’s or other transferee’s request, the seller or other transferor of the
dog shall give to the person a written notice relative to the behavior and
propensities of the dog.
   (D)   Within ten days after the transfer of ownership or possession of any
dog, if the seller or transferor of the dog has knowledge that the dog is a
dangerous dog, the seller or other transferor shall give to the buyer or
transferee, the Board of Health for the district in which the buyer or other
transferee resides, and the dog warden of the county in which the buyer or
other transferee resides a completed copy of a written form on which the seller
shall furnish the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the buyer or other transferee of the dog;
      (2)   The age, sex, color, breed and current registration number of the
dog;
      (3)   In addition, the seller shall answer the following questions which
shall be specifically stated on the form as follows:
      “Has the dog ever chased or attempted to attack or bite a person? If yes,
describe the incident(s) in which the behavior occurred.”
      “Has the dog ever bitten a person? If yes, describe the incident(s) in
which the behavior occurred.”
      “Has the dog ever seriously injured or killed a person? If yes, describe
the incident(s) in which the behavior occurred.”
      (4)   The dog warden of the county in which the seller resides furnishes
the form to the seller at no cost.
(R.C. § 955.11)
   (E)   No seller or other transferor of a dog shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of divisions (B) to (D) of this section.
(R.C. § 955.11)
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section because failure to
comply with division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section because of a failure
to comply with division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor on a first offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on
each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 955.99(A))
§ 90.29 FAILURE TO REGISTER DOG.
   (A)    No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog more than three months of age,
shall fail to file an application for registration required by R.C. § 955.01,
nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee therefor.
(Ord. 17-1840, passed 12-19-17)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be
fined not less than $75 nor more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more
than 30 days.
(R.C. § 955.99(E))
§ 90.30 HINDERING THE CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(R.C. § 955.24)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 90.31 UNLAWFUL TAG.
   (A)   No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious,
altered, or invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the
County Auditor in connection with the registration of that animal.
(R.C. § 955.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 955.99(B))
§ 90.32 ASSISTANCE DOG WITH BLIND, DEAF, OR HEARING IMPAIRED PERSON, OR PERSON
WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT, OR TRAINER.
   (A)   When a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired, a person with a
mobility impairment, or a trainer of an assistance dog is accompanied by an
assistance dog, the person or trainer, as applicable, is entitled to the full
and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities, and privileges of all public
conveyances, hotels, and lodging places, all places of public accommodation,
amusement, or resort, and other places to which the general public is invited,
and may take the dog into such conveyances and places, subject only to the
conditions and limitations applicable to all persons not so accompanied, except
that:
      (1)   The dog shall not occupy a seat in any public conveyance; and
      (2)   The dog shall be leashed while using the facilities of a common
carrier.
      (3)   Any dog in training to become an assistance dog shall be covered by
a liability insurance policy provided by the nonprofit special agency engaged
in such work protecting members of the public against personal injury or
property damage caused by the dog.
   (B)   No person shall deprive a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing
impaired, a person who has a mobility impairment, or a trainer of an assistance
dog when the person or trainer, as applicable, is accompanied by an assistance
dog of any of the advantages, facilities, or privileges provided in division
(A) of this section, and no person shall charge the person or trainer a fee or
charge for the dog.
(R.C. § 955.43(A), (B))
   (C)   As used in this section:
      ASSISTANCE DOG. A dog that has been trained by a nonprofit or for-profit
special agency and that is one of the following:
         (a)   A guide dog;
         (b)   A hearing dog;
         (c)   A service dog.
      GUIDE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to assist
a blind person.
      HEARING DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to
assist a deaf or hearing-impaired person.
      INSTITUTIONS OF EDUCATION. Means:
         (a)   Any state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.32;
         (b)   Any private college or university that holds a certificate of
authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to R.C. Chapter
1713;
         (c)   Any elementary or secondary school operated by a board of
education;
         (d)   Any chartered or nonchartered nonpublic elementary or secondary
school; or
         (e)   Any school issued a certificate of registration by the state
Board of Career Colleges and Schools.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Any person, regardless of age, who is
subject to a physiological impairment regardless of its cause, nature, or
extent that renders the person unable to move about without the aid of
crutches, a wheelchair, or any other form of support, or that limits the
person’s functional ability to ambulate, climb, descend, sit, rise, or perform
any related function. The phrase includes a person with a neurological or
psychological disability that limits the  person’s functional ability to
ambulate, climb, descend, sit, rise, or perform any related function. The
phrase also includes a person with a seizure disorder and a person who is
diagnosed with autism.
      SERVICE DOG. Means a dog that has been trained or is in training to
assist a person with a mobility impairment.
(R.C. §§ 955.011(B), 955.43(C))
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(D))
Cross-reference:
   Assaulting assistance dog, see §
136.15
§ 90.33 RETAIL SALE AND TRANSPORTATION OF DOGS.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or expose for sale to the general
public at retail any dog under the age of eight weeks.
   (B)   No person shall receive or ship, for sale to the general public at
retail, any dog that is not accompanied by a certificate, issued by a licensed
veterinarian who is accredited by the United States Department of Agriculture
and authorized to issue health certificates for animals in interstate commerce,
certifying that the dog is sufficiently sound and healthy to be reasonably
expected to withstand the intended transportation without adverse effect.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the transportation of dogs in
interstate commerce by common carrier, provided that neither the point of
shipment nor the point of receiving is within this state.
   (D)   No person responsible for the transportation of a pregnant dog shall
be liable in damages for any injury or illness of, or the death of, the dog or
any puppies, whenever the injuries, illness or death results from the birth of
such puppies during the time the dog is being transported.
(R.C. § 955.50)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for a
first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(C))
§ 90.34 COLORING RABBITS OR BABY POULTRY.
   (A)   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings. No person shall sell,
offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry
which has been dyed or otherwise colored. No poultry younger than four weeks of
age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots of
less than three. Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for
sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(R.C. § 925.62)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense; each subsequent offense is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 925.99(B))
§ 90.35 JACKLIGHTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall throw or cast the rays of a spotlight or other
artificial light from any vehicle into any field, woodland, or forest while
having in his or her possession a hunting device, or throw or cast the rays of
a spotlight or other artificial light from any vehicle into any field,
woodland, or forest for the purpose of locating a wild animal.
   (B)   This section does not apply to law enforcement officers, wildlife
officers, military personnel, and officers or employees of the Department of
Natural Resources while in the performance of their duties, or to any landowner
or lessee having a reason to use a light while engaged in surveillance or
protection of his or her property.
   (C)   An officer whose duty it is to enforce this chapter may arrest a
person whom he or she has reasonable grounds to believe is violating this
section, search the vehicle for firearms or other hunting implements in the
possession or under the control of that person, and seize the same.
(R.C. § 1533.161)
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(B))
§ 90.36 RESTRICTIONS ON DOG OWNERSHIP FOR CERTAIN CONVICTED FELONS.
   (A)   No person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony offense of
violence committed on or after May 22, 2012 or a felony violation of any
provision of R.C. Chapter 959, R.C. Chapter 2923 or R.C. Chapter 2925 committed
on or after May 22, 2012 shall knowingly own, possess, have custody of, or
reside in a residence with either of the following for a period of three years
commencing either upon the date of release of the person from any period of
incarceration imposed for the offense or violation or, if the person is not
incarcerated for the offense or violation, upon the date of the person’s final
release from the other sanctions imposed for the offense or violation:
      (1)   An unspayed or unneutered dog older than 12 weeks of age;
      (2)   Any dog that has been determined to be a dangerous dog under R.C.
Chapter 955 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   A person described in division (A) of this section shall microchip for
permanent identification any dog owned, possessed by, or in the custody of the
person.
   (C)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who is
confined in a correctional institution of the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction.
      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person with
respect to any dog that the person owned, possessed, had custody of, or resided
in a residence with prior to May 22, 2012.
(R.C. § 955.54)
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 955.99(O))
§ 90.37 SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ANIMAL. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian, either dead
or alive.
      OFFENSE. Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in violation of
R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Means either of the following committed for the purpose
of sexual gratification:
         (a)   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact
of the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis
of the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and
the penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva
of one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         (b)   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person’s body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
(R.C. § 959.21)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(R.C. § 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is
not specifically provided shall be subject to the penalty as provided in §
10.99.
CHAPTER 91: CEMETERY REGULATIONS
Section
   
91.01   Mt. Pleasant Cemetery
Statutory reference:
   Cemeteries, see R.C. Chapter 759
§ 91.01 MT. PLEASANT CEMETERY.
   (A)   The City Manager shall take possession and charge, and have the entire
management, control, and regulation of Mt. Pleasant Cemetery located on East
Compton Road in the city.
   (B)   Interment of the dead in the cemetery is prohibited without the
written consent of the City Manager.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, without the written permission of
the City Manager, to enter the cemetery between the hours of 7:30 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
(‘74 Code, § 97.01) (Ord. 243-A, passed 8-1-61)
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: FIREWORKS, EXPLOSIVES, FIRE PREVENTION
Section
Fireworks
   
92.01   Definitions
   
92.02   Possession, sale, and use of fireworks
   
92.03   Permit to use fireworks
   
92.04   Manufacturing or wholesale sale without a license; prohibitions
   
92.05   Purchasers to comply with law; unauthorized purchases
   
92.06   Exhibition without a license; prohibitions for exhibitions
   
92.07   Unauthorized transportation or shipping
   
92.08   Application of subchapter
   
92.09   Arrest of offender; seizure and forfeiture of fireworks; distribution
of fines
   
92.10   Safety requirements for fireworks showroom structures
Explosives
   
92.20   Storage of explosives
   
92.21   Blasting permit
Fire Prevention
   
92.30   Adoption of Ohio Fire Code
   
92.31   Removal of flammable materials or obstructions
   
92.32   Protective appliances
   
92.33   Compliance with order
   
92.34   Waste receptacles
   
92.35   Hotel to have fire warning device producing visible signal
   
92.36   Fire suppression systems
   
92.37   Violations of State Fire Code prohibited
   
92.38   Posting arson notices in hotels, motels and other places
   
92.39   Negligent burning
   
92.40   Spreading alarm of unfriendly fire
   
92.41   Unvented heaters
   
92.42   Burning waste or leaves
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance, see §
137.06
   Fire Department, see
Ch. 35
   License to possess dangerous ordnance, see §
137.10
   Vehicles carrying explosives, see §
74.36
Statutory reference:
   Explosives, ammunition and blasting agents, regulations, see O.A.C. § 1301:
7-7-30
   Fire Marshal, fire safety, see R.C. Chapter 3737
   Fire prevention regulations, see O.A.C. § 1301:7-7-03
   Fireworks, state law provisions, see R.C. Chapter 3743
   Ohio Fire Code, see O.A.C. Chapter 1301:7
   Open burning, see O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19
   Power to regulate explosives, see R.C. § 715.60
FIREWORKS
§ 92.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   1.3G FIREWORKS. Display fireworks consistent with regulations of the United
States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.3" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   1.4G FIREWORKS. Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the United
States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.4" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
   BEER and INTOXICATING LIQUOR. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4301.01.
   BOOBY TRAP. A small tube that has a string protruding from both ends that
has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the ends of
the string.
   CIGARETTE LOAD. A small wooden peg that is coated with a small quantity of
explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to fire
aerial shells.
   FIREWORKS. Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of producing a
visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, except
ordinary matches and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.
   FIREWORKS INCIDENT. Any action or omission that occurs at a fireworks
exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of injury or
death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
      (1)   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or other
use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials;
      (2)   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable requirement
imposed by this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743, or any applicable rule adopted
under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743.
   FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE. A discharge site or other location at a fireworks
exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an injury or
death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location where evidence
of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a fireworks
incident is found.
   FIREWORKS PLANT. All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
   FOUNTAIN DEVICE. Means a specific type of 1.4G firework that meets all of
the following criteria:
      (1)   It is nonaerial and nonreport producing.
      (2)   It is recognized and manufactured in accordance with sections 3.1.1
and 3.5 of APA standard 87-1 (2001 edition).
      (3)   It is a ground- based or hand-held sparkler with one or more tubes
containing a nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks
upon ignition, with or without additional effects that may include a colored
flame, audible crackling effect, audible whistle effect, or smoke.
      (4)   It contains not more than 75 grams of the nonexplosive pyrotechnic
mixture in any individual tube and not more than 500 grams or less for multiple
tubes.
   HIGHWAY. Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
   LICENSED BUILDING. A building on the licensed premises of a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy by the
building official having jurisdiction.
   LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR. A person licensed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.
   LICENSED FOUNTAIN DEVICE RETAILER or LICENSED RETAILER. Means a person
licensed pursuant to R.C. § 3743.26.
   LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER. A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.
   LIST OF LICENSED EXHIBITORS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.51(C).
   LIST OF LICENSED MANUFACTURERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.03(C).
   LIST OF LICENSED WHOLESALERS. The list required by R.C. § 3743.16(C).
   MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from raw materials, none
of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the processing of
fireworks.
   NAVIGABLE WATERS. Any body of water susceptible of being used in its
ordinary condition as a highway of commerce over which trade and travel is or
may be conducted in the customary modes, but does not include a body of water
that is not capable of navigation by barges, tugboats, and other large vessels.
   NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.
      (1)   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the user,
including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers, and
snappers;
      (2)   Snakes or glow worms;
      (3)   Smoke devices;
      (4)   Trick matches.
   PARTY POPPER. A small plastic or paper item that contains not more than 16
milligrams of friction- sensitive explosive composition that is ignited by
pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers are
expelled when the item is ignited.
   PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS. The making of fireworks from materials all or part
of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not include the
mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
   RAILROAD. Any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers for
hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings installed and
primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
   RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
   SMOKE DEVICE. A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition that,
upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
   SNAKE or GLOW WORM. A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
   SNAPPER. A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of
explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when dropped,
implodes.
   STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real estate
approved by the Ohio Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or R.C. §
3743.17(F) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
   TRICK MATCH. A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small quantity of
explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small report or a
shower of sparks.
   WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLE- SALE. A sale of fireworks to a purchaser
who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
   WIRE SPARKLER. A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition
and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(R.C. § 3743.01)
§ 92.02 POSSESSION, SALE, AND USE OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 to 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.15 to 3743.21, a
shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C. § 3743.40, a licensed fountain
device retailer as authorized by R.C. § 3743.27, a person as authorized by R.C.
§§ 3743.44 and 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by
R.C. §§ 3743.50 to 3743.55, or as authorized by any municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of these statutes, and except as provided in
R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (H), R.C. §§ 3743.45 and 3743.80 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed
exhibitors of fireworks authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, no person shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this
municipality.
   (C)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
   (D)    No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18 years
of age. No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales showroom
unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or other
responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person, other than
a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or shipping
permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.
(R.C. § 3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H))
   (F)   Purchase, use, and local regulation of consumer- grade fireworks.
      (1)   Any person who intends to obtain possession in this state of 1.4G
fireworks purchased in this state shall obtain possession of the 1.4G fireworks
only from a licensed retailer, licensed manufacturer, or licensed wholesaler
and shall be subject to this division (H).
      (2)   Any person authorized under this division (H) to possess 1.4G
fireworks in this state may discharge, ignite, or explode those fireworks on
private property, with authorization from the property owner, on the following
days each year:
         (a)   January 1st;
         (b)   Chinese new year’s day;
         (c)   May 5th;
         (d)   The last Monday in May, and the Saturday and Sunday immediately
preceding that day;
         (e)   June 19th;
         (f)   July 3rd, 4th, and 5th;
         (g)   The first Friday, Saturday, and Sunday before and after July
4th;
         (h)   The first Monday of September, and the Saturday and Sunday
immediately preceding that day;
         (i)   Diwali;
         (j)   December 31st.
      (3)   Fireworks discharged, ignited, or exploded pursuant to this
division (H) shall not be considered a public exhibition.
      (4)   The municipality may do either of the following:
         (a)   Restrict the dates and times a person may discharge, ignite, or
explode fireworks purchased pursuant to this division (H).
         (b)   Ban the discharge, ignition, or explosion of fireworks purchased
pursuant to this division (H).
      (5)   This division (H) does not limit the enforcement of any ordinance,
resolution, or statute that regulates noise, disturbance of the peace, or
disorderly conduct.
(R.C. § 3743.45) Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony offense for disabling a fire suppression system, see R.C. § 3743.65
(G)
§ 92.03 PERMIT TO USE FIREWORKS.
   (A)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§ 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
   (B)   The approval required by division (A) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition. Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public fireworks
exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal or, if
available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
   (C)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks.
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
   (D)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
   (E)   If the Legislative Authority has prescribed a fee for the issuance of
a permit for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention
officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
their designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite
fee.
   (F)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least one million dollars with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments
that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death, or loss
to person or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of
insurance coverage of at least one million dollars for liability arising from
injury, death, or loss of persons or property emanating from the fireworks
exhibition. The Legislative Authority may require the exhibitor to provide an
indemnity bond or proof of insurance coverage in amounts greater than those
required by this division. The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their designee, shall
not issue a permit until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the
insurance coverage required by this division or by the Legislative Authority.
   (G)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief, or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate. A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal. A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
   (H)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions. In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
   (I)   The Legislative Authority shall require that a certified fire safety
inspector, Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and
after the exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the
exhibition is to take place and determine whether the exhibition is in
compliance with this chapter and Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743.
(R.C. § 3743.54) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 MANUFACTURING OR WHOLESALE SALE WITHOUT A LICENSE; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
knowingly fail to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.05 and 3743.18 or the requirements of R.C. §§ 3743.06
and 3743.19.
   (B)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to maintain complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as
required by R.C. §§ 3743.07 and 3743.20, or to permit an inspection of these
records or the premises of a fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.08 and 3743.21.
   (C)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to comply with an order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.01(B)(1) and 3743.21(B)(1) within the specified period of time.
   (D)   No licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall
fail to comply with an order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to R.C.
§§ 3743.08(B)(2) and 3743.21(B)(2) until the nonconformities are eliminated,
corrected or otherwise remedied or the 72 hour period specified in those
divisions has expired, whichever occurs first.
   (E)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar, or a
match, lighter, other flame- producing item, or open flame on, or shall carry a
concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant or on the
premises of a wholesaler of fireworks, except as smoking is authorized in
specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a manufacturer or wholesaler pursuant to
R.C. §§ 3743.06(C) or 3743.19(D).
   (F)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of the fireworks plant or on the premises of a wholesaler of
fireworks.
   (G)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks or licensed wholesaler of
fireworks shall negligently fail to furnish a safety pamphlet to a purchaser of
1.4G fireworks as required by R.C. § 3743.47(A).
   (H)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks or licensed wholesaler of
fireworks shall negligently fail to have safety glasses available for sale as
required by R.C. § 3743.47(B).
(R.C. §§ 3743.60(E) - (L), 3743.61(E) - (L)) Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony provisions, see R.C. §§ 3743.60(A) - (D) and 3743.61(A) - (D)
§ 92.05 PURCHASERS TO COMPLY WITH LAW; UNAUTHORIZED PURCHASES.
   (A)   No person who purchases fireworks in this municipality shall obtain
possession of the fireworks in this municipality unless the person complies
with R.C. §§ 3743.44 to 3743.46.
   (B)   Except for the purchase of 1.4G fireworks made under R.C. § 3743.45,
no person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks in this
state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than from a
licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G fireworks,
to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after the time of
their purchase.
   (C)   No person who purchases fireworks in this state under R.C. § 3743.45
shall give or sell to any other person in this municipality fireworks that the
person has acquired in this state.
(R.C. § 3743.63) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.06 EXHIBITION WITHOUT A LICENSE; PROHIBITIONS FOR EXHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with R.C. § 3743.53(C) and (D).
   (B)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to R.C.
§ 3743.54 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, or if a permit so
secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation
with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or with a
designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
pursuant to those sections.
   (C)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use at
a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with R.C. §§ 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance.
   (D)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with the
conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or be
under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance
while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
   (E)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to assist
the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the employee
is registered with the State Fire Marshal under R.C. § 3743.56.
(R.C. § 3743.64(C) - (G)) Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony provisions, see R.C. § 3743.64(A), (B)
§ 92.07 UNAUTHORIZED TRANSPORTATION OR SHIPPING.
   (A)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. §
3743.58.
   (B)   As used in this division, FIREWORKS includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks. No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under R.C. § 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly to
the holder of a license issued under R.C. §§ 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
   (C)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under R.C. §§ 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(R.C. § 3743.66) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter does not apply to the following:
   (A)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage, or use in
emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals for
marine, aviation, or highway use;
   (B)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
fusees, torpedoes, or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
   (C)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
   (D)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state, as recognized by the Adjutant General of Ohio, of pyrotechnic
devices;
   (E)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
   (F)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms, or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
   (G)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use of
wire sparklers.
   (H)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use an
explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
      (1)   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
      (2)   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet;
      (3)   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations of
the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department of
the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect to
the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the exhibition.
(R.C. § 3743.80)
§ 92.09 ARREST OF OFFENDER; SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF FIREWORKS; DISTRIBUTION
OF FINES.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal, an assistant fire marshal, or a certified fire
safety inspector may arrest, or may cause the arrest of, any person whom he or
she finds in the act of violating, or who he or she has reasonable cause to
believe has violated, any provision of this subchapter. Any arrest shall be
made in accordance with statutory and constitutional provisions governing
arrests by law enforcement officers.
   (B)   If the Fire Marshal, an assistant fire marshal, or certified fire
safety inspector has probable cause to believe that fireworks are being
manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in violation of this
subchapter, he or she may seize the fireworks. Any seizure of fireworks shall
be made in accordance with statutory and constitutional provisions governing
searches and seizures by law enforcement officers. The Fire Marshal’s office or
certified fire safety inspector’s office shall impound at the site or safely
keep seized fireworks pending the time they are no longer needed as evidence. A
sample of the seized fireworks is sufficient for evidentiary purposes. The
remainder of the seized fireworks may be disposed of pursuant to an order from
a court of competent jurisdiction after notice and a hearing.
   (C)   Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in
violation of this subchapter shall be forfeited by the offender. The Fire
Marshal’s office or certified fire safety inspector’s office shall dispose of
seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified in R.C. §§ 2981.11 to
2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law enforcement agencies, and
the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for claims for the loss of or
damages to the seized fireworks.
   (D)   This section does not affect the authority of peace officers, as
defined in R.C. § 2935.01, to make arrests for violations of this subchapter or
to seize fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, or used in
violation of this subchapter.
   (E)   Any fines imposed for a violation of this subchapter relating to the
sale, purchase, possession, or discharge of fireworks shall be distributed as
set forth in R.C. § 3743.68(D).
(R.C. § 3743.68)
§ 92.10 SAFETY REQUIREMENTS FOR FIREWORKS SHOWROOM STRUCTURES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as described in division (A)(2) of this section, all
retail sales of 1.4G fireworks by a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler shall
only occur from an approved retail sales showroom on a licensed premises or
from a representative sample showroom as described in this section on a
licensed premises. For the purposes of this section, a retail sale includes the
transfer of the possession of the 1.4G fireworks from the licensed manufacturer
or wholesaler to the purchaser of the fireworks.
      (2)   Sales of 1.4G fireworks to a licensed exhibitor for a properly
permitted exhibition shall occur in accordance with the provisions of the Ohio
Revised Code and rules adopted by the Fire Marshal under R.C. Chapter 119. Such
rules shall specify, at a minimum, that the licensed exhibitor holds a license
under R.C. § 3743.51, that the exhibitor possesses a valid exhibition permit
issued in accordance with R.C. § 3743.54, and that the fireworks shipped are to
be used at the specifically permitted exhibition.
   (B)   All wholesale sales of fireworks by a licensed manufacturer or
wholesaler shall only occur from a licensed premises to persons who intend to
resell the fireworks purchased at wholesale. A wholesale sale by a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler may occur as follows:
      (1)   The direct sale and shipment of fireworks to a person outside of
this state;
      (2)   From an approved retail sales showroom as described in this
section;
      (3)   From a representative sample showroom as described in this section;
      (4)   By delivery of wholesale fireworks to a purchaser at a licensed
premises outside of a structure or building on that premises. All other
portions of the wholesale sales transaction may occur at any location on a
licensed premises.
      (5)   Any other method as described in rules adopted by the Fire Marshal
under R.C. Chapter 119.
   (C)   (1)   A licensed manufacturer or wholesaler shall only sell 1.4G
fireworks from a representative sample showroom or a retail sales showroom.
Each licensed premises shall only contain one sales structure.
      (2)   A representative sample showroom shall consist of a structure
constructed and maintained in accordance with the Nonresidential Building Code
adopted under R.C. Chapter 3781 and the Fire Code adopted under R.C. § 3737.82
for a use and occupancy group that permits mercantile sales. A representative
sample showroom shall not contain any pyrotechnics, pyrotechnic materials,
fireworks, explosives, explosive materials, or any similar hazardous materials
or substances. A representative sample showroom shall be used only for the
public viewing of fireworks product representations, including paper materials,
packaging materials, catalogs, photographs, or other similar product
depictions. The delivery of product to a purchaser of fireworks at a licensed
premises that has a representative sample structure shall not occur inside any
structure on a licensed premises. Such product delivery shall occur on the
licensed premises in a manner prescribed by rules adopted by the Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   If a manufacturer or wholesaler elects to conduct sales from a
retail sales showroom, the showroom structures, to which the public may have
any access and in which employees are required to work, on all licensed
premises, shall comply with the following safety requirements:
         (a)   A fireworks showroom that is constructed or upon which expansion
is undertaken on and after June 30, 1997, shall be equipped with interlinked
fire detection, fire suppression, smoke exhaust, and smoke evacuation systems
that are approved by the Superintendent of the Division of Industrial
Compliance in the Department of Commerce.
         (b)   1.   A fireworks showroom that first begins to operate on or
after June 30, 1997, or that resumes operations at any time after a period of
inactive status of licensure greater than one year, and to which the public has
access for retail purposes shall not exceed 7,500 square feet in floor area.
            2.   A fireworks showroom that, through construction of a new
showroom, expansion of an existing showroom, or similar means, first exceeds
5,000 square feet, to which the public has access for retail purposes, after
February 7, 2022, shall be equipped with a sprinkler system that meets the
criteria for sprinkler systems in extra hazard (group 2) occupancies under
“NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems (2019 Edition)”.
            3.    Notwithstanding division (D) of this section, the State Fire
Marshal may provide a variance to the requirements of division (C)(3)(b)2. of
this section pursuant to R.C. § 3743.59 for a sprinkler system that matches or
exceeds the degree of safety provided by a sprinkler system that meets the
criteria for sprinkler systems in extra hazard (group 2) occupancies under
“NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems (2019 Edition)”.
         (c)   A newly constructed or an existing fireworks showroom structure
that exists on September 23, 2008, but that, on or after September 23, 2008, is
altered or added to in a manner requiring the submission of plans, drawings,
specifications, or data pursuant to R.C. § 3791.04, shall comply with a graphic
floor plan layout that is approved by the Fire Marshal and Superintendent of
the Division of Industrial Compliance showing width of aisles, parallel
arrangement of aisles to exits, number of exits per wall, maximum occupancy
load, evacuation plan for occupants, height of storage or display of
merchandise, and other information as may be required by the Fire Marshal and
Superintendent.
         (d)   A fireworks showroom structure that exists on June 30, 1997,
shall be in compliance on or after June 30, 1997, with floor plans showing
occupancy load limits and internal circulation and egress patterns that are
approved by the Fire Marshal and Superintendent of Industrial Compliance, and
that are submitted under seal as required by R.C. § 3791.04.
   (D)   The safety requirements established in division (C) of this section
are not subject to any variance, waiver, or exclusion pursuant to this chapter
or any applicable building code.
(R.C. § 3743.25)  Penalty, see §
92.99
EXPLOSIVES
§ 92.20 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.
   It shall be unlawful to store at any time within the municipality a quantity
of gunpowder or other similar explosive weighing in excess of 100 pounds.
Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Illegal manufacture or processing of explosives, felony provisions, see R.C.
§ 2923.17
§ 92.21 BLASTING PERMIT.
   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the municipality without
making application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of the
intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the Mayor or other
proper municipal officer. The Mayor or other proper municipal officer before
granting such permit may require the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify
the municipality and all other persons against injury or damages which might
result from the proposed blasting.
Penalty, see §
92.99
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 92.30 ADOPTION OF OHIO FIRE CODE.
   There is hereby adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosion, a code
pertaining to fire, fire hazards, and fire and life safety and known as the
Ohio Fire Code, the 2005 edition, including any amendments or appendices
thereto, and the whole thereof, save except such portions as are hereinafter
deleted, or amended, of which not less than one copy has been and is now on
file in the office of the Clerk, and of which copies are available to the
public at cost. The Ohio Fire Code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully
as if set out in length herein and from the date on which this section shall
become effective, the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits
of the City of Mt. Healthy, Hamilton County, Ohio.
(Ord. 07-1514, passed 11-20-07)
§ 92.31 REMOVAL OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS OR OBSTRUCTIONS.
   Any flammable or combustible materials not arranged or stored in such a
manner as to afford reasonable safety against the danger of fire, or any matter
stored or arranged in such a manner as to impede or prevent access to, or exit
from, any premises in case of fire, shall be ordered by the Fire Chief to be
removed or rearranged in such manner as to eliminate any fire hazard. The order
shall be in writing and delivered to the owner, lessee, or occupant of the
premises.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.32 PROTECTIVE APPLIANCES.
   If the Fire Chief finds upon inspection that the appliances for protection
against fire are wholly wanting or are inadequate in number, condition, size,
arrangement, or efficiency for the reasonable protection of the premises
against fire, he or she shall cause an order in writing to be delivered to the
owner, lessee, or occupant requiring the installation, replacement, or repair
of appliances adequate for the reasonable protection of the premises in case of
fire.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.33 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER.
   An order to correct the hazardous conditions specified in either §
92.31 or §
92.32 shall be directed to the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises,
building, or structure, or to the person in control of the articles, material,
goods, wares, or merchandise, or to the owner thereof, as the circumstances may
require. It is made the duty of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises,
building, or structure, and of the person in control of such articles,
materials, goods, wares, and merchandise, or the owner thereof, to comply with
the order with all reasonable dispatch and diligence.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.34 WASTE RECEPTACLES.
   Waste paper, ashes, oil rags, waste rags, excelsior, or any material of a
similar hazardous nature shall not be accumulated in any cellar or any other
portion of any building of any kind. Proper fireproof receptacles shall be
provided for such hazardous materials.
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.35 HOTEL TO HAVE FIRE WARNING DEVICE PRODUCING VISIBLE SIGNAL.
   (A)   Every hotel shall have available at least one operational single
station automatic fire warning device approved by the Fire Chief that produces
a visible warning signal when activated by every product of combustion. The
device, at the discretion of the owner, may also be activated by an early
warning fire protection system. Hotels having fewer than 75 rooms shall have at
least one warning device available for its guests. Hotels having more than 75
rooms shall have available for its guests one device for every group of 75
rooms. Upon the request of a guest, such a device, if available, shall be
installed in the guest’s room.
   (B)   As used in this section, HOTEL means every establishment kept, used,
maintained, advertised or held out to the public to be a place where sleeping
accommodations are offered to guests in which five or more rooms are used for
accommodation of such guests, whether such rooms are in one or several
structures.
(R.C. §§ 3781.107, 5739.01(M))
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not
more than $1,000.
(R.C. §§ 3791.02, 3791.03)
§ 92.36 FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Every building constructed in this municipality with floors used for
human occupancy located more than 75 feet in height above the lower level of
fire department vehicle access shall have a fire suppression system installed
and in operation in conformity with the rules of the state Board of Building
Standards adopted pursuant to R.C. § 3781.10.
   (B)   As used in this section:
   FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM. A system that includes devices and equipment to
detect a fire, actuate an alarm, and suppress or control a fire.
   HUMAN OCCUPANCY. Does not include floors of buildings where occupancy by
humans is limited to ingress, egress, and limited access for maintenance and
repair.
(R.C. § 3781.108(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not
more than $1,000.
(R.C. §§ 3791.02, 3791.03)
Statutory reference:
   Fire suppression systems, see O.A.C. § 4101:2-9-04
§ 92.37 VIOLATIONS OF STATE FIRE CODE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly violate any provision of the State Fire Code
or any order made pursuant to it.
(R.C. § 3737.51(A))
   (B)   Except as a violation of R.C. § 2923.17, regarding the felonies of
unlawful possession of a dangerous ordnance and illegal manufacture or
processing of explosives, involves subject matter covered by the State Fire
Code, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(B))
Statutory reference:
   Fire Code violations, see R.C. §§ 3737.41 et seq.
   Ohio Fire Code, see O.A.C. Chapter 1301:7
§ 92.38 POSTING ARSON NOTICES IN HOTELS, MOTELS AND OTHER PLACES.
   (A)   The owner, operator or lessee of any hotel, motel or transient
residential building shall post the provisions of R.C. §§ 2909.02 and 2909.03,
regarding aggravated arson and arson, in a conspicuous place in each room
occupied by guests in such building. The owner, operator or lessee of any
nontransient residential building, institution, school or place of assembly
shall post the provisions of such sections in conspicuous places upon such
premises. No person shall fail to comply with this section.
(R.C. § 3737.61)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3737.99(C))
§ 92.39 NEGLIGENT BURNING.
   (A)   No person shall set, kindle, or cause to be set or kindled any fire
which, through his or her negligence, spreads beyond its immediate confines to
any structure, field or wooded lot.
(R.C. § 3737.62)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(D))
§ 92.40 SPREADING ALARM OF UNFRIENDLY FIRE.
   (A)   The owner, operator or lessee, an employee of any owner, operator or
lessee, an occupant, and any person in direct control of any building regulated
under the state building code, upon the discovery of an unfriendly fire, or
upon receiving information that there is an unfriendly fire upon the premises,
shall immediately, and with all reasonable dispatch and diligence, call or
otherwise notify the fire department concerning the fire, and shall spread an
alarm immediately to all occupants of the building.
   (B)   As used in this section, UNFRIENDLY FIRE means a fire of a destructive
nature as distinguished from a controlled fire intended for a beneficial
purpose.
(R.C. § 3737.63)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3737.99(E))
§ 92.41 UNVENTED HEATERS.
   (A)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply with the
following provisions;
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed, and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings which are
provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (A)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (B)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (C)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.
   (D)   Division (A) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. § 3737.82.
   (E)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (A) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings, and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. § 3781.10. No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (F)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or
liquid petroleum gas heater. No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (G)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale, or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (H)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered
for sale, or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas, or liquid
petroleum gas space heater.
   (I)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas- fired heater that is not exempt from division (A)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use.”
   (J)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.
(R.C. § 3701.82)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
§ 92.42 BURNING WASTE OR LEAVES.
   (A)   No person shall burn any leaves, trash, debris, or any other waste
material within the municipality unless proper authorization had been obtained
from appropriate municipal officials.
   (B)   No person shall ignite, burn, or attempt to burn any garbage, rubbish,
building materials, tree trimmings, leaves, evil smelling or noxious substance,
or other material outdoors on any public or private property within the city.
This section shall not apply to small charcoal or similar fires used for the
purpose of cooking food.
(‘74 Code, § 98.02) (Ord. 81-693, passed 10-6-81) Penalty, see §
92.99
Statutory reference:
   Open burning, see O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to the penalty as
provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of
this section, whoever violates any provisions of §§
92.01 through
92.08 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 3743.60(I) or R.C. § 3743.61(I), or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance, a violation of §
92.04(E) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates §
92.06(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any
other penalties that may be imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under
this division and unless the third sentence of this division applies, the
person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of
fireworks shall be suspended. If the violation of §
92.06(A) results in serious physical harm to persons or serious physical harm
to property, the person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an
assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be revoked.
      (4)   Whoever violates §
92.02(F) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Notwithstanding any
other provision of law to the contrary, a person may be convicted at the same
trial or proceeding of a violation of §
92.02(F) and a violation of R.C. § 2917.11(B), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the violation
of §
92.02(F).
      (5)   Whoever violates §
92.04(G) or (H) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates §
92.02(G) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H))
Statutory reference:
   Civil penalties for violations of State Fire Code, see R.C. § 3737.51(B) -
(H)
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Application of chapter
   
93.02   Attending schools and other public places when infected with
communicable diseases
Food and Food Handlers
   
93.15   Definitions
   
93.16   Permitting unclean premises
   
93.17   Equipment
   
93.18   Cleanliness of persons employed
   
93.19   Health of persons employed
   
93.20   Unsanitary food
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable within this municipality
concurrently with the state and federal laws relative to sanitation and health
and to the sale of pure foods and drugs, and the ordinances or orders of the
county health district, and shall not be construed as modifying, repealing,
limiting or affecting in any manner such laws, ordinances, or orders.
(‘74 Code, § 92.01)
§ 93.02 ATTENDING SCHOOLS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES WHEN INFECTED WITH
COMMUNICABLE DISEASES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person infected with or exposed to infection of
influenza, infantile paralysis, cerebrospinal meningitis, measles, chicken pox,
smallpox, whooping cough, cholera, scarlet fever, diphtheria or other
communicable disease, to attend any public, parochial or private school,
theater or other public gathering. The parents, guardian or other person having
custody or control of any child under 18 years of age, violating this section,
shall be deemed aiders and abettors and may be prosecuted as if they were
principal offenders.
(‘74 Code, § 92.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS
§ 93.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD. As used in this subchapter shall include breads, meats, fruits,
grains, vegetables, milk, juices and all other foodstuffs, food products or
food ingredients in the natural or processed state. The expression shall be
deemed to include all canned, bottled, dehydrated or otherwise preserved foods.
   FOOD HANDLER. Includes wholesale or retail grocers, bakers, butchers,
restaurant or lunch stand operators, dairymen, hucksters, fruit stand
operators, canners or packers of foodstuffs, cold storage house operators, or
other persons commercially engaged in processing, handling, transporting,
storing or selling food.
(‘74 Code, § 92.05)
§ 93.16 PERMITTING UNCLEAN PREMISES.
   It shall be unlawful for any food handler to keep or possess food except
when in original cans, packages or containers, in any room, building,
establishment or other place, unless such place:
   (A)   Shall be adequately lighted to reveal any dirt or unwholesome
condition which might exist.
   (B)   Shall consist of smooth, tight floors, walls and ceilings, free from
projections, cracks and crevices and kept clean and sanitary at all times by
painting, scrubbing and cleaning to prevent the accumulation of dirt and filth.
   (C)   Shall be adequately ventilated and screened against flies and other
insects.
   (D)   Shall be free from all vermin and rodents.
   (E)   Shall be provided with an ample supply of pure and uncontaminated
running water with sanitary drainage into a cesspool or sewer.
(‘74 Code, § 92.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.17 EQUIPMENT.
   Every food handler’s establishment shall be equipped with an adequate supply
of furniture, machinery, implements, containers and utensils for the proper
conduct of such business, and it shall be unlawful for any food handler to have
in possession or use in connection with such business any furniture, machine,
implement, container, utensil or other article of equipment which is not
thoroughly clean, sanitary and free from rust or corrosion.
(‘74 Code, § 92.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.18 CLEANLINESS OF PERSONS EMPLOYED.
   Every food handler or employee thereof who is engaged in handling food,
except when such food is in original cans, packages or containers, shall keep
his person, aprons, services, caps and other articles of clothing thoroughly
clean and free from dirt and filth. Failure to observe the provision of this
section shall constitute a misdemeanor and the employer of any person violating
the same shall be deemed an aider and abettor and may be prosecuted as if he
were the principal offender.
(‘74 Code, § 92.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.19 HEALTH OF PERSONS EMPLOYED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person suffering from cholera, dysentery,
epidemic or streptococcus sore throat, paratyphoid fever, poliomyelitis (acute
anterior), scarlet fever, tuberculosis, typhoid fever, or who is a carrier of
the organism of any such disease, or who is suffering from any venereal
disease, to serve or handle food, except when such food is in original cans or
containers. The employer of any person violating this section shall be deemed
an aider and abettor and may be prosecuted as if he were the principal
offender.
(‘74 Code, § 92.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.20 UNSANITARY FOOD.
   It shall be unlawful for any food handler to prepare, manufacture, possess,
sell or expose or offer for sale any food which is impure, moldy, tainted,
rancid, unwholesome or otherwise unsanitary or which is adulterated or
misbranded.
(‘74 Code, § 92.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 94: INTOXICATING LIQUORS
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Exemptions from chapter
   
94.03   Restrictions applicable to sale of beer and intoxicating liquor for
consumption on the premises
   
94.04   Restrictions on sale of beer and liquor
   
94.05   Permit required; activities prohibited without permit
   
94.06   Illegal transportation prohibited
   
94.07   Open container prohibited; exception
   
94.08   Underage person shall not purchase intoxicating liquor or beer
   
94.09   Prohibitions; minors under 18 years; low-alcohol beverages
   
94.10   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited
   
94.11   Misrepresentation to obtain alcoholic beverage for a minor prohibited
   
94.12   Misrepresentation by a minor under 21 years
   
94.13   Sale to underage persons prohibited
   
94.14   Posting of card
   
94.15   Good faith acceptances of spurious identification
   
94.16   Consumption in motor vehicle prohibited
   
94.17   Hours of sale or consumption
   
94.18   Obstructing search of premises prohibited
   
94.19   Illegal possession of intoxicating liquor prohibited
   
94.20   Sale or possession of diluted liquor and refilled containers prohibited
   
94.21   Keeping place where beer or intoxicating liquors are sold in violation
of law
   
94.22   Intoxicating liquors shall not be sold in brothels
   
94.23   Use of intoxicating liquor in a public dance hall prohibited;
exceptions
   
94.24   Poisonously adulterated liquors
   
94.25   Tavern keeper permitting rioting or drunkenness
   
94.26   Notice of action to prohibit liquor business
   
94.27   Procedure when injunction violated
   
94.28   Liquor transaction scans
   
94.29   Affirmative defenses
   
94.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages in parks and playgrounds, see §
96.22
   Driving while intoxicated or drugged, implied consent, see §§
73.01 and
73.011
Statutory reference:
   Liquor permits, see R.C. Chapter 4303
   Local option elections, see R.C. §§ 4301.32 et seq.
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL. Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not,
whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol. The term does
not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   AT RETAIL. For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   BEER.  
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   CIDER. All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that contain
0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight that are
made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe
apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling, or carbonated cider
and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   CLUB. A corporation or association of individuals organized in good faith
for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   COMMUNITY FACILITY. Means either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency, or
a political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state, or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to R.C. § 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to R.C. § 4301.80.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET. A closed container, either
refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the interior
of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a key,
magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages, or food may be sold.
   HOTEL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the exceptions
mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.
   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR. All liquids and compounds, other than beer,
containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for beverage
purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by whatever
name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary, or patented.
INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR include cider and alcohol, and all solids and
confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE. Any brewed or fermented malt product or any product
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume. The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.
   MANUFACTURE. All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is produced,
whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending, fermentation,
brewing, or in any other manner.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer or
intoxicating liquor.
   MIXED BEVERAGES.   Include bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials. The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume. The phrase
includes the contents of a pod.
   NIGHTCLUB. A place habitually operated for profit, where food is served for
consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are provided or
permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover charge or may
be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both, purchased by
patrons.
   PERSON. Includes firms and corporations.
   PHARMACY. An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is under the
management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with R.C. §
4729.27.
   POD. Means a sealed capsule made from plastic, glass, aluminum, or a
combination thereof to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The capsule contains intoxicating liquor of more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
      (2)   The capsule also contains a concentrated flavoring mixture.
      (3)   The contents of the capsule are not readily accessible or intended
for consumption unless certain manufacturer’s processing instructions are
followed.
      (4)   The instructions include releasing the contents of the capsule
through a machine specifically designed to process the contents.
      (5)   After being properly processed according to the manufacturer’s
instructions, the final product produced from the capsule contains not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   RESTAURANT. A place located in a permanent building provided with space and
accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot meals are
habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as the principal
business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies, confectionery
stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.
   SALE and SELL. The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
R.C. § 4301.21. Such terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders for
beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the Division
of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating liquor, but
no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been registered
with the Department pursuant to R.C. § 4303.25.
   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that is
assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or more
political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land with
readily identifiable geographic boundaries. SALES AREA OR TERRITORY does not
include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic
area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before
April 9, 2001
   SEALED CONTAINER. Any container having a capacity of not more than 128 fluid
ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR. All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21% of
alcohol by volume. The phrase does not include the contents of a pod.
   VEHICLE. All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for such transportation.
   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIBUTOR. A person engaged in the business of
selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   WINE. All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less than
0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume, that is
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products. The term includes cider, except as used in R.C. §§ 4301.13, 4301.421,
4301.422, 4301.432, and 4301.44, and, for purposes of determining the rate of
the tax that applies, R.C. § 4301.43(B), the term does not include cider.
(R.C. §§ 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 94.02 EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter do not prevent the following:
   (A)   The storage of intoxicating liquor in bonded warehouses, established
in accordance with the Acts of Congress and under the regulation of the United
States, located in the municipality, or the transportation of intoxicating
liquor to or from bonded warehouses of the United States wherever located.
   (B)   A bona fide resident of this state who is the owner of a warehouse
receipt from obtaining or transporting to the resident’s residence for the
resident’s own consumption and not for resale spirituous liquor stored in a
government bonded warehouse in this state or in another state prior to December
1933, subject to such terms as are prescribed by the Division of Liquor
Control.
   (C)   The manufacture of cider from fruit for the purpose of making vinegar,
and nonintoxicating cider and fruit juices for use and sale.
   (D)   A licensed physician or dentist from administering or dispensing
intoxicating liquor or alcohol to a patient in good faith in the actual course
of the practice of the physician’s or dentist’s profession.
   (E)   The sale of alcohol to physicians, dentists, druggists, veterinary
surgeons, manufacturers, hospitals, infirmaries, or medical or educational
institutions using the alcohol for medicinal, mechanical, chemical or
scientific purposes.
   (F)   The sale, gift, or keeping for sale by druggists and others of any of
the medicinal preparations manufactured in accordance with the formulas
prescribed by the United States Pharmacopoeia and National Formulary, patent or
proprietary preparations, and other bona fide medicinal and technical
preparations, which contain no more alcohol than is necessary to hold the
medicinal agents in solution and to preserve the same, which are manufactured
and sold as medicines and not as beverages, are unfit for use for beverage
purposes, and the sale of which does not require the payment of a United States
liquor dealer’s tax.
   (G)   The manufacture and sale of tinctures or of toilet, medicinal and
antiseptic preparations and solutions not intended for internal human use nor
to be sold as beverages, and which are unfit for beverage purposes, if upon the
outside of each bottle, box, or package of which there is printed in English,
conspicuously and legibly, the quantity by volume of alcohol in the preparation
or solution.
   (H)   The manufacture and keeping for sale of the food products known as
flavoring extracts when manufactured and sold for cooking, culinary or
flavoring purposes, and which are unfit for use for beverage purposes.
   (I)   The lawful sale of wood alcohol or of ethyl alcohol for external use
when combined with other substances as to make it unfit for internal use.
   (J)   The manufacture, sale, and transport of ethanol or ethyl alcohol for
use as fuel. As used in this division, ETHANOL has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 122.075.
   (K)   The purchase and importation into the municipality or the purchase at
wholesale from A or B permit holders in this state of beer and intoxicating
liquor for use in manufacturing processes of nonbeverage food products under
terms prescribed by the Division, provided that the terms prescribed by the
Division shall not increase the cost of the beer or intoxicating liquor to any
person, firm or corporation purchasing and importing it into this municipality
or purchasing it from an A or B permit holder for that use.
   (L)   Any resident of this state or any member of the armed forces of the
United States who has attained the age of 21 years from bringing into this
municipality for personal use and not for resale not more than one liter of
spirituous liquor, 4.5 liters of wine, or 288 ounces of beer in any 30 day
period, and the same is free of any tax consent fee when the resident or member
of the armed forces physically possesses and accompanies the spirituous liquor,
wine or beer on returning from a foreign country, another state, or an insular
possession of the United States.
   (M)   Persons at least 21 years of age who collect ceramic commemorative
bottles containing spirituous liquor that have unbroken federal tax stamps on
them from selling or trading the bottles to other collectors. The bottles shall
originally have been purchased at retail from the Division, legally imported
under division (L) of this section, or legally imported pursuant to a supplier
registration issued by the Division. The sales shall be for the purpose of
exchanging a ceramic commemorative bottle between private collectors and shall
not be for the purpose of selling the spirituous liquor for personal
consumption. The sale or exchange authorized by this division shall not occur
on the premises of any permit holder, shall not be made in connection with the
business of any permit holder, and shall not be made in connection with any
mercantile business.
   (N)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor without a liquor permit at a
private residence, not more than five times per calendar year at a residence
address, at an event that has the following characteristics:
      (1)   The event is for a charitable, benevolent, or political purpose,
but shall not include any event the proceeds of which are for the profit or
gain of any individual;
      (2)   The event has in attendance not more than 50 people;
      (3)   The event shall be for a period not to exceed 12 hours;
      (4)   The sale of beer and intoxicating liquor at the event shall not
take place between 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.;
      (5)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or consume beer or
intoxicating liquor at the event and no beer or intoxicating liquor shall be
sold to any person under 21 years of age at the event; and
      (6)   No person at the event shall sell or furnish beer or intoxicating
liquor to an intoxicated person.
   (O)   The possession or consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor by a
person who is under 21 years of age and who is a student at an accredited
college or university, provided that both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is required to taste and expectorate the beer or
intoxicating liquor for a culinary, food service, or hospitality course.
      (2)   The person is under the direct supervision of the instructor of the
culinary, food service, or hospitality course.
(R.C. § 4301.20)
§ 94.03 RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO SALE OF BEER AND INTOXICATING LIQUOR FOR
CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES.
   (A)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises is subject to the following restrictions, in addition to those imposed
by the rules and orders of the Division of Liquor Control:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter
4301, beer or intoxicating liquor may be served to a person not seated at a
table unless there is reason to believe that the beer or intoxicating liquor so
served will be consumed by a person under 21 years of age.
      (2)   Beer or intoxicating liquor may be served by a hotel in the room of
a bona fide guest, and may be sold by a hotel holding a D-5a permit, or a hotel
holding a D-3 or D-5 permit that otherwise meets all of the requirements for
holding a D-5a permit, by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage
cabinet that shall be located only in the hotel room of a registered guest. A
hotel may sell beer or intoxicating liquor as authorized by its permit to a
registered guest by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet
in accordance with the following requirements:
         (a)   Only a person 21 years of age or older who is a guest registered
to stay in a guestroom shall be provided a key, magnetic card, or other similar
device necessary to obtain access to the contents of a controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guestroom.
         (b)   The hotel shall comply with R.C. § 4301.22, or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance, in connection with the handling, restocking, and
replenishing of the beer and intoxicating liquor in the controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet.
         (c)   The hotel shall replenish or restock beer and intoxicating
liquor in any controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet only during the
hours during which the hotel may serve or sell beer and intoxicating liquor.
         (d)   The registered guest shall verify in writing that the guest has
read and understands the language that shall be posted on the controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet as required by division (A)(2)(e) of this section.
         (e)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating liquor pursuant
to division (A)(2) of this section shall post on the controlled access alcohol
and beverage cabinet, in conspicuous language, the following notice:
      “The alcoholic beverages contained in this cabinet shall not be removed
from the premises.”
         (f)   The hotel shall maintain a record of each sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor made by the hotel by means of a controlled access alcohol
and beverage cabinet for any period in which the permit holder is authorized to
hold the permit pursuant to R.C. §§ 4303.26 and 4303.27 and any additional
period during which an applicant exercises its right to appeal a rejection by
the Division of Liquor Control to renew a permit pursuant to R.C. § 4303.271.
The records maintained by the hotel shall comply with both of the following:
            1.   Include the name, address, age, and signature of each hotel
guest who is provided access by the hotel to a controlled access alcohol and
beverage cabinet pursuant to division (A)(2)(a) of this section;
            2.   Be made available during business hours to authorized agents
of the Division of Liquor Control pursuant to R.C. § 4301.10(A)(6) or to
enforcement agents of the Department of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. §§
5502.13 to 5502.19.
         (g)   The hotel shall observe all other applicable rules adopted by
the Division of Liquor Control and the Liquor Control Commission.
      (3)   The seller shall not require the purchase of food with the purchase
of beer or intoxicating liquor; nor shall the seller of beer or intoxicating
liquor give away food of any kind in connection with the sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor, except as authorized by rule of the state Liquor Control
Commission.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.62(B)(8), the seller
shall not permit the purchaser to remove beer or intoxicating liquor so sold
from the premises.
      (5)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating liquor pursuant to
division (A)(2) of this section shall provide a registered guest with the
opportunity to refuse to accept a key, magnetic card, or other similar device
necessary to obtain access to the contents of a controlled access alcohol and
beverage cabinet in that guest room. If a registered guest refuses to accept
such key, magnetic card, or other similar device, the hotel shall not assess
any charges on the registered guest for use of the controlled access alcohol
and beverage cabinet in that guest room.
(R.C. § 4301.21)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C)) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OF BEER AND LIQUOR.
   (A)   Restrictions on sales. Sales of beer and intoxicating liquor under all
classes of permits and from liquor stores are subject to the following
restrictions, in addition to those imposed by the rules or orders of the state
Division of Liquor Control.
      (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no beer or intoxicating liquor shall be sold to any person under
21 years of age.
         (b)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18
years of age. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended, revoked,
or cancelled because of a violation of this subdivision (A)(1)(b).
         (c)   Except as provided in division (A)(1)(d) of this section, all of
the following apply to the handling, serving, and selling of beer and
intoxicating liquor by a person employed by a permit holder:
            1.   No person under 19 years of age shall sell beer across a bar.
            2.   No person under 21 years of age shall sell wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor across a bar.
            3.   No person under 18 years of age shall otherwise handle, serve,
or sell beer or intoxicating liquor.
         (d)   Any person employed by a permit holder may handle beer or
intoxicating liquor in sealed containers in connection with manufacturing,
storage, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading, and
may handle beer or intoxicating liquor in open containers in connection with
cleaning tables or handling empty bottles or glasses.
      (2)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
      (3)   (a)   No sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made after 2:30 a.m.
on Sunday, except under either of the following circumstances:
            1.    Intoxicating liquor may be sold on Sunday under authority of
a permit that authorizes Sunday sale.
            2.    Spiritous liquor may be sold on Sunday by any person awarded
an agency contract under R.C. § 4301.17 if the sale of spiritous liquor is
authorized in the applicable precinct as the result of an election on question
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of R.C. § 4301.351 and if the agency contract authorizes the
sale of spiritous liquor on Sunday.
         (b)   This section does not prevent the municipality from adopting a
closing hour for the sale of intoxicating liquor earlier than 2:30 a.m. on
Sunday or to provide that no intoxicating liquor may be sold prior to that hour
on Sunday.
      (4)   (a)   No holder of a permit shall give away any beer or
intoxicating liquor of any kind at any time in connection with the permit
holder's business. However, with the exception of an A-1-A permit holder that
also has been issued an A-2 or A-2f permit, an A-1-A, A-1c, or D permit holder
may provide to a paying customer not more than a total of four tasting samples
of beer, wine, or spirituous liquor, as authorized by the applicable permit, in
any twenty-four-hour period. The permit holder shall provide the tasting
samples free of charge, at the permit holder’s expense, only to a person who is
21 years of age or older. The person shall consume the tasting samples on the
premises of the permit holder. A distributor is not responsible for the costs
of providing tasting samples authorized under division (A)(4) of this section.
         (b)   As used in division (A)(4) of this section:
            TASTING SAMPLE. Means one of the following, as applicable:
               a.   An amount not to exceed two ounces of beer;
               b.   An amount not to exceed two ounces of wine;
               c.   An amount not to exceed a quarter ounce of spirituous
liquor.
            D PERMIT HOLDER. Means a person that has been issued a D-1, D-2, D-
2x, D-3, D-3a, D-3x, D-4, D-5, D-5a, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i,
D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-6, or D-7 permit.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no retail permit
holder shall display or permit the display on the outside of any licensed
retail premises, on any lot of ground on which the licensed premises are
situated, or on the exterior of any building of which the licensed premises are
a part, any sign, illustration, or advertisement bearing the name, brand name,
trade name, trademark, designation, or other emblem of, or indicating the
manufacturer, producer, distributor, place of manufacture, production, or
distribution of, any beer or intoxicating liquor. Signs, illustrations, or
advertisements bearing the name, brand name, trade name, trademark,
designation, or other emblem of or indicating the manufacturer, producer,
distributor, place of manufacture, production, or distribution of beer or
intoxicating liquor may be displayed and permitted to be displayed on the
interior or in the show windows of any licensed premises, if the particular
brand or type of product so advertised is actually available for sale on the
premises at the time of display. The Liquor Control Commission shall determine
by rule the size and character of signs, illustrations, or advertisements.
      (6)   No retail permit holder shall possess on the licensed premises any
barrel or other container from which beer is drawn, unless there is attached to
the spigot or other dispensing apparatus the name of the manufacturer of the
product contained therein, provided that where the beer is served at a bar the
manufacturer’s name or brand must appear in full view of the purchaser. The
Commission shall regulate the size and character of the devices provided for in
this section.
      (7)   The sale of gift certificates for the purchase of beer, wine, or
mixed beverages shall be permitted for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed
beverages for on- or off-premises consumption. Limitations on the use of a gift
certificate for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed beverages for on- or off-
premises consumption may be expressed by clearly stamping or typing on the face
of the certificate that the certificate may not be used for the purchase of
beer, wine, or mixed beverages for on-premises consumption.
(R.C. § 4301.22)
   (B)   Division (A)(1) not modified or affected. The provisions of R.C. §§
4301.633 through 4301.637, or substantially similar municipal ordinances, shall
not be deemed to modify or affect division (A)(1) of this section or R.C. §
4301.22(A).
(R.C. § 4301.638)
   (C)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(b) or (A)(4) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(c), (A)(2) or (A)(3)
of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H)) (Rev. 1999) Penalty, see §
94.99
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see R.C. § 4301.251
§ 94.05 PERMIT REQUIRED; ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   No person, personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep, or possess for sale,
furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or intoxicating
liquor in this state, or transport, or import, or cause to be transported or
imported any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in or into this municipality
for delivery, use or sale, unless such person has fully complied with R.C.
Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued by the Division of
Liquor Control and in force at the time.
      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker, or
retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain,
or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor, or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders, or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by R.C.
Chapter 4301 or R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No function,
event, or party shall take place at any location other than a liquor permit
premises where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take orders, or
receive offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer or
intoxicating liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized by
R.C. Chapter 4301 or R.C. Chapter 4303 Code or rules adopted thereunder.
(R.C. § 4303.25)
   (B)   Activities prohibited without permit.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION. An organization described under section 501
(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code and exempt from federal income taxation
under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         FUNDRAISER. Means a raffle, silent auction, or event where a door
prize is awarded.
         POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. Means a political organization defined under
section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         RAFFLE. Means a raffle conducted in accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915.
         SILENT AUCTION. Means a method of submitting bids in writing by one or
more persons and, after a review of all the bids received, personal property is
awarded to the highest and most responsive bidder.
      (2)   No person, personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
who is not the holder of an A permit issued by the Ohio Division of Liquor
Control, in force at the time, and authorizing the manufacture of beer or
intoxicating liquor, or who is not an agent or employee of the Division
authorized to manufacture such beer or intoxicating liquor, shall manufacture
any beer or intoxicating liquor for sale, or shall manufacture spirituous
liquor.
      (3)   No person, personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
who is not the holder of an A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, or S permit issued by the
Division, in force at the time, and authorizing the sale of beer, intoxicating
liquor, or alcohol, or who is not an agent or employee of the Division or the
Tax Commissioner authorized to sell such beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol,
shall sell, keep, or possess beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol for sale to
any persons other than those authorized by R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 to
purchase any beer or intoxicating liquor, or sell any alcohol at retail.
      (4)   No person, personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
who is the holder of a permit issued by the Division, shall sell, keep, or
possess for sale any intoxicating liquor not purchased from the Division or
from the holder of a permit issued by the Division authorizing the sale of such
intoxicating liquor unless the same has been purchased with the special consent
of the Division. The Division shall revoke the permit of any person convicted
of a violation of division (B)(3) of this section.
      (5)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
         (a)   The sale or possession for sale of any low- alcohol beverage;
         (b)   Beer and intoxicating liquor that is given away if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The beer or intoxicating liquor is given away by a charitable
or political organization to a participant in a fundraiser.
            2.   Any beer, wine, or mixed beverages given away via the
fundraiser is purchased from a person issued a permit under R.C. Chapter 4303.
            3.   Any spirituous liquor given away via the fundraiser is
purchased from an agency store located in this state.
            4.    Regarding any spirituous liquor donated to the charitable or
political organization for purposes of the fundraiser, the donor is not an
agency store located in this state and submits to the charitable or political
organization receipts showing that the donor purchased the spirituous liquor
from an agency store located in this state.
            5.   The charitable or political organization submits purchase
receipts for the spirituous liquor given away via a fundraiser to the Division
of Liquor Control as proof that the spirituous liquor was purchased from an
agency store located in this state. The charitable or political organization
shall submit the receipts in accordance with procedures that the Division shall
establish.
(R.C. § 4301.58) (‘74 Code, § 114.01)
   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C)) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 ILLEGAL TRANSPORTATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, who is not the holder of an H permit shall transport beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in this municipality. This section does not
apply to the transportation and delivery of beer, alcohol, or intoxicating
liquor purchased or to be purchased from the holder of a permit issued by the
Division of Liquor Control, in force at the time, and authorizing the sale and
delivery of the beer, alcohol, or intoxicating liquor so transported, or to the
transportation and delivery of beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol purchased
from the Department or the Tax Commissioner, or purchased by the holder of an A
or B permit outside this state, and transported within this municipality by
them in their own trucks for the purpose of sale under their permits.
(R.C. § 4301.60)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
§ 94.07 OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE means a vehicle registered under R.C. § 4503.24.
      HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (B)   No person shall have in the person's possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(e) of this section, in a
state liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (C) or (J) of this section, on the
premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway,
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway, or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (C)   (1)    A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of any of the following:
         (a)   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, D-9, E, F,
F-2, F-5, F-7, F-8, or F-9 permit;
         (b)   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2, A-2f, S-1, or S-2 permit holder for consumption on the premises of a
farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or wine served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6 permit;
         (c)   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;
         (d)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         (e)   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting
sample, as defined in R.C. § 4301.171;
         (f)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed in an outdoor area
described in R.C. § 4303.188(B)(1).
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued. As used in this division (C)(2), MUSIC FESTIVAL means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(3)(a) of this section:
            ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE means a concert comprised of a group of not
fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER means an outdoor performing arts
center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and that is open for
performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (C)(3)(b)
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the F-9 permit
holder grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the
period for which the F-9 permit is issued.
      (6)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(6)(a) of this section:
            OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to which all of
the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            RACING EVENT. A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one or
more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the opened container
of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-1c, A-2, A-
2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         (b)   Division (C)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to
do either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the possession is otherwise authorized under division (D) or (E) of this
section.
         (c)   As used in division (C)(7) of this section, “D class permit
holder” does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).
         (b)   As used in division (C)(8) of this section, MARKET means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway, or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (E)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (E)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
   (F)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (F) of this section, MARKET means an
establishment that:
         (a)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3717;
         (b)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         (c)   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
   (G)   (1)   As used in this section, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 4303.185.
      (2)   An alcoholic beverage in a closed container being transported under
R.C. § 4303.185 to its final destination is not an opened container for the
purposes of this section if the closed container is securely sealed in such a
manner that it is visibly apparent if the closed container has been
subsequently opened or tampered with after sealing.
   (H)   This section does not apply to a person who has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in a public-use
airport, as described in R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a)(iii), when both of the
following apply:
      (1)   Consumption of the opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
occurs in the area of the airport terminal that is restricted to persons taking
flights to and from the airport; and
      (2)   The consumption is authorized under R.C. § 4303.181(D)(2)(a).
   (I)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of homemade beer or wine that is served in
accordance with R.C. § 4301.201(E).
(R.C. § 4301.62)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
§ 94.08 UNDERAGE PERSON SHALL NOT PURCHASE INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR BEER.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating liquor.
(R.C. § 4301.63) (‘74 Code, § 114.07(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of this section may
order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a reasonable
hour rate established by the court. The court shall designate the time within
which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E))
§ 94.09 PROHIBITIONS; MINORS UNDER 18 YEARS; LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under 18 years
of age.
   (B)   No underage person shall purchase any low- alcohol beverage.
   (C)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or attempt
to purchase any low- alcohol beverage.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (F)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (G)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low- alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low- alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (G)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (H)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of either division (F) or (G).
   (I)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (J)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(R.C. § 4301.631)
   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for which no
other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (B) of this section may order that the fine be paid by the performance
of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court
shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed.
(R.C. § 4301.99(E)) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.10 ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a machine or
other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (C)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(R.C. § 4301.65)
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent violation occurring
within a period of five consecutive years after the first violation, a person
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(J))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4301.99(A))
§ 94.11 MISREPRESENTATION TO OBTAIN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE FOR A MINOR PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name, age, or
other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the purpose of
obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor for a
person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a gift.
(R.C. § 4301.633) (‘74 Code, § 114.07(C))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
§ 94.12 MISREPRESENTATION BY A MINOR UNDER 21 YEARS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(R.C. § 4301.634) (‘74 Code, § 114.07(D))
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first violation of
division (A), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit or nonresident operation privilege or deny the offender the
opportunity to be issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license for a period
not exceeding 60 days.
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also may suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege or deny the offender the opportunity to be issued a
driver’s or commercial driver’s license for a period of 90 days, and the court
may order that the suspension or denial remain in effect until the offender
attains the age of 21 years. The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or driver’s
license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate number of
hours of community service, with the court determining the actual number of
hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall perform.
(R.C. § 4301.99(F))
      (4)   Any person under the age of 18 years who violates division (A)
above shall be apprehended and charged as being an unruly child and taken
before the juvenile court in the county in which the violation occurred as
provided in R.C. § 2151.25, and proceeded against in the manner provided in
R.C. Ch. 2151. On conviction of any person under the age of 18 years for a
violation of R.C. § 4301.63.4, the Juvenile Court may make such disposition of
the case as authorized by R.C. § 2151.354.
(‘74 Code, § 114.07(E))
§ 94.13 SALE TO UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C. Chapter 4301,
no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person, shall
buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish it to
an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian. In proceedings before the Liquor Control Commission,
no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder, charged with a
violation of this division shall be charged, for the same offense, with a
violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially similar municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place while
possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the intoxicating
liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that
person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian and
the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present
at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of the beer or
intoxicating liquor. An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed by a lessee
of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts
or omissions.
   (C)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person.
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person or for an
underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason
to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person
possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be
present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by
the underage person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (E)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place. No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. The
prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage person knowingly
possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or intoxicating
liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse
who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or intoxicating
liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the physician’s practice
or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is charged with violating division (E)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program. A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division if the child
previously has been diverted pursuant to this division. If the child completes
the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the child’s record in the case sealed under R.C. §§
2151.356 through 2151.358. If the child fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         (b)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (E)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (E)(2)(a) or (E)(2)
(b) of this section. If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.33. If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or R.C. §
4301.63, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially similar municipal
ordinance.
   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
      HOTEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.
      LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS and
PRESCRIPTION. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
      MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
      UNDERAGE PERSON. A person under the age of 21 years.
(R.C. § 4301.69)
   (I)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4301.633 through 4301.637, or substantially
similar municipal ordinances, shall not be deemed to modify or affect divisions
(A) through (H) of this section or R.C. § 4301.69.
(R.C. § 4301.638)
   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C), (D), or (F) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If an offender who violates division (E)(1) of
this section was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the
offense occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a
motor vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon
the offender, shall suspend the offender’s temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver’s license for a period of not less than six months and not
more than one year. If the offender is 15 years and six months of age or older
and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s
license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or
permit for a period of six months. If the offender has not attained the age of
15 years and six months, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a
temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1000, and in
addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more than
six months.
(R.C. § 4301.99(I))
Statutory reference:
   Changes to law if federal uniform drinking age repealed or declared
unconstitutional, see R.C. § 4301.691
§ 94.14 POSTING OF CARD.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691, every place in
this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any low-alcohol beverage
is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a prominent place
on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be furnished by the
Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
      Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
      Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or wine
that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per cent of
alcohol by volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the
name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or
to imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card. No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display
this card.
   (B)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the Division
of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
      Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card. No permit issued by the Department
shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit
holder to display this card.
(R.C. § 4301.637) Penalty, see §
94.99
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed weapon, felony, see R.C. § 2923.12
   Possessing firearm in liquor permit premises, exceptions, defenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.121
§ 94.15 GOOD FAITH ACCEPTANCES OF SPURIOUS IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   No permit holder, agent or employee of a permit holder, or any other
person may be found guilty of a violation of any section of this chapter in
which age is any element of the offense, if any court of record finds all of
the following:
      (1)   That the person buying, at the time of so doing, exhibited to the
permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder, or the other person
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card as defined
in R.C. § 4301.61, a military identification card issued by the United States
Department of Defense, or a United States or foreign passport, that displays a
picture of the individual for whom the license, card, or passport was issued
and shows that the person buying was then at least 21 years of age if the
person was buying beer as defined in R.C. § 4301.01 or intoxicating liquor, or
that the person was then at least 18 years of age if the person was buying any
low- alcohol beverage;
      (2)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder,
or the other person made a bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the
person buying by checking the identification presented at the time of the
purchase to ascertain that the description on the identification compared with
the appearance of the buyer and that the identification presented had not been
altered in any way.
      (3)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder,
or the other person had reason to believe that the person buying was of legal
age.
   (B)   The defense provided by division (A) of this section is in addition to
the affirmative defense provided by §
94.29.
(R.C. § 4301.639(A), (C))
§ 94.16 CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor
vehicle. This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. § 4301.62(D)
or a substantially similar municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4301.64) (‘74 Code, § 114.04)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age of 18 years
at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other penalties it
imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s temporary instruction
permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s license for a period of not
less than six months and not more than one year. In lieu of suspending the
offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, the court instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court. If the
offender is 15 years and 6 months of age or older and has not been issued a
temporary instruction permit or probationary driver’s license, the offender
shall not be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months. If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and 6 months, the
offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction permit
until the offender attains the age of 16 years.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 94.17 HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor.
   (B)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (C)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D- 5O, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (D)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (B), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (E)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. § 4301:1-1-49)
   (F)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of such permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of such permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))
   (G)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit. This division imposes strict liability on
the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(R.C. § 4303.208(C))
   (H)   Whoever violates divisions (F) or (G) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4303.99(D)) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.18 OBSTRUCTING SEARCH OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall hinder or obstruct any agent or employee of the
Division of Liquor Control, any enforcement agent of the Department of Public
Safety or any officer of the law from making an inspection or search of any
place, other than a bona fide private residence, where beer or intoxicating
liquor is possessed, kept, sold, or given away.
(R.C. § 4301.66)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 94.19 ILLEGAL POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall have possession of any spirituous liquor, in excess of
one liter, in one or more containers, which was not purchased at wholesale or
retail from the Division of Liquor Control or otherwise lawfully acquired
pursuant to this chapter, R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or any other
intoxicating liquor or beer, in one or more containers, which was not lawfully
acquired pursuant to those chapters.
(R.C. § 4301.67) (‘74 Code, § 114.08)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(B))
§ 94.20 SALE OR POSSESSION OF DILUTED LIQUOR AND REFILLED CONTAINERS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or possess with the intent to
sell intoxicating liquor in any original container which has been diluted,
refilled, or partly refilled.
(R.C. § 4301.68) (‘74 Code, § 114.02)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
§ 94.21 KEEPING PLACE WHERE BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS ARE SOLD IN VIOLATION
OF LAW.
   (A)   No person shall keep a place where beer or intoxicating liquors are
sold, furnished, or given away in violation of law. The court, on conviction
for a subsequent violation of this section, shall order the place where the
beer or intoxicating liquor is sold, furnished, or given away to be abated as a
nuisance or shall order the person so convicted to give bond payable to the
state in the sum of $1,000, with sureties to the acceptance of the court, that
the person will not sell, furnish, or give away beer or intoxicating liquor in
violation of law and will pay all fines, costs, and damages assessed against
the person for that subsequent violation of this section. The giving away of
beer or intoxicating liquors, or any other device to evade this section,
constitutes unlawful selling.
   (B)   As used in this section, BEER has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4301.01.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any premises for which
a permit has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 while that permit is in
effect.
(R.C. § 4399.09)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500 on a first offense and shall be fined not less than $200 nor
more than $500 on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4399.99(B))
§ 94.22 INTOXICATING LIQUORS SHALL NOT BE SOLD IN BROTHELS.
   (A)   No person shall sell, exchange, or give away intoxicating liquor in a
brothel.
(R.C. § 4399.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500 and imprisoned not less than one nor more than six months.
(R.C. § 4399.99(C))
§ 94.23 USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR IN A PUBLIC DANCE HALL PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) of this section,
no person who is the proprietor of, or who conducts, manages, or is in charge
of any public dance hall , shall allow the use of any intoxicating liquor or
the presence of intoxicated persons in the public dance hall or on the premises
on which it is located.
      (2)   The prohibition against the use of any intoxicating liquor
contained in division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to establishments
that are holders of a D-1, D-2, D-3, D-4, or D-5 permit whose principal
business consists of conducting a hotel, a restaurant, a club, or a nightclub,
all as defined in R.C. § 4301.01.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 4399.99(D))
§ 94.24 POISONOUSLY ADULTERATED LIQUORS.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sale, shall adulterate spirituous
liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer used or intended for drink or medicinal or
mechanical purposes, with cocculus indicus, vitriol, opium, alum, capsicum,
copperas, laurel water, logwood, brazilwood, cochineal, sugar of lead, aloes,
glucose, tannic acid, or any other substance that is poisonous or injurious to
health, or with a substance not a necessary ingredient in the manufacture of
the spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer, or sell, offer, or keep for
sale spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer that is so adulterated.
   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (C) of this section,
a person convicted of violating this section shall pay all necessary costs and
expenses incurred in inspecting and analyzing spiritous liquor, alcoholic
liquor, or beer that is so adulterated, sold, kept, or offered for sale.
(R.C. § 4399.15)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $20 nor
more than $100, imprisoned not less than 20 nor more than 60 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4399.99(E))
§ 94.25 TAVERN KEEPER PERMITTING RIOTING OR DRUNKENNESS.
   (A)   No tavern keeper shall permit rioting, intoxication, or drunkenness in
or on his or her premises.
(R.C. § 4399.16)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $5 nor more
than $100.
(R.C. § 4399.99(A))
§ 94.26 NOTICE OF ACTION TO PROHIBIT LIQUOR BUSINESS.
   Any party bringing an action to prohibit the operation of a business under a
liquor permit issued pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 shall, upon filing the
complaint in the action, notify the Division of Liquor Control of the filing of
the complaint.
(R.C. § 4303.40)
§ 94.27 PROCEDURE WHEN INJUNCTION VIOLATED.
   (A)   Any person subject to an injunction, temporary or permanent, granted
pursuant to R.C. § 3767.05(D) or (E) involving a condition described in R.C. §
3767.01(C)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall obey
the injunction. If the person violates the injunction, the court, or in
vacation a judge thereof, may summarily try and punish the violator. The
proceedings for punishment for contempt shall be commenced by filing with the
Clerk of the Court from which the injunction issued, information under oath
setting out the alleged facts constituting the violation, whereupon the court
shall cause a warrant to issue under which the defendant shall be arrested. The
trial may be had upon affidavits, or either party may demand the production and
oral examination of the witnesses.
(R.C. § 4301.74)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4301.99(C))
§ 94.28 LIQUOR TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (A)   As used in this section and §
94.29:
   CARD HOLDER means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or an identification card to a permit holder, or an agent or employee
of a permit holder, for either of the purposes listed in under divisions (1) or
(2) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
   IDENTIFICATION CARD means an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 to 4507.52 or an equivalent identification card issued by another
state.
   PERMIT HOLDER means the holder of a permit issued under R.C. Chapter 4303.
   TRANSACTION SCAN means the process by which a permit holder or an agent or
employee of a permit holder checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for doing either of the following:
      (1)   Purchasing any beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage;
      (2)   Gaining admission to a premises that has been issued a liquor
permit authorizing the sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on
the premises where sold, and where admission is restricted to persons 21 years
of age or older.
   TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE means any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
   (B)   (1)   A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder may
perform a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by a card holder for either of the purposes listed in divisions (1)
or (2) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
      (2)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (B)(1) of this section fails to match the information printed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information so
printed is false or fraudulent, neither the permit holder nor any agent or
employee of the permit holder shall sell any beer, intoxicating liquor, or low-
alcohol beverage to the card holder.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not preclude a permit holder
or an agent or employee of a permit holder from using a transaction scan device
to check the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or
magnetic strip that may be scanned by the device, as a condition of a sale
beer, intoxicating liquor, or a low-alcohol beverage or of granting admission
to a premises described in the definition for “transaction scan” in this
section.
   (C)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles, with the approval of the Liquor
Control Commission, shall adopt, and may amend or rescind, rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that do both of the following:
      (1)   Govern the recording and maintenance of information described in
R.C. § 4301.61(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b), R.C. § 2925.57(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b),
and R.C. § 2927.021(D)(1)(a) and (D)(1)(b);
      (2)   Ensure quality control in the use of transaction scan devices under
R.C. §§ 2925.57, 2925.58, 2927.021, 2927.022, 4301.61, and 4301.611.
   (D)   (1)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
         (a)   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder;
         (b)   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
      (2)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall use
the information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to
be recorded and maintained under division (D)(1) of this section, except for
purposes of R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance.
      (3)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall use
a transaction scan device for a purpose other than a purpose listed in
divisions (1) or (2) of the definition for “transaction scan” in this section.
      (4)   No permit holder or agent or employee of a permit holder shall sell
or otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by R.C. § 4301.611, or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, or another section of this code or
the Ohio Revised Code.
   (E)   Nothing in this section or R.C. § 4301.611, or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance, relieves a permit holder or an agent or employee of a
permit holder of any responsibility to comply with any other applicable local,
state or federal laws or rules governing the sale of beer, intoxicating liquor,
or low-alcohol beverages.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) or (D) of this section is guilty of
an illegal liquor transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender
a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court
shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into
the County Treasury.
(R.C. § 4301.61)
§ 94.29 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.
   (A)   A permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder may not be
found guilty of a charge of a violation of this chapter or any rule of the
Liquor Control Commission in which the age of the purchaser of any beer,
intoxicating liquor, or low-alcohol beverage is an element of the alleged
violation, if the permit holder, agent, or employee raises and proves as an
affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
      (1)   A card holder attempting to purchase any beer, intoxicating liquor,
or low-alcohol beverage presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card.
      (2)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that the
license or card was valid.
      (3)   The beer, intoxicating liquor, or low- alcohol beverage was sold to
the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan.
   (B)   In determining whether a permit holder or an agent or employee of a
permit holder has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (A) of
this section, the Liquor Control Commission or the trier of fact in a court of
record shall consider any written policy that the permit holder has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of R.C. §§ 4301.22(A)(1)
or (2), 4301.63 to 4301.636, 4301.69, and 4301.691, or any substantially
similar municipal ordinances. For purposes of division (A)(3) of this section,
the Commission or trier of fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon
the identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a
permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder to exercise reasonable
diligence to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not
excuse a permit holder or an agent or employee of a permit holder from
exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
      (1)   Whether a person to whom the permit holder or agent or employee of
a permit holder sells any beer or intoxicating liquor is 21 years of age or
older or sells low-alcohol beverage is 18 years of age or older;
      (2)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
   (C)   The affirmative defense provided by division (A) of this section is in
addition to the defense provided by R.C. § 4301.639, or any substantially
similar municipal ordinance.
   (D)   In any hearing before the Liquor Control Commission and in any
criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by division (A) of
this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar
who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 shall be
permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that issuance in lieu of
the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the hearing or action.
(R.C. § 4301.611)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no other penalty
has been provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4301.70, 4301.99(A))
Statutory reference:
   Liquor Director to be notified of court decision regarding permit holder,
employee or agent, see R.C. § 4301.991
CHAPTER 95: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Application of the chapter
   
95.02   Definitions
   
95.03   Nuisances generally; injunctions; violation; contempt
   
95.04   Maintaining certain nuisances
   
95.05   Collection of cost of abating dangerous property condition; injunction;
rehabilitation
   
95.06   Trimming of trees and shrubbery to prevent obstruction
   
95.061   Removal of dead trees and tree limbs
   
95.07   Keeping of animals
   
95.08   Littering roadways
Unclean Habitations
   
95.20   Permitting unclean habitations
   
95.21   When habitations are deemed unsanitary
   
95.22   Order for abatement or vacation of premises
   
95.23   Vacation and abatement hearings
   
95.24   Posting notice of vacation
   
95.25   Enforcement of vacation order by Fire Chief or Police Chief
   
95.26   Enforcement through court proceedings
Septic Tanks, Cesspools, and Refuse
   
95.40   Location of privy vaults, cesspools, and septic tanks
   
95.41   Unsanitary vaults
   
95.42   Removal of contents of vault
   
95.43   Deposit of dead animals, offal upon land or water
   
95.44   Prohibition against defiling spring or well
   
95.45   Dumping of refuse in municipality forbidden
   
95.46   Abandoned refrigerators
   
95.47   Discarding litter prohibited
   
95.48   Power of municipality to fill or drain land
   
95.49   Draining slops, etc.
   
95.50   Stormwater runoff into sanitary sewer
Weeds and Litter on Private Property
   
95.60   Keeping down weeds
   
95.61   Notice to owner to cut noxious weeds, remove litter; service
   
95.62   Fees for service and return
   
95.63   Procedure when owner fails to comply with notice
   
95.64   Written return to County Auditor; amount as a lien upon property
Cleaning of Premises
   
95.75   Order to clean up premises; sanitary inspection
   
95.76   Individual orders for abatement
   
95.77   Unclean premises prohibited
   
95.78   Periodic inspection
   
95.79   Enforcement; court proceedings
   
95.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Obscenity, injunction and abatement, see §
133.15
   Operating a gambling house as nuisance, see §
134.03
   Public gaming as nuisance, see §
134.04
   Unauthorized signs and signals as nuisance, see §
70.26
   Unclaimed and abandoned motor vehicles, see Ch. 98
Statutory reference:
   Authority to enact building code regulations, see O.A.C. § 4101:2-1-09
   Issuance of adjudication orders and stop work orders, see R.C. § 3781.031
   Noise, certain nuisance immunity regarding noise at shooting ranges, see
R.C. § 1533.85
   Ohio Basic Building Code, see O.A.C. § 4101:2-1-03
   Power to abate and prevent nuisances, see R.C. § 715.44
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 APPLICATION OF THE CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable within this municipality
concurrently with the state and federal laws relative to sanitation and health
and the ordinances or orders of the local health district relative thereto, and
shall not be construed as modifying, repealing, limiting, or affecting in any
manner such laws, ordinances, or orders.
(‘74 Code, § 91.01)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NUISANCE. Means any of the following:
      (1)   That which is defined and declared by statutes or ordinances to be
a nuisance;
      (2)   Any place in or upon which lewdness, assignation, or prostitution
is conducted, permitted, continued, or exists, or any place in or upon which
lewd, indecent, lascivious or obscene films or plate negatives, film or plate
positives, films designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition films, or
glass slides either in negative or positive form designed for exhibition by
projection on a screen, are photographed, manufactured, developed, screened,
exhibited, or otherwise prepared or shown, and the personal property and
contents used in conducting and maintaining any such place for any such
purpose. This chapter shall not affect any newspaper, magazine, or other
publication entered as second class matter by the post office department;
      (3)   Any room, house, building, boat, vehicle, structure, or place where
beer or intoxicating liquor is manufactured, sold, bartered, possessed, or kept
in violation of law and all property kept and used in maintaining the same, and
all property designed for the unlawful manufacture or beer, or intoxicating
liquor and beer, or intoxicating liquor contained in the room, house, building,
boat, structure, or place described in this division (3) where the operation of
that place substantially interferes with public decency, sobriety, peace, and
good order. “Violation of Law” includes but is not limited to sales to any
person under the legal drinking age prohibited in R.C. § 4301.22(A) or R.C. §
4301.69(A), and any violation of R.C. § 2913.46 or R.C. § 2925.03.
      (4)   Any place in which a pattern of continuous or repeated violations
of R.C. § 2927.02(B)(1) has occurred.
   PERSON. Includes any individual, corporation, association, partnership,
trustee, lessee, agent or assignee.
   PLACE. Includes any building, erection, or place or any separate part or
portion thereof or the ground itself.
(R.C. § 3767.01)
Cross-reference:
   Penalty and procedure when injunction issued pursuant to division (3) of the
definition of nuisance is violated, see §
94.27
§ 95.03 NUISANCES GENERALLY; INJUNCTIONS; VIOLATION; CONTEMPT.
   (A)   (1)   Any person who uses, occupies, establishes, or conducts a
nuisance, or aids and abets in the use, occupancy, establishment, or conduct of
a nuisance; the owner, agent, or lessee of an interest in any such nuisance;
any person who is employed in that nuisance by that owner, agent, or lessee;
and any person who is in control of that nuisance is guilty of maintaining a
nuisance and shall be enjoined as provided in R.C. §§ 3767.03 through 3767.11.
      (2)   A criminal gang that uses or occupies any building, premises, or
real estate, including vacant land, on more than two occasions within a one-
year period to engage in a pattern of criminal gang activity is guilty of
maintaining a nuisance and shall be enjoined as provided in R.C. §§ 3767.03
through 3767.11. As used in this division (A)(2), CRIMINAL GANG and PATTERN OF
CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2923.41.
(R.C. § 3767.02)
      (3)   Any building, premises, or real estate, including vacant land, that
is used or occupied by a criminal gang on more than two occasions within a one-
year period to engage in a pattern of criminal gang activity constitutes a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. §§ 3767.01 through 3767.11
(R.C. § 2923.43)
   (B)   In case of the violation of any injunction or closing order granted
under R.C. §§ 3767.01 through 3767.11, or of a restraining order or the
commission of any contempt of court in proceedings under such sections, the
court or, in vacation, a judge thereof, may summarily try and punish the
offender. The trial may be had upon affidavits or either party may demand the
production and oral examination or witnesses.
(R.C. § 3767.07)
   (C)   Whoever is guilty of contempt under this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(A))
Statutory reference:
   Abatement of nuisance, bond and notice, see R.C. § 3767.03
   Content of judgment and order, disposition of property seized, see R.C. §
3767.06
   Criminal gang activity, see R.C. §§ 2923.41 et seq.
   Priority of actions, evidence, costs, see R.C. § 3767.05
   Procedure in injunction action, see R.C. § 3767.04
§ 95.04 MAINTAINING CERTAIN NUISANCES.
   (A)   No person shall erect, continue to use, or maintain a building,
structure, or place for the exercise of a trade, employment, or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort, or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (B)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth, or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (C)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water, or unlawfully divert such
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (D)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
AGRICULTURE is defined in R.C. § 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety, or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (A) and (B) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(R.C. § 3767.13) (‘74 Code, § 91.49)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(C))
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 95.05 COLLECTION OF COST OF ABATING DANGEROUS PROPERTY CONDITION; INJUNCTION;
REHABILITATION.
   (A)   Collection of costs of abating dangerous property conditions.
      (1)   As used in this division (A):
         ABATEMENT ACTIVITY. Means each instance of any of the following:
            1.    Removing, repairing, or securing insecure, unsafe,
structurally defective, abandoned, deserted, or open and vacant buildings or
other structures;
            2.   Making emergency corrections of hazardous conditions;
            3.    Abatement of any nuisance by the municipality or its agent
pursuant to division (A)(5) of this section.
         TOTAL COST. Means any costs incurred due to the use of employees,
materials, or equipment of the municipality or its agent pursuant to division
(A)(5) of this section, any costs arising out of contracts for labor,
materials, or equipment, and costs of service of notice or publication required
under this section.
      (2)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of this
section may collect the total cost of abatement activities by any of the
methods prescribed in division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), or (A)(2)(c) of this
section.
         (a)   For each abatement activity in which costs are incurred, the
Clerk of the Legislative Authority of the municipality or its agent pursuant to
division (A)(5) of this section may certify the total costs of each abatement
activity, together with the parcel number or another proper description of the
lands on which the abatement activity occurred, the date the costs were
incurred for each abatement activity, and the name of the owner of record at
the time the costs were incurred for each abatement activity, to the County
Auditor who shall place the costs as a charge upon the tax list and duplicate.
The costs are a lien upon such lands from and after the date the costs were
incurred. The costs shall be collected as other taxes and returned to the
municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of this section, as
directed by the Clerk of the Legislative Authority in the certification of the
total costs or in an affidavit from the agent delivered to the County Auditor
or County Treasurer. The placement of the costs on the tax list and duplicate
relates back to, and is effective in priority, as of the date the costs were
incurred, provided that the municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)
(5) of this section certifies the total costs within one year from the date the
costs were incurred. If a lien placed on a parcel of land pursuant to this
division is extinguished as provided in division (A)(8) of this section, the
municipality may pursue the remedy available under division (A)(2)(b) of this
section to recoup the costs incurred with respect to that parcel from any
person that held title to the parcel at the time the costs were incurred.
         (b)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of
this section may commence a civil action to recover the total costs from the
person that held title to the parcel at the time the costs were incurred.
         (c)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of
this section may file a lien on a parcel of land for the total costs incurred
under this section with respect to the parcel by filing a written affidavit
with the County Recorder of the county in which the parcel is located that
states the parcel number, the total costs incurred with respect to the parcel,
and the date such costs were incurred. The municipality or its agent may pursue
a foreclosure action to enforce the lien in a court of competent jurisdiction
or, pursuant to R.C. §§ 323.65 to 323.79, with the Board of Revision. The
municipality or its agent may elect to acquire the parcel by indicating such an
election in the complaint for foreclosure or in an amended complaint. Upon the
entry of a decree of foreclosure, the County Sheriff shall advertise and offer
the property for sale on at least one occasion. The minimum bid with regard to
the sale of the foreclosed property shall equal the sum of the taxes,
penalties, interest, costs, and assessments due and payable on the property,
the total costs incurred by the municipality or its agent with respect to the
property, and any associated court costs and interest as authorized by law. An
owner of the property may redeem the property by paying the minimum bid within
ten days after the entry of the decree of foreclosure. If an owner fails to so
redeem the property, and if the parcel is not sold for want of a minimum bid,
the property shall be disposed of as follows:
            1.   If the municipality or its agent elects to acquire the
property, the parcel shall be transferred to the municipality or its agent as
if the property were transferred by all owners in title to the municipality or
its agent in lieu of foreclosure as provided in R.C. § 5722.10;
            2.   If the municipality or its agent does not elect to acquire the
property, the parcel shall be forfeited to the state or to a political
subdivision or school district as provided in R.C. Chapter 5723.
            3.   When the municipality or its agent acquires property as
provided in this division (A)(2)(c), the property shall not be subject to
foreclosure or forfeiture under R.C. § 323.25 or R.C. Chapter 5721 or 5723, and
any lien on the property for costs incurred under this division (A) or for any
unpaid taxes, penalties, interest, charges, or assessments shall be
extinguished.
      (3)   This division (A) applies to any action taken by the municipality
or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of this section pursuant to R.C. §
715.26 or pursuant to Section 3 of Article XVIII, Ohio Constitution.
      (4)   (a)   The municipality or its agent pursuant to division (A)(5) of
this section shall not certify to the County Auditor for placement upon the tax
list and duplicate and the County Auditor shall not place upon the tax list and
duplicate as a charge against the land the costs of any abatement activity
undertaken under division (A)(2) of this section if any of the following apply:
            1.   The abatement activity occurred on land that has been
transferred or sold to an electing subdivision as defined in R.C. § 5722.01,
regardless of whether the electing subdivision is still the owner of the land,
and the abatement activity occurred on a date prior to the transfer or
confirmation of sale to the electing subdivision.
            2.   The abatement activity occurred on land that has been sold to
a purchaser at sheriff’s sale or auditor’s sale, the abatement activity
occurred on a date prior to the confirmation of sale, and the purchaser is not
the owner of record of the land immediately prior to the judgment of
foreclosure nor any of the following:
               a.   A member of that owner’s immediate family;
               b.   A person with a power of attorney appointed by that owner
who subsequently transfers the land to the owner;
               c.   A sole proprietorship owned by that owner or a member of
that owner’s immediate family;
               d.   A partnership, trust, business trust, corporation, or
association of which the owner or a member of the owner’s immediate family owns
or controls directly or indirectly more than 50%.
            3.   The abatement activity is taken on land that has been
forfeited to this state for delinquent taxes, unless the owner of record
redeems the land.
         (b)   Upon valid written notice to the County Auditor by any owner
possessing an ownership interest of record of the land or by an electing
subdivision previously in the chain of title of the land that the costs of an
abatement activity undertaken under division (A)(2) of this section was
certified for placement or placed upon the tax list and duplicate as a charge
against the land in violation of this division, the County Auditor shall
promptly remove such charge from the tax duplicate. This written notice to the
County Auditor shall include all of the following:
            1.   The parcel number of the land;
            2.   The common address of the land;
            3.   The date of the recording of the transfer of the land to the
owner or electing subdivision;
            4.   The charge allegedly placed in violation of this division.
      (5)   The municipality may enter into an agreement with a County Land
Reutilization Corporation organized under R.C. Chapter 1724 wherein the County
Land Reutilization Corporation agrees to act as the agent of the municipality
in connection with removing, repairing, or securing insecure, unsafe,
structurally defective, abandoned, deserted, or open and vacant buildings or
other structures, making emergency corrections of hazardous conditions, or
abating any nuisance, including high weeds, overgrown brush, and trash and
debris from vacant lots. The total costs of such actions may be collected by
the corporation pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section, and shall be paid
to the corporation if it paid or incurred such costs and has not been
reimbursed by the owner of record at the time of the action or any other party
with a recorded interest in the land.
      (6)   In the case of the lien of a County Land Reutilization Corporation
that is the agent of the municipality, a notation shall be placed on the tax
list and duplicate showing the amount of the lien ascribed specifically to the
agent’s total costs. The agent has standing to pursue a separate cause of
action for money damages to satisfy the lien or pursue a foreclosure action in
a court of competent jurisdiction or with the Board of Revision to enforce the
lien without regard to occupancy. For purposes of a foreclosure proceeding by
the County Treasurer for delinquent taxes, this division does not affect the
lien priority as between a County Land Reutilization Corporation and the County
Treasurer, but the corporation’s lien is superior to the lien of any other
lienholder of the property. As to a direct action by a County Land
Reutilization Corporation, the lien for the taxes, assessment, charges, costs,
penalties, and interest on the tax list and duplicate is in all cases superior
to the lien of a County Land Reutilization Corporation, whose lien for total
costs shall be next in priority as against all other interests, except as
provided in division (A)(7) of this section.
      (7)   A County Land Reutilization Corporation acting as an agent of the
municipality under an agreement under this division (A) may, with the County
Treasurer’s consent, petition the court or Board of Revision with jurisdiction
over an action undertaken under division (A)(6) of this section pleading that
the lien of the corporation, as agent, for the total costs shall be superior to
the lien for the taxes, assessments, charges, costs, penalties, and interest.
If the court or Board of Revision determines that the lien is for total costs
paid or incurred by the corporation as such an agent, and that subordinating
the lien for such taxes and other impositions to the lien of the corporation
promotes the expeditious abatement of public nuisances, the court or board may
order the lien for the taxes and other impositions to be subordinate to the
corporation’s lien. The court or board may not subordinate the lien for taxes
and other such impositions to any other liens.
      (8)   (a)   When a parcel of land upon which a lien has been placed under
division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(c) of this section is transferred to a County Land
Reutilization Corporation, the lien on the parcel shall be extinguished if the
lien is for costs or charges that were incurred before the date of the transfer
to the corporation and if the corporation did not incur the costs or charges,
regardless of whether the lien was attached or the costs or charges were
certified before the date of transfer. In such a case, the County Land
Reutilization Corporation and its successors in title shall take title to the
property free and clear of any such lien and shall be immune from liability in
any action to collect such costs or charges.
         (b)   If a County Land Reutilization Corporation takes title to
property before any costs or charges have been certified or any lien has been
placed with respect to the property under division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(c) of
this section, the corporation shall be deemed a bona fide purchaser for value
without knowledge of such costs or lien, regardless of whether the corporation
had actual or constructive knowledge of the costs or lien, and any such lien
shall be void and unenforceable against the corporation and its successors in
title.
      (9)   The municipality or County Land Reutilization Corporation may file
an affidavit with the County Recorder under R.C. § 5301.252 stating the nature
and extent of any proceedings undertaken under this division (A). Such an
affidavit may include a legal description of a parcel or, in lieu thereof, the
common address of the parcel and the permanent parcel number to which such
address applies.
(R.C. § 715.261)
   (B)   Injunction may be granted for failure to comply. No person shall
erect, alter, repair or maintain any residential building, office, mercantile
building, workshop or factory, including a public or private garage, or other
structure, within the municipality unless all ordinances or resolutions enacted
pursuant to R.C. §§ 715.26 through 715.30 are fully complied with. In the event
any building or structure is being erected, constructed, altered, repaired or
maintained in violation of such ordinances or resolutions, or there is imminent
threat of violation, the municipality or the owner of any contiguous or
neighboring property who would be especially damaged by such violation, in
addition to any other remedies provided by law, may institute a suit for
injunction to prevent or terminate such violation. (R.C. § 715.30)
   (C)   Appropriation of property to rehabilitate; demolition or sale.
      (1)   In order to rehabilitate a building or structure that the
municipality has determined to be a blighted property as defined in R.C. §
1.08, the municipality may appropriate, in the manner provided by R.C. §§
163.01 through 163.22, any such building or structure and the real property of
which it is a part. The municipality shall rehabilitate the building or
structure or cause it to be rehabilitated within two years after the
appropriation so that the building or structure is no longer a public nuisance,
insecure,
unsafe, structurally defective, unhealthful or unsanitary, or a threat to the
public health, safety, or welfare, in violation of a building code or ordinance
adopted under R.C. § 731.231. Any building or structure appropriated pursuant
to this division which is not rehabilitated within two years shall be
demolished.
      (2)   If, during the rehabilitation process, the municipality retains
title to the building or structure and the real property of which it is a part,
then within 180 days after the rehabilitation is complete, the municipality
shall appraise the rehabilitated building or structure and the real property of
which it is a part, and shall sell the building or structure and property at
public auction. The municipality shall advertise the public auction in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality once a week for three
consecutive weeks, or as provided in R.C. § 7.16, prior to the date of sale.
The municipality shall sell the building or structure and real property to the
highest and best bidder. No property that the municipality acquires pursuant to
this division shall be leased.
(R.C. § 719.012)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical ordinances and codes by reference, see R.C. § 731.231
§ 95.06 TRIMMING OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, grow, or maintain any
shade tree or trees or shrubbery which will obstruct the proper distribution of
light from street lamps or which will obstruct the view of traffic approaching
an intersection by operators of vehicles approaching such intersection from
another direction.
   (B)   All trees shall be trimmed so as to have a clear height of ten feet
above the surface of sidewalks and 12 feet above the surface of the street or
roadway, and the branches of all trees in front of and along lots or lands near
which street lights are placed shall be trimmed so as not to obstruct the free
passage of light from such street lights to the street and sidewalk.
   (C)   The Legislative Authority shall cause a written notice to be given to
property owners ordering them to trim or remove trees and shrubbery so that the
trees and shrubbery conform to divisions (A) and (B).
   (D)   If the property owner fails to trim or remove the trees and shrubbery
as ordered, the Legislative Authority may cause the trees and shrubbery to be
trimmed or removed as ordered, and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
(‘74 Code, § 91.45) Penalty, see §
95.99
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate shade trees, see R.C. § 715.20
§ 95.061 REMOVAL OF DEAD TREES AND TREE LIMBS.
   (A)   It shall be a nuisance and shall be unlawful for any owner of property
to permit dead trees or dead tree limbs to remain on lots and lands within the
city.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the City Manager or his/her designee to serve
or cause to be served a notice upon the owner of any premises on which there
are dead trees or dead tree limbs and to demand the abatement of the nuisance
within 30 days.
   (C)   If the owner so served does not abate the nuisance within 30 days, the
City Manager or his/her designee may proceed to abate the nuisance, keeping an
account of the expense of the abatement, and such expense shall be charged to
and paid by the owner.
   (D)   Whenever charges for abatement expense remain unpaid for 30 days after
a statement has been mailed to the owner, Council, by resolution, may certify
the charges to the County Auditor to be placed upon the tax duplicate,
collected in the same manner as other taxes and returned to the city. Such
charges for abatement expense shall be a lien on the premises from the date of
entry upon the tax duplicate.
(Ord. 24-2060, passed 1-7-25)
§ 95.07 KEEPING OF ANIMALS.
   (A)    No person shall keep any pig, horse, cow, goat, no more than three
dogs at least three months of age in any pen, yard, lot or other enclosure
situated within the city.
   (B)   The owner or keeper of any dog shall keep any pen, yard, lot or other
enclosure for said dog in a sanitary condition and free from preventable
offensive odors. Any fowl or poultry shall be maintained in a pen or other
enclosure more than 100 feet from any inhabited dwelling other than the
dwelling house of the owner of such fowl or poultry; and said pen/enclosure
shall be kept in a sanitary condition and free from preventable offensive
odors.
(‘74 Code, § 91.46)
   (C)   This section shall not limit the number of handicapped assistance dogs
which may be housed outside of a principal dwelling so long as there is no more
than one handicapped assistance dog for any one disabled person upon the
premises requiring the use of such dog. This exception is intended to provide
equal accessibility for all owners of dogs that are trained as assistance dogs
in a manner that is no less than that required by the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990, being 42 USC 12101 et seq. For purposes of this
section, a HANDICAPPED ASSISTANCE DOG shall be defined to be a guide dog, a
signal dog or a service dog.
      (1)   A GUIDE DOG means a seeing eye dog or other dog that meets the
definitional criteria under federal regulations adopted to implement Title III
of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
      (2)   A SIGNAL DOG means any dog trained to alert a deaf person or a
person who is hearing impaired to intruders or sound.
      (3)   A SERVICE DOG means any dog individually trained to do work or
perform tasks for the benefit on an individual with disability, including but
not limited to minimal protective work, rescue work, pulling a wheelchair,
fetching dropped items, or seizure detection.
(Ord. 17-1840, passed 12-19-17) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 LITTERING ROADWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall place or dispose of in any manner any garbage, waste,
or peelings of vegetables or fruits, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire,
paper, cartons, boxes, parts of automobiles, wagons, furniture, glass, oil, or
anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature along or near or on any
public road, street, parkway, park drive, highway, ditch or any land adjoining
any public road or highway or ditch, except on land provided by Council.
(R.C. § 3767.20)
   (B)   No person shall transport junk, refuse or garbage in any manner over
and upon any street, alley, road, parkway, park drive or public highway in such
a manner that it is strewn upon and along such street, alley, road or public
highway.
(R.C. § 3767.21)
(‘74 Code, § 91.48) Penalty, see §
95.99
UNCLEAN HABITATIONS
§ 95.20 PERMITTING UNCLEAN HABITATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to lease, let, permit the occupancy of,
permit the continuation of the occupancy of, or continue the occupancy of a
structure or building or any portion thereof used for human habitation, unless
such structure or building or portion thereof is free from unclean and
unsanitary conditions as defined in §
95.21 and unless the provisions of the subsequent sections are complied with.
(‘74 Code, § 91.05) Penalty, see §
95.99
Statutory reference:
   Regulating occupied buildings, see R.C. § 715.29
   Duties of the landlord, see R.C. § 5321.04
   Duties of the tenant, see R.C. § 5321.05
   Injunction for failure to comply, see R.C. § 715.30
§ 95.21 WHEN HABITATIONS ARE DEEMED UNSANITARY.
   A structure, building, or any portion thereof used for human habitation
shall be deemed to be in an unclean and unsanitary condition when any of the
following conditions exist:
   (A)   Infection with communicable disease;
   (B)   Absence of the toilet facilities required by law or ordinance;
   (C)   Presence of sewer gas;
   (D)   Dampness or wetness due to lack of repair;
   (E)   Accumulation of dirt, filth, litter, refuse, or other offensive or
dangerous substances likely to cause sickness among the occupants;
   (F)   Defective or improperly used drainage, plumbing, or ventilation
facilities likely to cause sickness.
(‘74 Code, § 91.06)
§ 95.22 ORDER FOR ABATEMENT OR VACATION OF PREMISES.
   If the local Board of Health ascertains from examination or reports of its
inspectors or sanitary officers or otherwise determines that a public nuisance,
as defined in §
95.21, exists in or upon any structure or building, or portion thereof, and has
notified the owner, occupant, or person in charge of the premises to abate the
nuisance or vacate the premises, it shall be unlawful to occupy or permit the
occupancy of the premises or portion thereof until the nuisance has been
completely abated and the building or portion thereof has been rendered clean
and sanitary in accordance with the terms of the notices of the Board of
Health.
(‘74 Code, § 91.07)
§ 95.23 VACATION AND ABATEMENT HEARINGS.
   When the notice or order of vacation follows a notice or order of abatement,
as provided in §
95.22, such notice or order of vacation shall not be enforced as provided in
this chapter, unless said notice or order of abatement specifies a time when
the person so notified or ordered may appear before the Board or officer
issuing same to show cause why such order or notice of vacation should not be
issued, and unless said Board (or a majority thereof) or officer is present at
its or his office at the time so specified; such time to be not less than 24
hours after the service of the notice or order. When the notice or order of
vacation is issued as provided in this section, without a previous notice or
order of abatement, such notice or order of vacation shall not be enforced as
provided in this chapter unless it specifies a time, not less than five days
after the service thereof, when the person so notified or ordered may appear
before the Board issuing same to show cause why such notice or order should not
be enforced, and said Board or a majority thereof is present at its office at
the time so specified; provided that when, in the opinion of at least 4/5 of
the members of such Board, an emergency exists which requires, for the
protection of the health of occupants, the vacation of the building or portion
thereof without a delay of five days, then no such fixing of a time for hearing
shall be required.
(‘74 Code, § 91.08)
§ 95.24 POSTING NOTICE OF VACATION.
   Whenever such procedure, in the opinion of the Board of Health is desirable
or necessary, said Board of Health may affix conspicuously on the buildings or
part thereof the notice or order of vacation.
(‘74 Code, § 91.09)
§ 95.25 ENFORCEMENT OF VACATION ORDER BY FIRE CHIEF OR POLICE CHIEF.
   When the notice or order of vacation has not been complied with, and the
Board of Health certifies such fact to the Fire Chief or Police Chief, together
with a copy of the order of notice, it shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or
Police Chief to enforce such notice or order of vacation and to cause the
premises to be vacated in accordance with the terms of the notice or order.
(‘74 Code, § 91.10)
§ 95.26 ENFORCEMENT THROUGH COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   Whenever the Board of Health certifies to the municipal legal officer any
failure to comply with any order or notice of vacation, with the request that
civil proceedings for the enforcement thereof be instituted, the municipal
legal officer shall institute any and all proceedings, either legal or
equitable, that may be appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of the
order or notice and the abatement of the nuisance against which the order or
notice was directed. These suits or proceedings shall be brought in the name of
the municipality. Proceedings under this section shall not relieve any party
defendant from criminal prosecution or punishment under this code or any other
criminal law or ordinance in force within the municipality.
(‘74 Code, § 91.11)
SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS, AND REFUSE
§ 95.40 LOCATION OF PRIVY VAULTS, CESSPOOLS, AND SEPTIC TANKS.
   No owner, occupant, or person in charge of any premises situated as to
permit connection with any sanitary sewer shall maintain or permit to be
maintained on or in connection with such premises any privy vault, cesspool,
septic tank, or other repository for human excreta.
(‘74 Code, § 91.15) Penalty, see §
95.99
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate refuse disposal, see R.C. § 715.43
   Power to regulate privies, see R.C. § 715.40
§ 95.41 UNSANITARY VAULTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner, lessor, occupant, or
person in charge of any premises upon which a privy vault, cesspool, or septic
tank is located to permit such vault, pool, or tank, or any building, fixture,
or device appurtenant thereto, to become foul, noisome, filthy, or offensive to
neighboring property owners.
(‘74 Code, § 91.16) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.42 REMOVAL OF CONTENTS OF VAULT.
   Whenever any part of the waste in any privy vault or cesspool extends to a
point less than three feet below the surface of the ground adjacent thereto, or
whenever use of any such vault or cesspool is abandoned or where such use or
maintenance is prohibited by ordinance or health order, the owner, lessor,
occupant or person in charge of such premises shall cause the vault or cesspool
to be emptied of its contents, thoroughly cleaned, and disinfected, and if
abandoned, to be filled with clean earth or mineral matter to the level of the
adjacent ground.
(‘74 Code, § 91.17) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.43 DEPOSIT OF DEAD ANIMALS, OFFAL UPON LAND OR WATER.
   (A)   No person shall put the carcass of a dead animal or the offal from a
slaughter house, butcher’s establishment, packing house or fish house, or
spoiled meat, spoiled fish, or other putrid substance or the contents of a
privy vault, upon or into a lake, river, bay, creek, pond, canal, road, street,
alley, lot, meadow, public ground, market place, or common. No owner or
occupant of such place shall knowingly permit such thing to remain therein to
the annoyance of any citizen or neglect to remove or abate the nuisance
occasioned thereby within 24 hours after knowledge of the existence thereof, or
after notice thereof in writing from the designated municipal official.
(R.C. § 3767.16) (‘74 Code, § 91.18)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
§ 95.44 PROHIBITION AGAINST DEFILING SPRING OR WELL.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously put a dead animal, carcass, or part
thereof, or other putrid, nauseous, or offensive substance into, or befoul, a
well, spring, brook, or branch of running water, or a reservoir of a
waterworks, of which use is or may be made for domestic purposes.
(R.C. § 3767.18)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
§ 95.45 DUMPING OF REFUSE IN MUNICIPALITY FORBIDDEN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, cause to be dumped or
permit to be dumped on any publicly or privately owned land or water in the
municipality any paper, brush, rubbish, tin cans, vegetation, garbage, or
refuse of any kind, without first having obtained a written license from the
Mayor or other designated municipal officer to do so. The Mayor or other
designated municipal officer shall issue a license permitting dumping of
designated materials when it appears that filling of the land is necessary and
that the material deposited will be immediately covered with earth or will not
be objectionable to the citizens of the neighborhood, or injurious to health,
safety and general welfare of the citizens.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be subject to the provisions of §
95.99, and in addition, the violator shall be responsible for clean up fees
payable to the city.
(‘74 Code, § 91.19) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.46 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person's control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of 1½ cubic feet or more and an opening of 50
square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a hinge, latch,
or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid, without
rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges, latches
or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. This section
shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or semi-airtight
container located in that part of a building occupied by a dealer, warehouse or
repairer.
(R.C. § 3767.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3767.99(B))
§ 95.47 DISCARDING LITTER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause litter
to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned by him or
her, or in or on waters of the state, unless one of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the person
deposits the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents its being
carried away by the elements.
      (3)   The person is issued a permit or license covering the litter
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734 or 6111.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit litter,
or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any public
property or on any private property not owned by him or her, unless one of the
following applies:
      (1)   The litter was generated or located on the property on which the
litter receptacle is located.
      (2)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as part of a
litter collection drive.
      (3)   The person is directed to do so by a person whom he or she
reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle.
      (4)   The litter consists of any of the following:
         (a)   The contents of a litter bag or container of a type and size
customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         (b)   The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily installed or
carried and used in a motor vehicle.
         (c)   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings, and containers of
a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be generated during
routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a motor vehicle.
         (d)   Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings, containers, and
other materials of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to
be generated during a routine day by a person and deposited in a litter
receptacle by a casual passerby.
   (C)   (1)   As used in division (B)(1) of this section, PUBLIC PROPERTY
includes any private property open to the public for the conduct of business,
the provision of a service, or upon the payment of a fee but does not include
any private property to which the public otherwise does not have a right of
access.
      (2)   As used in division (B)(4) of this section, CASUAL PASSERBY means a
person who does not have depositing litter in a litter receptacle as his or her
primary reason for traveling to or by the property on which the litter
receptacle is located.
   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AUXILIARY CONTAINER. Means a bag, can, cup, food or beverage service
item, container, keg, bottle, or other packaging to which all of the following
apply:
         (a)   It is designed to be either single use or reusable.
         (b)   It is made of cloth, paper, plastic, foamed or expanded plastic,
cardboard, corrugated material, aluminum, metal, glass, postconsumer recycled
material, or similar materials or substances, including coated, laminated, or
multilayered substrates.
         (c)   It is designed for consuming, transporting, or protecting
merchandise, food, or beverages from or at a food service operation, retail
food establishment, grocery, or any other type of retail, manufacturing, or
distribution establishment.
      DEPOSIT. Means to throw, drop, discard, or place.
      LITTER. Includes garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles,
wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass, auxiliary
containers, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
      LITTER RECEPTACLE. Means a dumpster, trash can, trash bin, garbage can,
or similar container in which litter is deposited for removal.
   (E)   This section may be enforced by any sheriff, deputy sheriff, police
officer of a municipal corporation, police constable or officer of a township,
or township or joint police district, wildlife officer designated under R.C. §
1531.13, natural resources officer appointed under R.C. § 1501.24, forest-fire
investigator appointed under R.C. § 1503.09, conservancy district police
officer, inspector of nuisances of a county, or any other law enforcement
officer within the law enforcement officer’s jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 3767.32)
   (F)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. The sentencing court may, in addition to or in
lieu of the penalty provided in this division, require a person who violates
this section to remove litter from any public or private property or in or on
waters of the state. (R.C. § 3767.99(C))
§ 95.48 POWER OF THE MUNICIPALITY TO FILL OR DRAIN LAND.
   (A)   The municipality may fill or drain any lot or land within its limits
on which water at any time becomes stagnant, remove all putrid substances from
any lot, and remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains, or private
property, laid in any natural watercourse, creek, brook, or branch, which
obstruct the water naturally flowing therein, causing it to flow back or become
stagnant, in a way prejudicial to the health, comfort, or convenience of any of
the citizens of the neighborhood. If such culverts or drains are of
insufficient capacity, the municipality may make them of such capacity as
reasonable to accommodate the flow of such water at all times.
   (B)   The Legislative Authority may, by resolution, direct the owner to fill
or drain such lot, remove such putrid substance or other obstructions, and if
necessary, enlarge such culverts or covered drains to meet the requirements
thereof.
   (C)   After service of a copy of such resolution, or after a publication
thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality or as
provided in R.C. § 7.16, for two consecutive weeks, the owner, or the owner's
agent or attorney, shall comply with the directions of the resolution within
the time therein specified.
   (D)   In case of the failure or refusal of such owner to comply with the
resolution, the work required thereby may be done at the expense of the
municipality, and the amount of money so expended shall be recovered from the
owner before any court of competent jurisdiction. This expense from the time of
the adoption of the resolution shall be a lien on such lot, which may be
enforced by suit in the Court of Common Pleas, and like proceedings may be had
as directed in relation to the improvement of streets.
   (E)   The officers connected with the Health Department of the municipality
shall see that this section is strictly and promptly enforced.
(R.C. § 715.47)
§ 95.49 DRAINING SLOPS, ETC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drain, cause to be drained
or allow to drain from any property occupied by him or her, any kitchen slops
or other greasy or impure matter in the open gutters or waterways in the
municipality, unless said drainage has been drained into a vault and filtered
through a lesser vault filled with sand and fine gravel, built under the
inspection of the County Board of Health.
(‘74 Code, § 91.20)
§ 95.50 STORMWATER RUNOFF INTO SANITARY SEWER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to carry the
normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from residences, business,
buildings, institutions, industries, and commercial establishments, exclusive
of storm water runoff, surface water, or ground water.
      (2)   STORM WATER RUNOFF. That portion of a rainfall which reaches a
drain.
   (B)   No person, being the owner of a premises, shall permit the discharge
of storm water runoff from said premises into a sanitary sewer located on or
appurtenant to said premises.
   (C)   On written notice to the owner of the premises by the City Engineer or
the Metropolitan Sewer District of Greater Cincinnati that storm water runoff
is being discharged into a sanitary sewer, the owner shall have 60 days to
eliminate the means of discharge. After the lapse of the 60-day period, each
day during which the means of discharge continues to exist shall constitute a
separate violation of this section.
   (D)   The discharge of storm water runoff into a sanitary sewer is declared
a nuisance. The City Director of Law is authorized to institute appropriate
legal proceedings to abate such nuisances.
   (E)   It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to enforce this section.
(‘74 Code, § 50.17) (Ord. 587-A, passed 2-20-79)
Penalty, see §
95.99
WEEDS AND LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 95.60 KEEPING DOWN WEEDS.
   (A)   Any person owning or having charge of land within the municipality
shall keep such property free and clear from all noxious weeds and rank
vegetation and shall be required to cut all such weeds and vegetation on the
lots owned or controlled by him or her at least twice in every year, once
between June 1 and July 1 and once between August 1 and September 1.
   (B)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be limited to:
      (1)   Shatter cane (Sorghum bicolor).
      (2)   Russian thistle (Salsola Kali var. tenuifolia).
      (3)   Johnsongrass (Sorghum halepense).
      (4)   Wild parsnip (Pastinaca sativa).
      (5)   Grapevines (Vitis spp.), when growing in groups of 100 or more and
not pruned, sprayed, cultivated, or otherwise maintained for two consecutive
years.
      (6)   Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense).
      (7)   Poison hemlock (Conium maculatum).
      (8)   Cressleaf groundsel (Senecio glabellus).
      (9)   Musk thistle (Carduus nutans).
      (10)   Purple loosestrife (Lythrum salicaria).
      (11)   Mile-a-minute weed (Polygonum perfoliatum).
      (12)   Giant hogweed (Heracleum mantegazzianum).
      (13)   Apple of Peru (Nicandra physalodes).
      (14)   Marestail (Conyza canadensis)
      (15)   Kochia (Bassia scoparia).
      (16)   Palmer amaranth (Amaranthus palmeri).
      (17)   Kudzu (Pueraria montana var. lobata).
      (18)   Japanese knotweed (Polygonum cuspidatum).
      (19)   Yellow groove bamboo (Phyllostachys aureasculata), when the plant
has spread from its original premise of planting and is not being maintained.
      (20)   Field bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis).
      (21)   Heart-podded hoary cress (Lepidium draba sub. draba).
      (22)   Hairy whitetop or ballcress (Lepidium appelianum).
      (23)   Perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis).
      (24)   Russian knapweed (Acroptilon repens).
      (25)   Leafy spurge (Euphorbia esula).
      (26)   Hedge bindweed (Calystegia sepium).
      (27)   Serrated tussock (Nassella trichotoma).
      (28)   Columbus grass (Sorghum x almum).
      (29)   Musk thistle (Carduus nutans).
      (30)   Forage kochia (Bassia prostrata).
      (31)   Water hemp (Amaranthus tuberculatus).
(O.A.C. §§ 901:5-27-06 and 901:5-37-01)
      (32)   Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European barberry,
further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;
      (33)   Any weeds, grass, or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or
other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches.
§ 95.61 NOTICE TO OWNER TO CUT NOXIOUS WEEDS, REMOVE LITTER; SERVICE.
   (A)   Upon written information that noxious weeds are growing on lands in
the municipality and are about to spread or mature seeds, the Legislative
Authority shall cause written notice to be served on the owner, lessee, agent,
or tenant having charge of such land, notifying him or her that noxious weeds
are growing on such lands and that they must be cut and destroyed within five
days after service of such notice.
   (B)   Upon a finding by the Legislative Authority that litter has been
placed on lands in a municipality, and has not been removed, and constitutes a
detriment to public health, the Legislative Authority shall cause a written
notice to be served upon the owner and, if different, upon the lessee, agent,
or tenant having charge of the littered land, notifying him or her that litter
is on the land, and that it must be collected and removed within 15 days after
the service of the notice.
   (C)   As used in this section and §
95.63, LITTER includes any garbage, waste, peelings of vegetables or fruits,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, parts of
automobiles, wagons, furniture, glass, oil of an unsightly or unsanitary
nature, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (D)   If the owner or other person having charge of the land is a
nonresident of the municipality whose address is known, the notice shall be
sent to his or her address by certified mail. If the address of the owner or
other person having charge of the land is unknown it is sufficient to publish
the notice once in a newspaper of general circulation in the county.
   (E)   This section does not apply to land being used under a municipal
building or construction permit or license, a municipal permit or license, or a
conditional zoning permit or variance to operate a junkyard, scrap metal
processing facility, or similar business, or a permit or license issued
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734, §§ 4737.05 to 4737.12, or R.C. Chapter 6111.
(R.C. § 731.51)
§ 95.62 FEES FOR SERVICE AND RETURN.
   The Police Chief, any police officer, or Clerk of the Legislative Authority
may make service and return of the notice provided for in § 93.41 and shall be
allowed the same fees as that provided for service and return of summons in
civil cases before a magistrate.
(R.C. § 731.52)
§ 95.63 PROCEDURE WHEN OWNER FAILS TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
   If the owner, lessee, agent, or tenant having charge of the lands mentioned
in §
95.61 fails to comply with the notice required by such section, the Legislative
Authority shall cause such noxious weeds to be cut and destroyed or such litter
removed and may employ the necessary labor to perform the task. All expenses
incurred shall, when approved by the Legislative Authority, be paid out of the
money in the treasury of the municipality not otherwise appropriated.
(R.C. § 731.53)
§ 95.64 WRITTEN RETURN TO COUNTY AUDITOR; AMOUNT AS A LIEN UPON PROPERTY.
   The Legislative Authority shall make a written return to the County Auditor
of their action under §§
95.61,
95.62, and
95.63, with a statement of the charges for their services, the amount paid for
labor, the fees of the officers serving the notices, an administrative fee, if
any, charged by the Legislative Authority not to exceed $200 and a proper
description of the premises. These amounts, when allowed, shall be entered upon
the tax duplicate and be a lien upon such lands from and after the date of
entry and be collected as other taxes and returned to the municipality with the
general fund.
(Ord. 20-1909, passed 5-19-20)
CLEANING OF PREMISES
§ 95.75 ORDER TO CLEAN UP PREMISES; SANITARY INSPECTION.
   (A)   Prior to May 10 in every year, the Mayor shall cause a notice or
proclamation to be inserted in one or more newspapers of general circulation
within the municipality, ordering persons to clean thoroughly and provide
proper drainage for all lands, yards, vaults, cesspools, sheds and barns and to
cause all tin cans, trash and other unclean and unsightly matter to be removed
therefrom on or before May 10.
(‘74 Code, § 91.25)
   (B)   Thereafter in the month of May of each year the County Health Officer
or in his absence the Chief of Police shall make a thorough sanitary inspection
of all public and private property in the municipality and such findings shall
be transmitted in a report together with recommendations to the Council on or
before the first day of June. A copy of such report shall also be sent to the
State Department of Health.
(‘74 Code, § 91.26)
§ 95.76 INDIVIDUAL ORDERS FOR ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If, upon inspection, it is found that the published order has not been
complied with as to any lot or parcel of ground, Council shall by resolution
direct the owner, occupant or person in charge of such land within ten days to
abate said nuisance, setting forth the nature of the violation and the acts
required to be done. Said resolution shall provide that upon failure or refusal
to comply with said order, the work required will be done by the municipality,
with the amount expended thereof to be a valid claim against such owner or
occupant and charged as a lien upon said land and recovered by the municipality
by suit in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(‘74 Code, § 91.27)
   (B)   A copy of the resolution adopted under division (A) above may be
served personally or at the usual place of residence of such owner, occupant or
person in charge of such land or by registered mail; or in lieu of such
service, may be published for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality.
(R.C. § 715.47) (‘74 Code, § 91.28)
§ 95.77 UNCLEAN PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful at any time for the owner, occupant or person in charge
of any lot or parcel of ground to cause or permit water to accumulate thereon
and become stagnant, to permit culverts, drains or natural watercourses thereon
to become obstructed, or to cause or permit any putrid or unsanitary substance
to accumulate thereon.
(R.C. § 715.47) (‘74 Code, § 91.29) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.78 PERIODIC INSPECTION.
   Independent of annual clean-up and inspection provided for in §
95.75, the County Health Officer or Marshal or Police Chief shall make periodic
inspection of properties within the municipality and shall report all
violations of §
95.77 to Council, who shall thereupon by resolution proceed to order such
nuisances abated as provided in §§
95.76.
(‘74 Code, § 91.30)
§ 95.79 ENFORCEMENT; COURT PROCEEDINGS.
   In case of failure or refusal to comply with any such resolution of Council,
the work required thereby may be done at the expense of the corporation and the
amount of money expended therefor shall be a valid claim against such owner,
occupant or person in charge and a lien upon such land which may be enforced by
suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. Proceedings under this section
shall not relieve any party defendant from criminal prosecution or punishment
for violation of any section of this code or any other criminal law or
ordinance in force within the municipality.
(R.C. § 715.47) (‘74 Code, § 91.31)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in §
10.99.
CHAPTER 96: PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Recreation Committee; Park Superintendent
   
96.02   Playground Supervisor
   
96.03   Park Groundskeeper
   
96.04   Municipal pool regulations
Park Rules and Regulations
   
96.15   Definitions
   
96.16   Preservation of property and natural features
   
96.17   Garbage, refuse, and waste material
   
96.18   Fires
   
96.19   Firearms, weapons, and fireworks prohibited
   
96.20   Removal from park
   
96.21   Compliance with park personnel
   
96.22   Alcoholic beverages in city parks prohibited
   
96.23   Commercial enterprises
   
96.24   Grazing prohibited
   
96.25   Animals
   
96.26   Games and sports
   
96.27   Permits and reservations required
   
96.28   Fee permits and rental facilities
   
96.29   Use of fee facility without paying
   
96.30   Park operating hours
   
96.31   Motorized vehicles
   
96.32   Heritage Park; Forest Avenue Nature Preserve
   
96.33   Posting copies
   
96.34   Prescribing additional rules
   
96.35   Banning use of tobacco products of all kinds
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 RECREATION COMMITTEE; PARK SUPERINTENDENT.
   (A)   A Recreation Committee for the city is established consisting of five
at-large members to be appointed by the Mayor.
   (B)   Members of the Committee shall be residents of the city and shall
serve without compensation.
   (C)   Originally two members shall be appointed to two-year terms, and three
members shall be appointed to three-year terms. Thereafter, all members shall
be appointed to three-year terms. Vacancies on the Committee occurring
otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be filled for the unexpired term
in the same manner as the original appointments.
   (D)   The Committee shall select its Chairperson from among its members. The
Committee shall meet the second Thursday of every month at 7:30 p.m.
   (E)   If a member misses more than two Committee meetings without being
excused by a majority of the remaining Committee members, that member shall be
removed from the Committee and the Mayor shall appoint another individual to
fill the unexpired term.
   (F)   It shall be the duty of the Committee to plan, develop, and coordinate
programs and activities for the park and swimming pool.
   (G)   There is established the position of Park Superintendent who shall be
appointed by the Mayor. The Park Superintendent, under the direction of the
City Manager, shall be responsible for the operation of the parks and shall
cooperate with the Committee in implementing the programs established.
(‘74 Code, § 31.10) (Ord. 407-A, passed 2-28-72; Am. Ord. 585-A, passed 2-20-
79; Am. Ord. 80-648, passed 5-20-80; Am. Ord. 84-777, passed 10-2-84; Am. Ord.
00-1316, passed 5-16-00)
§ 96.02 PLAYGROUND SUPERVISOR.
   There is established the position of Playground Supervisor. The compensation
of playground supervisors shall be as set by legislative authority, payable
semimonthly.
(‘74 Code, § 96.01) (Ord. 147-A, passed 6-19-56; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-16-
00)
§ 96.03 PARK GROUNDSKEEPER.
   There is established the position of Park Groundskeeper and the salary
therefor shall be as set by legislative authority payable semimonthly.
(‘74 Code, § 96.03) (Ord. 192-A, passed 5-5-59; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-16-
00)
§ 96.04 MUNICIPAL POOL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Rates for municipal swimming pool.
      (1)   The rates of admission for the adult municipal swimming pool shall
be established by and may be changed from time to time by the City Manager.
      (2)   The rates for swimming lessons shall be established by and may be
changed from time to time by the City Manager.
(‘74 Code, § 96.02) (Ord. 318-A, passed 5-17-66; Am. Ord. 517-A, passed 5-4-76;
Am. Ord. 80-644, passed 4-15-80; Am. Ord. 84-769, passed 4-17-84; Am. Ord. 00-
1316, passed 5-16-00)
   (B)   Municipal pool limited to residents; exception. The Mt. Healthy
Municipal Swimming Pool shall be limited to those persons living within the
corporate limits of the city, except as provided in this division (B). The City
Manager is authorized, within his or her discretion, to allow non-residents of
the city to use the municipal swimming pool for up to seven days per week
during normal days and hours of operation.
(‘74 Code, §§ 96.04, 96.06) (Ord. 297-A, passed 5-18-65; Am. Ord. 86-792,
passed 4-1-86; Ord. 90-921, passed 4-17-90; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-16-00)
Cross-reference:
   Free admission to pool for city employees, see §
37.07
PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 96.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY MANAGER.  The City Manager of the city or his authorized
representative.
   PARK. Any land owned, operated and under the management and control of the
city, devoted primarily to outdoor recreational activities, including without
limitation the City Park, Heritage Park, Forest Avenue Nature Preserve, and the
Bernard Avenue green space.
(‘74 Code, § 96.10) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00)
§ 96.16 PRESERVATION OF PROPERTY AND NATURAL FEATURES.
   No person shall injure, deface, disturb, or befoul any part of any parks nor
any building, sign equipment, or other property found therein. No person shall
remove, injure, or destroy any tree, flower, shrub, rock, or other mineral.
(‘74 Code, § 96.11) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.17 GARBAGE, REFUSE, AND WASTE MATERIAL.
   No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited in any part of any park,
any glass, garbage, ashes, sewage, refuse, or any waste material of any kind,
other than in receptacles or pits provided for these purposes. No person shall
dump any earth within the park without specific written permit from the City
Manager.
(‘74 Code, § 96.12) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.18 FIRES.
   No person shall start a fire in any park, except small fires for culinary
purposes, after prior permission has been obtained from the City Manager and
then only in places provided for that purpose. All fires shall be put out by
the person starting or using the same before leaving the immediate vicinity of
the fire.
(‘74 Code, § 96.13) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.19 FIREARMS, WEAPONS, AND FIREWORKS PROHIBITED.
   No persons, except employees or officers of the city, shall carry firearms
of any description, or air rifle, slingshot, or missile-throwing device, within
any park or discharge any firearms, fireworks, or explosive substances, or air
rifle, without specific permission from the City Manager.
(‘74 Code, § 96.14) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.20 REMOVAL FROM PARK.
   No person shall remain within any park who does not abide by conditions
adopted and posted by the City Manager for the preservation of good order and
the protection of property within the park, and no person shall remain within
any park who does not abide by the instructions and directions of duly
authorized employees or agents of the City Manager, in the lawful performance
of their duties. Any person directed by an employee, or agent of the City
Manager to leave any park, shall do so promptly and peaceably.
(‘74 Code, § 96.15) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.21 COMPLIANCE WITH PARK PERSONNEL.
   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any reasonable order relating
to the regulation, direction, or control of traffic, or to any other order
lawfully officer acting under the authority of the City Manager or willfully
resist, obstruct, assault, or abuse any park personnel or law enforcement
officer or any other official in the execution of his office.
(‘74 Code, § 96.16) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.22 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN CITY PARKS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any beer or
intoxicating liquor, or have possession of an open container of beer or
intoxicating liquor, in any city park.
   (B)   This prohibition may be waived for community events such as the July
Fireworks Celebration, park dances, community group fundraisers, and other
events by issuance of a special permit by the Mayor, subject to such written
criteria as shall be established by the Mayor. Such permit may be revoked by
the Mayor if any criteria are violated or unmet, or for any other abuse of the
privilege granted.
(‘74 Code, § 96.17) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 92-1021, passed 4-7-
92; Am. Ord. 92-1037, passed 8-4-92; Am. Ord. 98-1264, passed 6-16-98; Am. Ord.
00-1316, passed 5-16-00; Am. Ord. 06-1482, passed 4-18-06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.23 COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISES.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale any articles, things, privilege, or
service within any park without a permit from the city; and no person shall do
any begging, hawking, peddling, or soliciting without prior permission from the
City Manager.
(‘74 Code, § 96.18) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.24 GRAZING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall herd, graze, drive, ride, or permit to run at large within
any park any cattle, horse, mule, donkey, goat, swine, sheep, or other animal,
or any poultry or other fowl.
(‘74 Code, § 96.20) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.25 ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall bring into, have, or keep in any park, any cat or
other animal destructive of bird life, nor shall any person bring into or
permit within the City Park, any dog. Dogs shall be permitted within Heritage
Park, and the Forest Avenue Nature Preserve but must remain on leashes at all
times and owners are responsible for cleaning up after all dogs.
   (B)   This section shall not be applicable to the presence within the park
of animals assisting handicapped persons (as, for example, seeing-eye dogs),
nor to police dogs on patrol.
(‘74 Code, § 96.21) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 82-720, passed 7-6-
82; Am. Ord. 95-1149, passed 5-16-95; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-16-00)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.26 GAMES AND SPORTS.
   No person shall engage in any sport, game, or amusement except in such area
as may be designated by the City Manager and then only under such rules and
regulations as may be prescribed by him.
(‘74 Code, § 96.22) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.27 PERMITS AND RESERVATIONS REQUIRED.
   A permit or reservation shall first be obtained from the City Manager prior
to the entrance into the park or the use of any park property or facility
whenever required by this subchapter or by any rule or regulations promulgated
hereunder. In addition, the fee, if any is required, may be paid at the time
that such permit or reservation is applied for. All permits and reservations
shall be applied for in advance at the bathhouse. The City Manager may, in his
discretion, issue such permit or reservation on application when same is
consistent with the proper use and protection of the park property and
likewise, in his discretion, may refuse same.
(‘74 Code, § 96.23) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.28 FEE PERMITS AND RENTAL FACILITIES.
   Fees and charges for the use of various park facilities shall be established
by the Council or City Manager and may be changed from time to time.
(‘74 Code, § 96.24) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00)
§ 96.29 USE OF FEE FACILITY WITHOUT PAYING.
   No person, except those with valid reason, or those having special
permission of the City Manager, shall use any pay facility such as, but not
limited to, the swimming pools or the miniature golf course, without first
paying the proper fee for the same.
(‘74 Code, § 96.25) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.30 PARK OPERATING HOURS.
   The City Manager shall fix the hours during which parks in the city shall be
open, and no one except authorized personnel shall be permitted in the confines
of any park under the jurisdiction of the city except during the hours the park
is open.
(‘74 Code, § 96.26) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.31 MOTORIZED VEHICLES.
   No person shall operate or park a motorized vehicle in park areas except in
designated parking areas or by permission of the City Manager.
(Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.32 HERITAGE PARK; FOREST AVENUE NATURE PRESERVE.
   In addition to the general regulations in this subchapter, no person shall
fish, ice skate, swim or wade in Heritage Park or the Forest Avenue Nature
Preserve, nor bring glass of any type into those areas.
(Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-16-00) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 96.33 POSTING COPIES.
   The City Manager is ordered and directed to post copies of this subchapter
in conspicuous places in park recreational sites and other areas under the
control of the Recreational Committee within the city.
(‘74 Code, § 96.27) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00)
§ 96.34 PRESCRIBING ADDITIONAL RULES.
   The City Manager is authorized to establish rules and regulations relative
to the park and recreation areas that are not specified in this subchapter in
order to insure that public welfare of the citizens of the city.
(‘74 Code, § 96.28) (Ord. 81-685, passed 5-19-81; Am. Ord. 00-1316, passed 5-
16-00)
§ 96.35 BANNING USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS OF ALL KINDS.
   (A)   Tobacco products of all kinds shall be banned from use at the city
park pool, community center building and the playground at all times.
   (B)   Tobacco products of all kinds shall be banned from use during all
events at the city park gazebo, area surrounding gazebo, stage, area
surrounding stage, and ball fields including, movies in the park, concerts,
city sponsored events, sporting events including games and practices and any
other events where a gathering of people takes place.
(Ord. 17-1812, passed 2-21-17)
CHAPTER 97: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Conditions precedent to improving streets
   
97.02   Opening permit required
   
97.03   Application and cash deposit
   
97.04   Restoration of pavement
   
97.05   Barriers around excavations
   
97.06   Warning lights
   
97.07   Sidewalk construction by the municipality
   
97.08   Unloading on street or sidewalk
   
97.09   Street or sidewalk obstruction
   
97.10   Materials on street or sidewalk
   
97.11   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean of ice and snow
   
97.12   Ramped curbing for persons with disabilities
   
97.13   Flagpole along right-of-way
   
97.14   Altering or injuring marker or monument
   
97.15   Bond required
   
97.16   Signs in right-of-way
Construction and Repair
   
97.25   Construction and repair may be required
   
97.26   Resolution of necessity
   
97.27   Notice to construct or repair
   
97.28   Assessments of costs against owner
   
97.29   Proceedings may include different owners
   
97.30   Making and levying assessments
Changes in Streets
   
97.40   Change of name, vacating or narrowing streets by petition
   
97.41   Change of name, vacating or narrowing streets without petition
   
97.42   Notice; exception
   
97.43   Publication of notice
   
97.44   Effect of order of vacation
   
97.45   Effect on public utility easements
   
97.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Assessments generally, see R.C. Chapter 727
   Vacation or establishment of streets by court, notice and hearings, see R.C.
§§ 723.09 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 CONDITIONS PRECEDENT TO IMPROVING STREETS.
   No department of this municipality shall accept, lay out, open, improve,
grade, pave, curb or light any street or other way, unless the street or way
has been accepted or opened or otherwise has received the legal status of a
public street or way prior to the effective date of this code; or unless the
street or way corresponds in location and extent with a street or way shown on
a recorded plat which has been legally accepted by the Legislative Authority.
(‘74 Code, § 50.01)
Statutory reference:
   Power over streets and sidewalks, see R.C. §§ 715.19, 717.01(P), 723.01,
723.011, 723.02, 729.01
§ 97.02 OPENING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an authorized municipal
official or the authorized employees or agents of such municipal official, to
make any opening in any street, alley, sidewalk, or public way of the
municipality unless a permit to make the opening has been obtained prior to
commencement of the work.
(‘74 Code, § 50.02) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.03 APPLICATION AND CASH DEPOSIT.
   Each permit for making an opening shall be confined to a single project and
shall be issued by the Mayor or other proper municipal officer. Application
shall be made on a form prescribed by the Legislative Authority, giving the
exact location of the proposed opening, the kind of paving, the area and depth
to be excavated, and such other facts as may be provided for. The permit shall
be issued only after a cash deposit sufficient to cover the cost of restoration
has been posted with the Mayor or other proper municipal officer, conditioned
upon prompt and satisfactory refilling of excavations and restoration of all
surfaces disturbed.
(‘74 Code, § 50.03)
§ 97.04 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
   (A)   The opening and restoration of pavement or other surface shall be
performed under the direction and to the satisfaction of an authorized
municipal official, and in accordance with rules, regulations, and
specifications approved by the Legislative Authority.
   (B)   Upon failure or refusal of the permittee satisfactorily to fill the
excavation, restore the surface, and remove all excess materials within the
time specified in the permit or where not specified therein, within a
reasonable time after commencement of the work, the municipality may proceed
without notice to make such fill and restoration, and the deposit referred to
in §
97.03 shall be deemed forfeited. Thereupon, the deposit shall be paid into the
street repair fund of the municipality, except such part demanded and paid to
the permittee as the difference between the deposit and the charges of the
municipality for restoration services performed by it. If the amount of such
services performed by the municipality should exceed the amount of the deposit,
the Clerk or other proper municipal officer shall proceed to collect the
remainder due from such permittee.
(‘74 Code, § 50.04)
§ 97.05 BARRIERS AROUND EXCAVATIONS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating, or opening any
street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way shall have the excavation or
opening fully barricaded at all times to prevent injury to persons or animals.
(‘74 Code, § 50.05) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.06 WARNING LIGHTS.
   Any person engaged in or employing others in excavating or otherwise in any
manner obstructing a portion or all of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other
public way, at all times during the night shall install and maintain at least
two illuminated warning lamps which shall be securely and conspicuously posted
on, at, or near each end of such obstruction or excavation, and if the space
involved shall exceed 50 feet in extent, then at least one additional lamp for
each added 50 feet or portion thereof excavated or obstructed.
(‘74 Code, § 50.06) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.07 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION BY THE MUNICIPALITY.
   It shall be the duty of the engineer of the municipality or, if none exist,
another authorized municipal official, to supervise construction or repair of
sidewalks within the municipality. He or she shall cause specifications to be
prepared for the construction of the various kinds of pavements and transmit
the same to the Legislative Authority for approval. When the specifications are
approved, the Legislative Authority shall advertise for proposals to do all the
work which may be ordered by the municipality in construction and repair of
sidewalks, and shall contract therefor, for a period not exceeding one year,
with the lowest responsible bidder, who shall furnish good and sufficient
sureties for the faithful performance of the work. The Legislative Authority,
if it deems advisable, may make separate contracts for the different kinds of
work with different parties.
(‘74 Code, § 50.07)
§ 97.08 UNLOADING ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall unload any heavy material in the streets of the
municipality, by throwing or letting the same fall upon the pavement of any
street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way, without first placing some
sufficient protection over the pavement.
(‘74 Code, § 50.08) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.09 STREET OR SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTION.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, public ground,
or other public way within the municipality by erecting thereon any fence,
structure or building, or permitting any fence, structure or building to remain
thereon unless authorized by the Legislative Authority or other proper
municipal official. Each day that any such fence or building is permitted to
remain upon such public way shall be deemed a separate offense.
(R.C. § 5589.01) (‘74 Code, § 50.09)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 5589.99(A))
Cross-reference:
   Driving upon sidewalk prohibited, see §
72.58
§ 97.10 MATERIALS ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall encumber any street or sidewalk. No owner, occupant, or
person having the care of any building or lot of land bordering on any street
or sidewalk shall permit the same to be encumbered with barrels, boxes, cans,
articles, or substances of any kind so as to interfere with the free and
unobstructed use thereof.
(‘74 Code, § 50.10) Penalty, see §
97.99
Cross-reference:
   Placing injurious materials and litter upon streets or highways prohibited,
see §
72.62
§ 97.11 DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN OF ICE AND SNOW.
   No owner or occupant of lots or lands abutting any sidewalk, curb or gutter
shall fail to keep the sidewalks, curbs and gutters in repair and free from
snow, ice or any nuisance, and to remove from such sidewalks, curbs or gutters
all snow and ice accumulated thereon within a reasonable time, which will
ordinarily not exceed 12 hours after any storm during which the snow and ice
has accumulated.
(R.C. § 723.011) (‘74 Code, § 50.11) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.12 RAMPED CURBING FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   All new curbs that are authorized by the municipality, and all existing
curbs which are part of any reconstruction, shall have a ramp with nonslip
surface built into the curb at each pedestrian crosswalk so that the sidewalk
and street blend to a common level. These ramps shall be not less than 40
inches wide and shall, insofar as feasible, be constructed in accordance with
the standard drawings and specifications for curb ramps of the state Department
of Transportation.
(R.C. § 729.12) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.13 FLAGPOLE ALONG RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   A property owner in the municipality may install a flagpole between
the sidewalk and curb along the right-of-way of any public street or highway
adjacent to his or her property. A property owner may also install underground
lighting for the display of the flag. Installation of the flagpole and holder
shall meet the following specifications:
      (1)   The flagpole holder shall be embedded in concrete, flush with the
sidewalk or sodded area, and possess a cap or cover which shall be used when
the holder is not used for the purpose of displaying the American flag;
      (2)   The holder shall not exceed two inches in diameter and shall be
installed not less than one foot from the curb;
      (3)   Underground lighting for the flagpole shall be situated within a
reasonable distance to the holder and meet all underwriters’ requirements
governing installation. The highest part of the lighting fixture shall at all
times be flush with the sidewalk or sodded area in which it is embedded;
      (4)   At no time shall the flag, flagpole, or holder limit or restrict
the view of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, nor shall a flag, flagpole, or
holder be installed that comes in physical contact, or is likely to come in
physical contact, with overhead wiring.
   (B)   The municipality may require the issuance of a permit for installation
of flagpoles but shall not charge the property owner a permit fee or an
inspection fee in excess of $1 per installation.
(R.C. § 723.012) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.14 ALTERING OR INJURING MARKER OR MONUMENT.
   (A)   No person shall alter, deface, injure or destroy any marker or
monument placed along, upon, or near a public highway by the proper authorities
to mark the boundary thereof, or for any other purpose.
(R.C. § 5589.02)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 97.15 BOND REQUIRED.
   A bond of $1,000 shall be required for all work in the right-of-way. Failure
to post such bond shall subject the violator to a penalty as set forth in §
10.99.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.16 SIGNS IN RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   No person shall place any sign in the roadway right-of-way, unless
authorized by law.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR
§ 97.25 CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR MAY BE REQUIRED.
   In addition to the power conferred upon the municipality under R.C. § 727.01
to construct sidewalks, curbs or gutters and levy an assessment therefor, the
Legislative Authority may require the construction or repair of sidewalks,
curbs or gutters within the municipality by the owners of lots or lands
abutting thereon, and upon the failure of such owners to construct or repair
such sidewalks, curbs or gutters within the time prescribed in the resolution
adopted under §
97.26, may cause such sidewalks, curbs or gutters to be constructed or repaired
and assess the total cost thereof against the lots or land abutting thereon,
notwithstanding the provisions of R.C. §§ 727.03 and 727.05.
(R.C. § 729.01)
§ 97.26 RESOLUTION OF NECESSITY.
   (A)   When it is deemed necessary by the municipality to require the
construction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, or gutters within the municipality
by the owners of the lots or lands abutting thereon, the Legislative Authority
shall cause plans, specifications, and an estimate of the cost of such
construction or repair to be prepared, showing the location and dimensions of
such sidewalks, curbs or gutters and the specifications for the construction or
repair thereof, and to be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Legislative
Authority.
   (B)   After such plans, specifications and estimate of cost have been filed,
as provided in this section, the Legislative Authority may declare the
necessity for the construction or repair of such sidewalks, curbs or gutters by
the adoption of a resolution which shall:
      (1)   Approve the plans, specifications and estimate of cost of the
proposed construction or repair on file as provided by this section;
      (2)   Describe the lots and lands abutting upon the sidewalks, curbs or
gutters to be constructed or repaired by the termini of the improvement or by
the street address;
      (3)   Set forth that such sidewalks, curbs or gutters shall be
constructed or repaired by the owners of the lots or lands abutting thereon in
accordance with the specifications on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Legislative Authority;
      (4)   Set forth the time within which such sidewalks, curbs or gutters
shall be constructed or repaired by the owners of the lots and lands abutting
thereon, which shall not be less than 30 days from the date of service of
notice under §
97.27 on the owner of the lots or lands;
      (5)   State than in the event such sidewalks, curbs or gutters are not
constructed or repaired by the owners of the lots and lands abutting thereon in
accordance with such plans and specifications and within the time prescribed in
this resolution, the municipality will so construct or repair such sidewalks,
curbs or gutters and assess the costs thereof against the lots and lands
abutting thereon.
(R.C. § 729.02)
§ 97.27 NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR.
   Notice of the passage of a resolution of necessity under §
97.26 shall be served by the Clerk of the Legislative Authority, or a person
designated by such Clerk, upon the owners of the lots or lands abutting upon
the sidewalks, curbs or gutters to be constructed or repaired in the same
manner as service of summons in civil cases, or by certified mail addressed to
such owner at his or her last known address or to the address to which tax
bills are sent, or by a combination of the foregoing methods. If it appears by
the return of service or the return of the certified mail notice that one or
more of the owners cannot be found, such owners shall be served by publication
of the notice once in a newspaper of general circulation within the
municipality. The return of the person serving the notice or a certified copy
thereof or a returned receipt for notice forwarded by certified mail accepted
by the addressee or anyone purporting to act for him or her shall be prima
facie evidence of the service of notice under this section. The notice shall
also set forth the place where the specifications governing the construction or
repair of such sidewalks, curbs or gutters are on file, the time within which
the owner of such lot or parcel of land may construct or repair the sidewalks,
curbs or gutters, and that in the event the owner does not construct or repair
the sidewalks, curbs or gutters in accordance with the specifications and
within such time, the municipality will construct or repair such sidewalks,
curbs or gutters and assess the costs thereof against the lot or land of the
owner.
(R.C. § 729.03)
§ 97.28 ASSESSMENTS OF COSTS AGAINST OWNER.
   (A)   Upon the expiration of the time within which sidewalks, curbs or
gutters shall be constructed or repaired by the owner of the lots or lands
abutting thereon as set forth in the resolution adopted under §
97.26, the sidewalks, curbs or gutters not constructed or repaired by the
owners of the lots and lands abutting thereon shall be constructed or repaired
by the municipality in accordance with the resolution adopted under §
97.26, and the Legislative Authority shall, upon the completion of such
construction or repair, assess the costs thereof against the lots or lands
abutting thereon.
   (B)   In anticipation of the collection of the costs of construction or
repair of such sidewalks, curbs or gutters from the owners of the lots or lands
abutting thereon, the Legislative Authority may provide for the issuance of
bonds or notes and the proceeds thereof shall be used to pay for the
construction or repair of such sidewalks, curbs or gutters.
(R.C. § 729.04)
§ 97.29 PROCEEDINGS MAY INCLUDE DIFFERENT OWNERS.
   In all proceedings pertaining to the construction or repair of sidewalks,
curbs or gutters under this subchapter or R.C. §§ 729.01 through 729.08,
sidewalks, curbs or gutters upon different streets abutting upon lots or lands
owned by different owners may be included in the same resolution, notice,
contract, ordinance, or other proceedings.
(R.C. § 729.05)
§ 97.30 MAKING AND LEVYING ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   Estimated assessments. Upon completion of the construction or repair
of sidewalks, curbs or gutters under this subchapter, the total cost of such
construction, repair, or installation as defined in division (B) shall be
ascertained and reported to the Legislative Authority by its Clerk, and the
Legislative Authority shall cause a list of estimated assessments to be
prepared. Such list shall include the total cost of such construction, repair,
or installation to each lot or land abutting upon such construction, repair, or
installation and shall be filed in the office of the Clerk of the Legislative
Authority and be available for public inspection.
(R.C. § 729.07)
   (B)   Notice of assessment; objection.
      (1)   The Legislative Authority shall cause a notice to be published for
three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipal
corporation or as provided in R.C. § 7.16, stating that such list of estimated
assessments has been made and is on file in the office of the Clerk of the
Legislative Authority for the inspection and examination of persons interested
therein.
      (2)   If any person objects to an assessment on such list, the person
shall file the objection in writing with the Clerk of the Legislative Authority
within two weeks after the expiration of the notice provided for in division
(B)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 729.08)
   (C)   Assessment ordinance. The Clerk of the Legislative Authority shall
deliver the objections received under division (B) of this section to the
Legislative Authority. The Legislative Authority shall review the written
objections and shall adopt an ordinance levying upon the lots and lands
enumerated in the list of estimated assessments the amount set forth on such
list with such changes or corrections as the Legislative Authority shall
determine to be proper after consideration of the written objections filed
under division (B) of this section. Such ordinance shall state the number of
annual installments, not exceeding ten, over which the assessments shall be
payable and shall establish a period of time during which the assessments shall
be payable in cash.
(R.C. § 729.09)
   (D)   Assessment proceedings. The provisions of R.C. §§ 727.26 to 727.43,
inclusive, shall apply to and govern the proceedings taken under and the
assessments levied under this subchapter. The proceedings taken under this
subchapter shall be construed in accordance with the provisions of R.C. §
727.40.
(R.C. § 729.10)
Statutory reference:
   Assessments generally, see R.C. Chapter 727
CHANGES IN STREETS
§ 97.40 CHANGE OF NAME, VACATING OR NARROWING STREETS BY PETITION.
   The Legislative Authority, on petition by a person owning a lot in the
municipality requesting that a street or alley in the immediate vicinity of
such lot be vacated or narrowed, or the name thereof changed, upon hearing, and
upon being satisfied that there is good cause for such change of name,
vacation, or narrowing, that it will not be detrimental to the general
interest, and that it should be made, may, by ordinance, declare such street or
alley vacated, narrowed or the name thereof changed. The Legislative Authority
may include in one ordinance the change of name, vacation, or narrowing of more
than one street, avenue or alley. The original ordinance or a certified copy
thereof shall be recorded in the official records of the County Recorder.
(R.C. § 723.04)
§ 97.41 CHANGE OF NAME, VACATING OR NARROWING STREETS WITHOUT PETITION.
   (A)   The Legislative Authority may, when there are two or more streets,
avenues or alley of the same name in the municipality, by ordinance and without
petition therefor, change the name of any such street, avenue or alley so as to
leave only one to be designated by the original name.
   (B)   When, in the opinion of the Legislative Authority, there is good cause
for vacating or narrowing a street or alley, or any part thereof, and that such
vacation or narrowing will not be detrimental to the general interest, it may,
by ordinance and without petition therefor, vacate or narrow such street or
alley or any part thereof. The original ordinance or a certified copy thereof
shall be recorded in the official records of the County Recorder.
(R.C. § 723.05)
§ 97.42 NOTICE; EXCEPTION.
   Notice of the intention of the Legislative Authority to vacate any street,
alley, avenue, or part thereof shall be given as provided in §
97.43, except when written consent to such vacation is filed with the
Legislative Authority by the owners of the property abutting the part of the
street or alley proposed to be vacated, in which case such notice shall not be
required.
(R.C. § 723.06)
§ 97.43 PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.
   No street or alley shall be vacated or narrowed unless notice of the
pendency and prayer of the petition under R.C. § 723.04 is given by publishing,
in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality, for six consecutive
weeks preceding action on such petition, or as provided in R.C. § 7.16
preceding action on the petition. Where no newspaper is of general circulation
in the municipality, notice shall be given by posting the notice in three
public places therein six weeks preceding such action. Action thereon shall
take place within three months after the completion of the notice.
(R.C. § 723.07)
§ 97.44 EFFECT OF ORDER OF VACATION.
   The order of the Legislative Authority vacating or narrowing a street or
alley which has been dedicated to public use by the proprietor thereof shall,
to the extent to which it is vacated or narrowed, operate as a revocation of
the acceptance thereof by the Legislative Authority, but the right-of-way and
easement therein of any lot owner shall not be impaired by such order.
(R.C. § 723.08)
§ 97.45 EFFECT ON PUBLIC UTILITY EASEMENTS.
   When any street, alley or public highway, or a portion thereof, is vacated
or narrowed by the municipality pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter
or the provisions of R.C. Chapter 723, and the relocation of any conduits,
cables, wires, towers, poles, sewer lines, steam lines, pipelines, gas and
water lines, tracks, or other equipment or appliances of any railroad or public
utility, whether owned privately or by any governmental authority, located on,
over or under the portion of the street, alley, or highway affected by such
vacation or narrowing, is not required for purposes of the municipality,
including urban renewal, any affected railroad or public utility shall be
deemed to have a permanent easement in such vacated portion or excess portion
of such street, alley or highway for the purpose of maintaining, operating,
renewing, reconstructing, and removing such utility facilities and for purposes
of access to such facilities.
(R.C. § 723.041)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which another penalty is
not already provided shall be subject to the penalty as prescribed in §
10.99.
CHAPTER 98: UNCLAIMED AND ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
98.01   Impounding motor vehicle on private property; requirements
   
98.02   Impounding motor vehicle on public property; notice; disposition
   
98.03   Disposition of vehicle ordered into storage
   
98.04   Disposition of abandoned junk motor vehicles
   
98.05   Abandonment of junk motor vehicle prohibited
   
98.06   Junk motor vehicle; order to cover or remove; notice; exceptions
Cross-reference:
   Nuisances generally, see
Ch. 95
§ 98.01 IMPOUNDING MOTOR VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation, upon complaint of any person adversely affected, may order into
storage any motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has been left on private residential or private
agricultural property for at least four hours without the permission of the
person having the right to the possession of the property. The chief, upon
complaint of a repair garage or place of storage, may order into storage any
motor vehicle, other than an abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left
at the garage or place of storage for a longer period than that agreed upon.
When ordering a motor vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the chief
may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall
designate a storage facility.
      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division (A)(1) of
this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that division.
The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed from the
private property, unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor
vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or
other event that is not within the power of the towing service.
      (3)   Subject to division (B) of this section, the owner of a motor
vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the vehicle
only in accordance with division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As used in this section, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY means private
property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a home,
residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than three
separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. The phrase
does not include any private property on which is located one or more
structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by two or more
persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure
or structures.
   (B)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section arrives after
the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner
or operator may pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal
of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal
corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall
give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or
operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the
motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the
towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction.
      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give
the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally
assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to
the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately
shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private
agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to
possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without
the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable.
   (C)   (1)   The chief of a law enforcement agency in the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of motor vehicles that the chief orders
into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section. The record shall
include an entry for each such motor vehicle that identifies the motor
vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color, the location from which it
was removed, the date and time of its removal, the telephone number of the
person from whom it may be recovered, and the address of the place to which it
has been taken and from which it may be recovered. The chief shall provide any
information in the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any
person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information
pertaining to its location.
      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
chief’s order for the removal and storage of a motor vehicle under division (A)
(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the law enforcement agency
with which the complaint was registered to any person who identifies self as
the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining
to its location.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of
the following:
         (a)   Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the vehicle
was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle
removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the
municipal corporation.
         (b)   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for
the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.
      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the
vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle
shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor
vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under
R.C. § 4513.611.
      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under division
(D)(1)(b) of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage under division (A)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items
from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after-hours
retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours,
unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice
required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if applicable. The owner of a motor
vehicle shall not do either of the following:
         (a)   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the chief
to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
         (b)   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
      (4)   For purposes of division (D)(3) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (A)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the
procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor
vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other
than in accordance with division (A)(1) of this section or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to
4513.65.
      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (F)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (H) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.60)
   (H)   Private tow-away zones.
      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         (a)   The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:
            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away zone;
            2.   A description of persons authorized to park on the property.
If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property
may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in
the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the
property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may
include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private
tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in
the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on
the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property designated
as a private tow-away zone.
            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times,
the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced;
            4.   The telephone number and the address of the place from which a
towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night;
            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may
result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in R.C. § 4505.101(B).
            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of division (H)(1)(a)
of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by
affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the
sign.
         (b)   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this
division (H) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that
complies with all of the following:
            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the location of the
private tow- away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a
place of storage within 25 linear miles.
            2.   It is well-lighted.
            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly
scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public
transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which
the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   (a)   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is
established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of
this section, without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the
private property may cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The
towing service shall remove the vehicle in accordance with this division (H).
The vehicle owner and the operator of the vehicle are considered to have
consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the
applicable fees established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25, and to the right of a towing service to obtain title to
the vehicle if it remains unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner
or lienholder of a vehicle that has been removed under this division (H),
subject to division (H)(3) of this section, may recover the vehicle in
accordance with division (H)(7) of this section.
         (b)   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck
operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the
municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to division (H)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or
unlicensed tow truck operator.
         (c)   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away
zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered
into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone
is located.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under
authority of division (H)(2) of this section arrives after the vehicle has been
prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written
notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may
pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle
established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25 in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.
Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or
operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the
actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator.
Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so
that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private
tow-away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation.
      (4)   (a)   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (H)(2) of this
section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many
photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on
private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under
division (H)(1) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under this division (H). The towing service shall
retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or
printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is
recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on
which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.
         (b)   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under division
(H)(2) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more
than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone,
unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two
hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is
not within the power of the towing service.
      (5)   (a)   If an owner of a private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of this section causes
the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under division
(H)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the
vehicle, shall provide notice to the law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation concerning all of the following:
            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color;
            2.   The location from which the vehicle was removed;
            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;
            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may
be recovered;
            5.   The address of the place from which the vehicle may be
recovered.
         (b)   The chief of a law enforcement agency of the municipal
corporation shall maintain a record of any vehicle removed from private
property in the chief’s jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away
zone of which the chief has received notice under this division (H). The record
shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The chief shall
provide any information in the record that pertains to a particular vehicle to
a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self
as the owner, operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and requests information
pertaining to the vehicle.
      (6)   (a)   When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance
with this section, within three business days of the removal, the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause
a search to be made of either of the following to ascertain the identity of the
owner and any lienholder of the vehicle:
            1.   The records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles;
            2.   The records of any vendor or vendors, approved by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, that are capable of providing real-time access to
owner and lienholder information.
         (b)   The towing service or storage facility may search the National
Motor Vehicle Title Information System in order to determine the state in which
the vehicle is titled. The entity that provides the record of the owner and any
lienholder under this division shall ensure that such information is provided
in a timely manner.
         (c)   Subject to division (H)(6)(f) of this section, the towing
service or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any
known lienholder as follows:
            1.   Within five business days after the applicable entity provides
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle, if the
vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner’s and lienholder’s last known address
by certified or express mail with return receipt requested, by certified mail
with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service utilizing any form
of delivery requiring a signed receipt;
            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (H)(6)(c)1. of this
section.
         (d)   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to division (H)(6)(c)
of this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or
the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not
possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under R.C. §
4505.101(B), may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle as provided in that section.
         (e)   A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a
signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible,
shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).
         (f)   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or
storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C. § 4505.101, the
towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice
required under division (H)(6)(c)1. of this section.
      (7)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under
division (H)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following:
            1.    Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;
            2.   Payment of the following fees:
               a.   All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except that the lienholder of
a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the
period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or
storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent
under division (H)(6)(a)1. of this section;
               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as
described in division (H)(6) of this section, a processing fee of $25.
         (b)   A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle
that is removed under authority of division (H)(2) of this section shall show
the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests the removal of the
vehicle all photographs taken under division (H)(4) of this section. Upon
request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all
photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper,
electronic, or otherwise.
         (c)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves
the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the
vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the
motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action
under R.C. § 4513.611.
         (d)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced
by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed
under authority of division (H)(2) of this section may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a
vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees
to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of division (H)(7)(d) of this
section, “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.
      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
division (H) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this
division (H), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of
this division (H).
      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of divisions
(A) through (G) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65
as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone under division (H)(1) of this section.
      (10)   Whoever violates division (H)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private property” or “owner
of the private property” includes, with respect to a private property, any of
the following:
         (a)   Any person who holds title to the property;
         (b)   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease
or sublease agreement for the property;
         (c)   A person who is authorized to manage the property;
         (d)   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in divisions (H)
(11)(a) to (H)(11)(c) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.601)
§ 98.02 IMPOUNDING MOTOR VEHICLE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; NOTICE; DISPOSITION.
   (A)   The Police Chief, upon notification to the Police Chief of such action
and of the location of the place of storage, may order into storage any motor
vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4513.63, that:
      (1)   Has come into the possession of the Police chief as a result of the
performance of the Police Chief’s duties; or
      (2)   Has been left on a public street or other property open to the
public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way of
any road or highway, for 48 hours or longer without notification to the Police
Chief of the reasons for leaving the motor vehicle in such place. However, when
such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic it may be ordered
into storage immediately unless either of the following applies:
         (a)   The vehicle was involved in an accident and is subject to R.C. §
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (b)   The vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle. If the vehicle is a
commercial motor vehicle, the Police Chief shall allow the owner or operator of
the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle
within a period of time specified by the Police Chief. If the Police Chief
determines that the vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of
time, the Police Chief shall order the removal of the vehicle.
      (3)   Subject to division (C) of this section, the Police Chief shall
designate the place of storage of any motor vehicle so ordered removed.
   (B)   If the Police Chief issues an order under division (A) of this section
and arranges for the removal of a motor vehicle by a towing service, the towing
service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated by the
Police Chief not more than two hours after the time it is removed.
   (C)   (1)   The Police Chief shall cause a search to be made of the records
of an applicable entity listed in R.C. § 4513.601(F)(1) to ascertain the
identity of the owner and any lienholder of a motor vehicle ordered into
storage by the Police Chief within five business days of the removal of the
vehicle. Upon obtaining such identity, the Police Chief shall send or cause to
be sent to the owner and any lienholder at the owner’s and any lienholder’s
last known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested,
by certified mail with electronic tracking, or by a commercial carrier service
utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed receipt. The notice shall
inform the owner and any lienholder that the motor vehicle will be declared a
nuisance and disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of the
sending of the notice.
      (2)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle is responsible
for payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage and
may reclaim the motor vehicle upon payment of those expenses or charges, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title or memorandum certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of
registration for the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement. Upon presentation of
proof of ownership evidenced as provided above, the owner of the motor vehicle
also may retrieve any personal items from the vehicle without retrieving the
vehicle and without paying any fee. However, a towing service or storage
facility may charge an after-hours retrieval fee established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner
retrieves the personal items after hours, unless the towing service or storage
facility fails to provide the notice required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if
applicable. However, the owner shall not do either of the following:
            1.   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Police Chief to be necessary to a criminal investigation;
            2.   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
         (b)   For purposes of division (C)(2) of this section, “personal
items” do not include any items that are attached to the vehicle.
      (3)   If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle reclaims it after a
search of the applicable records has been conducted and after notice has been
sent to the owner and any lienholder as described in this section, and the
search was conducted by the place of storage, and the notice was sent to the
motor vehicle owner by the place of storage, the owner or lienholder shall pay
to the place of storage a processing fee of $25, in addition to any expenses or
charges incurred in the removal and storage of the vehicle.
   (D)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle within
ten days of the date of sending the notice, and if the vehicle is to be
disposed of at public auction as provided in R.C. § 4513.62 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police Chief, without charge
to any party, shall file with the clerk of courts of the county in which the
place of storage is located an affidavit showing compliance with the
requirements of this section. Upon presentation of the affidavit, the clerk,
without charge, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of
all liens and encumbrances, to the Police Chief. If the vehicle is to be
disposed of to a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility as provided in
R.C. § 4513.62 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the Police
Chief shall execute in triplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in which it was
disposed of, and that all requirements of this section have been complied with.
The Police Chief shall retain the original of the affidavit for the Police
Chief’s records, and shall furnish two copies to the motor vehicle salvage
dealer or other facility. Upon presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the
motor vehicle salvage dealer, the clerk of courts, within 30 days of the
presentation, shall issue a salvage certificate of title, free and clear of all
liens and encumbrances.
   (E)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility receives an
affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this section, the
dealer or facility shall not be required to obtain an Ohio certificate of title
to the motor vehicle in the dealer’s or facility’s own name if the vehicle is
dismantled or destroyed and both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the
clerk of courts.
   (F)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with this
section.
(R.C. § 4513.61)
§ 98.03 DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE ORDERED INTO STORAGE.
   An unclaimed motor vehicle ordered into storage pursuant to §
98.01(A)(1) or §
98.02 is subject to one of the following:
   (A)   The Police Chief may dispose of it with a motor vehicle salvage dealer
or scrap metal processing facility as defined in R.C. § 4737.05, or with any
other facility owned by or under contract with the municipality for the
disposal of such motor vehicles.
   (B)   The Police Chief or a licensed auctioneer may sell the motor vehicle
at public auction, after giving notice thereof by advertisement, published once
a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
county or as provided in R.C. § 7.16.
   (C)   A towing service or storage facility may obtain title to the motor
vehicle in accordance with R.C. § 4505.104.
   (D)   Money accrued pursuant to division (A) or (B) of this section that are
in excess of the expenses resulting from the removal and storage of the vehicle
shall be credited to the general fund of the municipality.
(R.C. § 4513.62)
§ 98.04 DISPOSITION OF ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   ABANDONED JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor vehicle meeting all of
the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle is left on private property for 48 hours or longer
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property, on a public street or other property open to the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road
or highway for 48 hours or longer;
      (2)   The vehicle is three years old or older;
      (3)   The vehicle is extensively damaged, such damage including but not
limited to any of the following: missing wheels, tires, motor, or transmission;
      (4)   The vehicle is apparently inoperable; and
      (5)   The vehicle has a fair market value of $1,500 or less.
   (B)   The Police Chief shall order any abandoned junk motor vehicle to be
photographed by a law enforcement officer. The officer shall record the make of
motor vehicle, the serial number when available, and shall also detail the
damage or missing equipment to substantiate the value of $1,500 or less. The
Police Chief shall thereupon immediately dispose of the abandoned junk motor
vehicle to a motor vehicle salvage dealer as defined in R.C. § 4738.01 or a
scrap metal processing facility as defined in R.C. § 4737.05 which is under
contract to the municipality, or to any other facility owned by or under
contract with the municipality for the destruction of such motor vehicles. The
records and photographs relating to the abandoned junk motor vehicle shall be
retained by the Police Department for a period of at least two years. The
Police Department shall execute in quadruplicate an affidavit, as prescribed by
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, describing the motor vehicle and the manner in
which it was disposed of, and that all requirements of R.C. § 4513.63 have been
complied with, and, within 30 days of disposing of the vehicle, shall sign and
file the affidavit with the clerk of courts of the county in which the motor
vehicle was abandoned. The clerk of courts retains the original of the
affidavit for the clerk’s files, furnishes one copy thereof to the Registrar,
one copy to the motor vehicle salvage dealer or other facility handling the
disposal of the vehicle, and one copy to the Police Department, who shall file
such copy with the records and photograph relating to the disposal.
   (C)   Any monies arising from the disposal of an abandoned junk motor
vehicle shall be deposited in the general fund of the municipality.
   (D)   Notwithstanding §
98.02, any motor vehicle meeting the requirements of division (A)(3), (A)(4)
and (A)(5) of this section which has remained unclaimed by the owner or
lienholder for a period of ten days or longer following notification as
provided in §
98.02 may be disposed of as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.63)
§ 98.05 ABANDONMENT OF JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall willfully leave an abandoned junk motor vehicle
as defined in §
98.04 on private property for more than 72 hours without the permission of the
person having the right to the possession of the property, or on a public
street or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking, or upon or within the right-of-way of any road or highway for 48 hours
or longer without notification to the Police Chief of the reason for leaving
the motor vehicle in such place.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the fact that a motor vehicle has
been so left without permission or notification is prima facie evidence of
abandonment.
      (3)   Nothing contained in §§
98.01,
98.02 and
98.04 and R.C. §§ 4513.60, 4513.61 and 4513.63 shall invalidate or prevent the
enactment of further provisions of municipal ordinances regulating or
prohibiting the abandonment of motor vehicles on streets, highways, public
property, or private property within the municipality.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
shall also be assessed any costs incurred by the municipality in disposing of
the abandoned junk motor vehicle that is the basis of the violation, less any
money accruing to the municipality from the disposal of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.64)
§ 98.06 JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE; ORDER TO COVER OR REMOVE; NOTICE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   For purposes of this section, JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE means any motor
vehicle meeting the requirements of §
98.04(A)(2), (3), (4) and (5) that is left uncovered in the open on private
property for more than 72 hours with the permission of the person having the
right to possession of the property, except if the person is operating a junk
yard or scrap metal processing facility licensed under the authority of R.C. §§
4737.05 through 4737.12, or otherwise regulated under authority of a political
subdivision; or if the property on which the motor vehicle is left is not
subject to licensure or regulation by any governmental authority, unless the
person having the right to the possession of the property can establish that
the motor vehicle is part of a bona fide commercial operation; or if the motor
vehicle is a collector’s vehicle.
      (2)   The municipality shall not prevent a person from storing or
keeping, or restrict him or her in the method of storing or keeping, any
collector’s vehicle on private property with the permission of the person
having the right to the possession of the property, except that the
municipality may require a person having such permission to conceal, by means
of buildings, fences, vegetation, terrain, or other suitable obstruction, and
unlicensed collector’s vehicle stored in the open.
      (3)   The Police Chief, the Legislative Authority, or the zoning
authority may send notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to
the person having the right to the possession of the property on which a junk
motor vehicle is left, that within ten days of receipt of the notice, the junk
motor vehicle either shall be covered by being housed in a garage or other
suitable structure, or shall be removed from the property.
      (4)   No person shall willfully leave a junk motor vehicle uncovered in
the open for more than ten days after receipt of a notice as provided in this
section. The fact that a junk motor vehicle is so left is prima facie evidence
of willful failure to comply with the notice, and each subsequent period of 30
days that a junk motor vehicle continues to be so left constitutes a separate
offense.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.65)
CHAPTER 99: PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
99.01   Definitions
   
99.02    Permit—required—application
   
99.03    Permit—issuance—required findings
   
99.04   Exemption of event permittee from certain requirements
   
99.05   Permit—contents
   
99.06    Permit—denial—appeal procedure
   
99.07   Deviation from permit
   
99.08   Permit—revocation
   
99.09   Use of sirens by emergency vehicles participating in parade
   
99.10   Insurance requirements
§ 99.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any scheduled walk, demonstration, procession, march or motorcade
consisting of persons, animals, vehicles, or a combination thereof having a
common purpose, design, designation or goal, upon any public street, sidewalk,
alley, or other public thoroughfare, which does not comply with normal and
usual traffic regulations and controls.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any planned assembly, block party, demonstration, rally, or
gathering of a group of 25 or more persons, animals, vehicles, or a combination
thereof, in a public space that:
      (1)   Has a common purpose, design or goal, and:
         (a)   Which substantially inhibits the usual flow of pedestrians or
vehicular travel on public streets;
         (b)   Which involves a temporary and exclusive use of a public space;
or
         (c)   Involves a substantial deviation from the public space's current
use.
      (2)   Special events do not include the following:
         (a)   Parades;
         (b)   The use of public space by governmental agencies acting within
the scope of their authority;
         (c)   Funeral processions; or
         (d)   Picnics or gatherings in reserved spaces within public parks
which are reserved in advance through the City Administration.
(Ord. 20-1931, passed 1-5-21)
§ 99.02 PERMIT—REQUIRED— APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, manage or participate in any parade or
special event unless a permit has been issued in accordance with this chapter.
If a permit is issued, no person shall conduct, manage or participate in any
parade or special event which is in violation of the terms or conditions of the
permit.
   (B)   A permit must be applied for in writing on a form obtained from the
Police Department or City Administration Office and shall be filed at least 60
days prior to the commencement of any parade or special event, unless an
exception to the deadline is granted by the city or as provided in division (D)
of this section. Late applications may be accepted at the discretion of the
Police Chief or City Manager. The application shall set forth the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of any individual, group,
association, firm or corporation requesting the permit, and the applicable
title or office of the person so applying;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) responsible
for the organization, coordination and conduct of the proposed activity;
      (3)   Time and date of commencement and termination of the proposed
activity;
      (4)   A detailed narrative and timeline, nature and purpose of the parade
or special event, including a description of all activities, schedule of
events, and all other pertinent information;
      (5)   A detailed event site plan mapping the physical areas for the
event;
      (6)   The anticipated maximum number of persons, vehicles, bands, floats
and other units of persons, horses or other animals to participate; and
      (7)   Such other reasonably relevant information as the Police Chief and/
or City Manager or other city staff may request for investigation of the
application.
   (C)   The applicant shall submit nonrefundable permit fee(s) to be set by
resolution of the City Council with the application. Additional fees approved
by resolution of the City Council may also be required. If the City Manager or
the Chief of Police determine that the event requires or utilizes city
resources beyond what is reasonable for a parade or special event, staff may
deny the permit or may charge applicant additional fees equivalent to the
city's cost to provide the resources. Such fees may include city cost to
provide barricades, police presence, sanitation, waste removal, picnic tables,
etc. and may be billed before the permit is issued or after the parade or
special event occurs.
   (D)   Demonstrations as defined below may be issued a special event or
parade permit, as applicable. The City Manager or the Chief of Police may
consider an application that is filed after the filing deadline if there is
sufficient time to process and investigate the permit application and to obtain
city services for the event and if the circumstance that gave rise to the event
application did not reasonably allow the applicant to apply within the time
prescribed in division (B) of this section. A demonstration under this section
is defined as parade or special event which involves a rally, picketing,
speechmaking, march, vigil, religious service, or similar gathering that
primarily involves the communication or expression of opinions, grievances, or
personal views.
(Ord. 20-1931, passed 1-5-21)
§ 99.03 PERMIT—ISSUANCE—REQUIRED FINDINGS.
   (A)   Special event and parade permit considerations. The city officials
reviewing all permit applications shall evaluate the following considerations
in deciding on each application:
      (1)   Whether the event promotes the community as a whole;
      (2)   Whether the event provides positive civic and economic benefit;
      (3)   The impact upon neighboring businesses and properties;
      (4)   The frequency of closures of streets/public spaces for parades and
special events;
      (5)   Other events or activities that are permitted at the same time and/
or location;
      (6)   The applicant's conduct and compliance in sponsoring prior events;
      (7)   The health, safety, and public welfare of event participants and
the impact of the event on the health, safety, and public welfare of all
citizens;
      (8)   If applicable, whether the applicant conformed to all permit
requirements and the provisions in this chapter in holding any previous parades
or special events; and
      (9)   The financial and practical ability of the applicant to conduct the
proposed parade or special event in conformance with the provisions of the
permit and this chapter.
   (B)   Parade permit.
      (1)   The City Manager or Chief of Police may issue a parade permit after
evaluating the application, such other information as may otherwise be
obtained, and the considerations in division (A) of this section.
      (2)   A parade permit may not be issued if:
         (a)   The proposed activity will substantially interrupt the safe and
orderly movement of traffic;
         (b)   The proposed activity will require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the city to properly police the activity and the
areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city;
         (c)   The proposed activity will require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
city other than that to be occupied by the activity and other areas contiguous
thereto;
         (d)   Any concentration of persons, animals, units, floats or vehicles
at assembly points of the proposed activity will unduly interfere with proper
fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the
assembly areas;
         (e)   There is reason to believe that the proposed activity will not
move from its point of origin to its point of termination, expeditiously and
without unreasonable delay;
         (f)   Other similar scheduled activities for which permits have been
issued will conflict with the activity proposed in the permit application;
         (g)   Applicant supervision for the proposed activity is inadequate or
volunteer/staff support for the parade is insufficient;
         (h)   The parade does not follow the standard parade route designated
by the city, unless the city finds that a deviation from this route is
substantially justified;
         (i)   The parade will adversely affect adjacent or neighboring
properties by causing excessive noise or creating a nuisance;
         (j)   The parade will be conducted primarily for the purpose of
private monetary gain or commercial advertisement; or
         (k)   The parade will fail to comply in any respect with the
provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (C)   Special event permit.
      (1)   The City Manager or Chief of Police may issue a special event
permit after evaluating the application, such other information as may
otherwise be obtained, and the considerations in division (A) of this section.
      (2)   A special event permit may not be issued if:
         (a)   The proposed activity will substantially interrupt the normal
and customary use of the public space;
         (b)   The proposed activity will impose an unreasonable burden upon
the Police Department, Fire Department, or ambulance service;
         (c)   The proposed activity is scheduled to be held at an
inappropriate time and or in an inappropriate location;
         (d)   Other similar scheduled activities for which permits have been
issued will conflict with the special event proposed in the permit application;
         (e)   Applicant supervision for the proposed activity is inadequate or
volunteer/staff support for the parade is insufficient;
         (f)   The special event will cause unreasonable injury or damage to
the public space requested;
         (g)   The event will involve such a number of persons or activities as
will exceed the reasonable capacity of the public space requested;
         (h)   The special event will cause unreasonable adverse effects on
adjacent or neighboring properties by causing excessive noise or creating a
nuisance;
         (i)   The special event will be conducted primarily for the purpose of
private monetary gain or commercial advertisement; or
         (j)   The special event will fail to comply in any respect with the
provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law.
(Ord. 20-1931, passed 1-5-21)
§ 99.04 EXEMPTION OF EVENT PERMITTEE FROM CERTAIN REQUIREMENTS.
   If a special event or parade permit is issued, the permit may explicitly
exempt the special event or parade from provisions found in this chapter. Any
such exemptions must include references to the specific code provisions that
are implicated and must be explicit on the face of the permit.
(Ord. 20-1931, passed 1-5-21)
§ 99.05 PERMIT—CONTENTS.
   (A)   The permits provided in this chapter shall include all information in
the application and shall be signed by the City Manager or Chief of Police as
appropriate, or their designees with a signed copy kept with the application on
file in the City/Police Department office issuing the permit. The permit may
include any terms or conditions necessary for the preservation of the public
health, safety and welfare and for the protection of the public space to be
utilized.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued until the insurance required under this
chapter has been filed with the city.
   (C)   Issuance of a permit shall not constitute city endorsement or
sponsorship of the parade or special event. No permittee shall represent,
advertise, promote or otherwise publish any claim of city endorsement or
sponsorship of the parade or event unless the city authorizes such a claim by
explicitly endorsing or sponsoring the parade or special event.
(Ord. 20-1931, passed 1-5-21)
§ 99.06 PERMIT—DENIAL—APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to file a written appeal of the
denial of a permit to the City Council not later than seven days after notice
of denial. City Council will hear the appeal at the next scheduled meeting.
Council will have 15 days to respond. The reason for the denial shall be
provided in writing.
(Ord. 20-1931, passed 1-5-21)
§ 99.07 DEVIATION FROM PERMIT.
   No person organizing, conducting, coordinating or participating in any
activity for which a permit has been granted under the provisions of this
chapter shall deviate from or alter any of the terms, conditions, or contents
of the permit without the express permission of the City Manager, Chief of
Police, or city official issuing the permit.
(Ord. 20-1931, passed 1-5-21)
§ 99.08 PERMIT—REVOCATION.
   Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the
City Manager or Chief of Police issuing the permit in the following
circumstances:
   (A)   The violation by the permittee of any applicable provisions, terms or
conditions of the permit, or of state law or city ordinance;
   (B)   The event is causing or expected to cause physical damage to persons
or property;
   (C)   The event is interfering or will interfere with fire or police
protection, or an emergency arises making it impossible to assign necessary
personnel to the special event needed to protect the public safety;
   (D)   The event is creating or threatening to create a health hazard;
   (E)   Information is obtained after the permit is issued from which the city
may reasonably conclude that the permit should have been denied; or
   (F)   The city finds that the insurance required by §
99.10 has lapsed or has been cancelled.
(Ord. 20-1931, passed 1-5-21)
§ 99.09 USE OF SIRENS BY EMERGENCY VEHICLES PARTICIPATING IN PARADE.
   Emergency vehicles participating in any parade or special event shall not
sound sirens except when and if any emergency should arise and the vehicle must
clear the area.
(Ord. 20-1931, passed 1-5-21)
§ 99.10 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   Special event and parade organizers shall provide adequate insurance
coverage with designated limits as required by the city official issuing the
permit. However, the city official issuing the permit may waive this
requirement with the approval of the City Attorney's Office. The insurance
policy shall name the city and its representatives as an additional insured.
(Ord. 20-1931, passed 1-5-21)
CHAPTER 100: SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS
Section
   
100.01   Definition
   
100.02   Exceptions
   
100.03   Location on lot
   
100.04   Design and construction
   
100.05   Water supply, treatment and drainage systems
   
100.06   Plumbing Code
   
100.07   Electrical Code
   
100.08   Enclosure devices
   
100.09   Minimum standards
§ 100.01 DEFINITION.
   Any constructed pool which is used or intended to be used as a swimming pool
in connection with a one-, two-, or three-family residence and available to the
families of the household(s) and their private guests shall be classified a
FAMILY SWIMMING POOL. Such family swimming pools shall be in conformity with
the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 100.02 EXCEPTIONS.
   These regulations shall not be applicable for any pools less than 18 inches
deep or having a surface area of less than 150 square feet.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 100.03 LOCATION ON LOT.
   Family swimming pools shall be classified as accessory structures and shall
conform to the Zoning Code of Mt. Healthy except that no wall of a pool shall
be located less than three feet from any rear or side property line.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 100.04 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Structural design. The pool structure shall be engineered and designed
to withstand the expected forces to which it will be subjected and be in
conformity with Chapters BB-5, BB-29, BB-31 OBC.
   (B)   Wall slopes. To a depth up to five feet from the top, the wall slope
not to be more than two feet horizontal and five feet vertical.
   (C)   Floor slopes. The slope of the floor on the shallow side of transition
shall not exceed one foot vertical to seven feet horizontal.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 100.05 WATER SUPPLY, TREATMENT AND DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Water supply. Every family swimming pool shall be provided with a
potable water supply, free of cross-connections with the pool or its equipment.
   (B)   Water treatment. Every family swimming pool shall be equipped with a
recirculating system capable of filtering the entire contents of the pool in 18
hours.
   (C)   Owner instructions. The pool owner shall be instructed in proper care
and maintenance of the family swimming pool, by the supplier or contractor,
including the use of high test Calcium hypochlorite (dry chlorine) or sodium
hypochlorite (liquid chlorine) or equally effective germicide and algicide and
the importance of proper pH (alkalinity and acidity) control.
   (D)   Drainage. Every family swimming pool designed to be emptied of water
shall be equipped to discharge water to a storm water discharge point, a storm
sewer if one is available, to a road-way drainage ditch or street curb if no
storm sewer is available or to a natural drainage ditch on the owner's property
if neither is available.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 100.06 PLUMBING CODE.
   All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Ohio Residential
Building Code, Chapter 25.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 100.07 ELECTRICAL CODE.
   All work shall conform to Ohio Residential Building Code, Chapter 34 and the
National Electric Code.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 100.08 ENCLOSURE DEVICES.
   Every person owning land on which there is situated a family swimming pool,
which constitutes an obvious hazard and contains 18 inches in depth at any
point, shall erect and maintain thereon an adequate enclosure surrounding the
family swimming pool area, sufficient to make such a body of water inaccessible
to small children. Such enclosure, including, but not limited to, gates
therein, must be not less than four feet above the adjacent grade; all gates
must be self-latching with latches placed four feet above the grade or
otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 100.09 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   When items not required by this section are used in construction or
operation of family swimming pools, or when performance is required by this
section, the standards to be used in determining compliance to this section
shall be those which are established as generally accepted construction and
maintenance principles and/or practices for above-ground and in-ground
residential pools.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
CHAPTER 101: CITY TREE REGULATIONS
Section
   
101.01   Tree planting and care standards
   
101.02   Prohibition against harming public trees
   
101.99   Violations and penalty
§ 101.01 TREE PLANTING AND CARE STANDARDS.
   This chapter provides governance of trees planted on public lands within the
City of Mount Healthy, Ohio. Its purpose is to establish policies and
regulations that will promote and protect the urban forest infrastructure of
Mount Healthy.
   (A)   Standards for planting and maintenance of public trees shall conform
to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) A-300 "Standards for Tree
Care Operations" and shall follow all arboriculture Best Management Practices
(BMPs) published by the International Society of Arboriculture.
   (B)   Requirements of franchise utility companies. The maintenance of public
trees for utility clearance shall conform to all applicable utility industry
standards.
   (C)   Prohibited species list. The Mt. Healthy Urban Tree Commission shall
provide to the City Manager an official list of tree species prohibited from
planting on public property.
   (D)   Planting distances. No street tree shall be planted within 20 feet of
street intersections, within 25 feet of a stop sign, within 15 feet of a fire
hydrant and within ten feet of a driveway.
   (E)   Planting trees under electric utility lines. Only trees projected to
reach a maximum of 25 feet in height at maturity may be planted under any
overhead distribution utility wire carrying 7.2 KV or more.
   (F)   Protection of public trees during construction. Any person, firm,
corporation, or city department performing construction near any public tree
must employ industry-accepted appropriate measures (as specified in ANSI A-300)
to protect the tree. Critical root zone (as defined in ANSI A-300) measures
shall be employed by placing barriers around the tree to a minimum of 75% of
the CRZ to prevent damage. Any and all construction, demolition or remaining
street construction materials shall be removed by the contractor. There shall
be no concrete equipment washing in public right-of-way, tree lawns or medians.
Any public trees damaged or destroyed due to contractor negligence shall be
treated or removed at the contractor's expense.
(Ord. 23-2016, passed 9-19-23)
§ 101.02 PROHIBITION AGAINST HARMING PUBLIC TREES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
recklessly cause direct or indirect damage to a tree or other planting in the
public way or on public land through any of the following means: Topping,
girdling, cutting, carving, transplanting, removing, attaching rope, wire or
nails or advertising posters; pouring harmful liquids or harmful chemicals on
the tree or other planting or in or near CRZ; setting fire to or near a tree or
other planting; impeding water, air or fertilizer to a tree or other planting.
   (B)   Trees severely damaged by storms and needing to be trimmed or removed
in the interest of public safety are exempted from this section. Trees damaged
by insects, diseases or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions
may be removed with the approval of the City Manager or his designee.
Contractors involved in utility line pruning are exempted from this section;
however, line pruning must be done in accordance with the guidelines set forth
in the publication standard.
   (C)   No person or property owner shall remove a public tree for any reason
without approval from the City Manager.
(Ord. 23-2016, passed 9-19-23) Penalty, see §
101.99
§ 101.99 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine not to exceed
$500 per first offense.
(Ord. 23-2016, passed 9-19-23)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
         
110.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
111.   CABLE TELEVISION
         
112.   CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
         
113.   COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS
         
114.   DISTRESS MERCHANDISE SALE
         
115.   PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
         
116.   TAXICABS
         
117.   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
         
118.   TEEN CLUB PERMIT AND LICENSE
         
119.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
110.01   Licenses required to engage in certain businesses; exceptions
   
110.02   Application for license
   
110.03   Issuance of license
   
110.04   Date and duration of license
   
110.05   License not transferable
   
110.06   License certificate to be displayed
   
110.07   Revocation or suspension
   
110.08   Appeal and review
   
110.09   Access to businesses between 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.
   
110.10   Security guard required at retail businesses during night hours
 
   
110.99   General penalty for Title XI
Cross-reference:
   Commercial amusements, see
Ch. 113
   Peddlers and solicitors, see
Ch. 115
   Taxicabs, see
Ch. 116
Statutory reference:
   Revocation of licenses for conviction of certain fraud and theft offenses,
see R.C. § 2961.03
§ 110.01 LICENSES REQUIRED TO ENGAGE CERTAIN BUSINESSES; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall engage in any of the trades, businesses, or
professions for which licenses are required by Title XI or by any other
ordinance of the municipality or provision of this code without first applying
for and obtaining a license from the Clerk or other duly authorized issuing
authority.
   (B)   The municipality shall not require a license for:
      (1)   The owner of any product of his or her own raising, or the
manufacturer of any article manufactured by him or her, to vend or sell, by
himself, herself or his or her agent, any such article or product, including
but not limited to agricultural articles or products offered or exposed for
sale by the producer;
      (2)   Any person who by state or federal law or constitutional provision
has been exempted from obtaining such license;
      (3)   Any person selling by sample only;
      (4)   Advertising;
      (5)   Any sale under order of court or at a bona fide auction;
      (6)   Any sale at wholesale to a retail dealer.
('74 Code, § 111.01) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Municipal licensing power, exceptions, see R.C. §§ 715.27, 715.48, and
715.60 through 715.68
§ 110.02 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   All original applications for licenses, unless otherwise specifically
provided, shall be made to the Clerk or other authorized official in writing
upon forms to be furnished by him or her and shall contain:
      (1)   The applicant's full name, address, and telephone number, and the
full name of each officer, partner or business associate, if applicable;
      (2)   His or her present occupation and principal place of business;
      (3)   His or her place of residence for the preceding five years;
      (4)   The nature and location of the intended business or enterprise;
      (5)   The period of time for which the license is desired;
      (6)   A description of the merchandise, goods or services to be sold;
      (7)   If a motor vehicle is to be used, a full description of such motor
vehicle, including the make, model, year, color, license number, and vehicle
registration (VIN) number of such vehicle.
      (8)   Such other information concerning the applicant and his or her
business as may be reasonable and proper, having regard to the nature of the
license desired.
   (B)   Any change in the information required by division (A) of this section
must be reported to the Clerk or other authorized official within 14 days of
such change.
   (C)   Renewal of an annual license may be granted to a licensee in good
standing on the basis of the original application, unless otherwise provided.
However, if a request for renewal is not submitted to the Clerk or other
authorized official within 21 days after the date of expiration for the
preceding license, the applicant must fill out an original application.
   (D)   With each original or renewal application, the applicant shall deposit
the fee required for the license requested.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful to knowingly make any false statement or
representation in the license application.
('74 Code, § 111.02) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   Upon receipt of such application for a license, accompanied by the proper
fee, if approval by another officer or department is not required, the Clerk,
with the written approval of the Mayor or other chief administrative officer,
shall deposit the fee in the general fund of the municipality and issue to the
applicant a proper license certificate signed by the Clerk and Mayor or other
chief administrative officer. If for any reason the license is not issued, this
fee less $5 to cover administrative expenses of considering such application
shall be returned to the applicant.
('74 Code, § 111.03)
§ 110.04 DATE AND DURATION OF LICENSE.
   A license shall not be valid beyond the expiration date therein specified
and, unless otherwise provided, shall not extend beyond December 31 of the year
issued. However, at any time after December 1, licenses may be issued for the
next calendar year. Unless otherwise specified, the full annual fee will be
required of licensees irrespective of the date of issuance of the license.
('74 Code, § 111.04)
§ 110.05 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   Every license shall be issued to a real party in interest in the enterprise
or business, and unless otherwise provided, no license shall be assigned or
transferred.
('74 Code, § 111.05) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 LICENSE CERTIFICATE TO BE DISPLAYED.
   Every licensee carrying on business at a fixed location shall keep posted in
a prominent place upon the premises the license certificate. Other licensees
shall carry their licenses at all times, and whenever requested by any officer
or citizen, shall exhibit such license.
('74 Code, § 111.06) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   Any license may be suspended or revoked by the Mayor or other chief
administrative officer at any time for the following reasons:
      (1)   For conditions or considerations which, had they existed at the
time of issuance, would have been valid grounds for its denial;
      (2)   For any misrepresentation of a material fact in the application
discovered after issuance of the license;
      (3)   For any misrepresentation or materially false statement made in the
course of carrying on the trade, business or profession;
      (4)   For violation of any provision of this chapter or other federal,
state or municipal law or ordinance relating to the operation of the business
or enterprise for which the license has been issued; or
      (5)   Upon conviction of a licensee for any federal, state or municipal
law or ordinance involving the creation of a nuisance, a breach of the peace,
interference with the rights of property owners, or any other offense
constituting a threat to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare
of the public.
   (B)   The suspension or revocation shall become effective upon notice served
upon such licensee. The notice shall contain a written summary of the reasons
for the suspension or revocation and a statement concerning the right to appeal
the decision. The notice shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the address given on the licensee's application.
('74 Code, § 111.07)
§ 110.08 APPEAL AND REVIEW.
   In case any applicant has been denied a license, or if his or her license
has been suspended or revoked, the applicant or licensee shall within ten
business days have the right to appeal to the Legislative Authority from such
denial, suspension or revocation. Notice of appeal shall be filed in writing
with the Clerk or other authorized official who shall fix the time and place
for a hearing which shall be held not later than 21 days thereafter. The Clerk
shall notify the Mayor and all members of the Legislative Authority of the time
and place of such hearing not less than 24 hours in advance thereof. Three
members of the Legislative Authority shall constitute a quorum to hear such
appeal. The appellant may appear and be heard in person or by counsel. If,
after hearing, a majority of the members of the Legislative Authority present
at such meeting declare in favor of the applicant, the license shall be issued
or fully reinstated as the case may be; otherwise the order appealed from shall
become final.
('74 Code, § 111.08)
§ 110.09 ACCESS TO BUSINESSES BETWEEN 2:30 A.M. AND 5:30 A.M.
   (A)   The city shall implement closing requirements preventing private
rentals of event halls between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.
   (B)   The tenant(s) and/or property owner(s) and/or organizations shall be
subject to compliance with this section. As used in this section, ORGANIZATION
means an individual or a corporation for profit or not for profit, partnership,
limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated nonprofit association,
estate, trust, or other commercial or legal entity. ORGANIZATION does not
include an entity organized as or by a governmental agency for the execution of
a governmental program.
   (C)   There is a purpose to impose organizational liability for commission
of an offense under this section for which strict liability shall be imposed.
In addition to any applicable penalties under state or county law, any person
convicted of a criminal offense under this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or
by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. If an offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section within a year, conviction of a
criminal offense under this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree and be punished by a fine not to exceed $750 or by imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days, or both. If an offender previously has been convicted of
two or more violations of this section within three years, conviction of a
criminal offense under this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment
not to exceed 180 days, or both. The city may take any such lawful action to
prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance, including but not limited to
an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
(Ord. 21-1969, passed 11-2-21; Am. Ord. 24-2052, passed 10-15- 25)
§ 110.10 SECURITY GUARD REQUIRED AT RETAIL BUSINESSES DURING NIGHT HOURS.
   (A)   No business establishment providing services or products to the
general public in such fashion that members of the public are required to come
on the premises to purchase such products or receive such services shall remain
open for business at any time between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. on
any day unless and until there shall be on duty on the payroll of the owner or
operator of the premises, a security guard, who shall be a sworn police
officer, otherwise employed by a governmental entity of the State of Ohio and
who shall be armed at all times while on such special duty.
   (B)   Any law enforcement officer of the city finding a violation of this
section to apparently exist, shall immediately notify the person in charge of
such premises to cease operations until compliance with this section is
achieved.
   (C)   The business tenant(s) and/or property owner(s) and/or organizations
shall be subject to compliance with this section. As used in this section,
ORGANIZATION means an individual or a corporation for profit or not for profit,
partnership, limited partnership, joint venture, unincorporated nonprofit
association, estate, trust, or other commercial or legal entity. ORGANIZATION
does not include an entity organized as or by a governmental agency for the
execution of a governmental program.
   (D)   There is a purpose to impose organizational liability for commission
of an offense under this section for which strict liability shall be imposed.
In addition to any applicable penalties under state or county law, any person
convicted of a criminal offense under this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or
by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. If an offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section within a year, conviction of a
criminal offense under this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree and be punished by a fine not to exceed $750 or by imprisonment
not to exceed 90 days, or both. If an offender previously has been convicted of
two or more violations of this section within three years, conviction of a
criminal offense under this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment
not to exceed 180 days, or both. The city may take any such lawful action to
prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance, including but not limited to
an equitable action for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
(Ord. 24-2053, passed 11-5-24)
§ 110.99 GENERAL PENALTY FOR TITLE XI.
   Whoever violates any provision of this title, for which another penalty is
not already provided, shall be fined not more than $500, imprisoned for not
more than six months, or both.
CHAPTER 111: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Initial review of basic cable rates
   
111.03   Review of request for increase in basic cable rates
   
111.04   Cable operator information
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC CABLE RATES. The monthly charges for a subscription to the basic
service tier and the associated equipment.
   BASIC SERVICE TIER. A separately available service tier to which
subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including as
a minimum, but not limited to, all must-carry signals, all PEG channels, and
all domestic television signals other than superstations.
   BENCHMARK. A per channel rate of charge for cable service and associated
equipment which the FCC has determined is reasonable.
   CABLE ACT OF 1992. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition
Act of 1992.
   CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or group of persons:
      (1)   Who provide cable service over a cable system and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such a cable
system; or
      (2)   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.
   CHANNEL. A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel number
of similar designation.
   COST OF SERVICE SHOWING. A filing in which the cable operator attempts to
show that benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient to allow the cable
operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic service tier and to
continue to attract capital.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   INITIAL BASIC CABLE RATES. The rates that the cable operator is charging for
the basic service tier, including charges for associated equipment, at the time
the city notifies the cable operator of the city's qualification and intent to
regulate basic cable rates.
   INTERCOMMUNITY CABLE REGULATORY COMMISSION (ICRC). A regional council of
governments organized under Ohio law of which the city is a member having the
authority to conduct certain administrative procedures on behalf of the city in
relation to this chapter.
   MUST-CARRY SIGNAL. The signal of any local broadcast station (except
superstations) which is required to be carried on the basic service tier.
   PEG CHANNEL. The channel capacity designated for public, educational, or
governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel
capacity.
   PRICE CAP. The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic cable
rates regulated by the city, based on a formula using the GNP fixed weight
price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing business and
changes in overall inflation.
   REASONABLE RATE STANDARD A per channel rate that is at, or below, the
benchmark or price cap level.
   SUPERSTATION. Any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted by
satellite.
('74 Code, § 94.01) (Ord. 94-1084, passed 1-4-94)
§ 111.02 INITIAL REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE RATES.
   (A)   Notice. Upon the adoption of this chapter and the certification of the
city by the FCC, the city or the ICRC shall immediately notify all cable
operators in the city, by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the
city intends to regulate subscriber rates charged for the basic service tier
and associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992.
   (B)   Cable operator response. Within 30 days of receiving notice from the
city or the ICRC, a cable operator shall file with the city or the ICRC its
current rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment and any
supporting material concerning the reasonableness of its rates.
   (C)   Expedited determination and public hearing.  
      (1)   If the City Council is able to expeditiously determine that the
cable operator's rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment are
within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable
benchmark, the City Council shall:
         (a)   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express
their views; and
         (b)   Act to approve the rates within 30 days from the date the cable
operator filed its basic cable rates with the city.
      (2)   If the City Council or the ICRC takes no action within 30 days from
the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the city, the
proposed rates will continue in effect.
      (3)   Such public hearing may be held in conjunction with other ICRC
communities under the direction of the ICRC.
   (D)   Extended review period.
      (1)   If the City Council is unable to determine whether the rates in
issue are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the material
before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing, the City
Council shall, within 60 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic
cable rates with the city and by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the
following additional periods of time, as applicable, to make a final
determination:
         (a)   90 days if the City Council needs more time to ensure that a
rate is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard; or
         (b)   150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service
showing seeking to justify a rate above the applicable benchmark.
      (2)   If the City Council has not made a decision within the 90 or 150
day period, the City Council shall issue a brief written order at the end of
the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose behalf the amounts
are paid.
   (E)   Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the proposed rate, the City Council or the ICRC shall hold at least
one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views and
record objections.
   (F)   Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to
the proposed initial basic rate may request the secretary to record the
objection during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing
anytime before the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to
be made part of the record, the objector must provide the secretary with the
objector's name and address.
   (G)   Benchmark analysis. If a cable operator submits its current basic
cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the FCC's reasonable rate
standard, the City Council or the ICRC shall review the rates using the
benchmark analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC.
Based on the City Council or the ICRC's findings, the initial basic cable rates
shall be established as follows:
      (1)   If the current basic cable rates are below the benchmark, those
rates shall become the initial basic cable rates and the cable operator's rates
will be capped at that level.
      (2)   If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, the rates
shall be the greater of the cable operator's per channel rate on September 30,
1992, reduced by 10%, or the applicable benchmark, adjusted for inflation and
any change in the number of channels occurring between September 30, 1992 and
the initial date of regulation.
      (3)   If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark, but the
cable operator's per channel rate was below the benchmark on September 30,
1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark, adjusted for
inflation.
   (H)   Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator does not wish to reduce
the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator shall have the opportunity
to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify initial basic
cable rates above the FCC's reasonable rate standard. The City Council will
review a cost-of-service review. The City Council may approve initial basic
cable rates above the benchmark if the cable operator makes the necessary
showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in rates below the
benchmark or below the cable operator's September 30, 1992 rates less 10%, will
prescribe the cable operator's new rates.
   (I)   Decision.
      (1)   By formal resolution. After completion by the city or the ICRC of
its review of the cable operator's proposed rates, the City Council shall adopt
its decision by formal resolution. The decision shall include one of the
following:
         (a)   If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or
is justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the City Council shall approve the
initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable operator; or
         (b)   If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable rate standard
and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not justify the proposed rates,
the City Council shall establish initial basic cable rates that are within the
FCC's reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a cost-of-service
analysis.
      (2)   Rollbacks and refunds. If the City Council determines that the
initial basic cable rates as submitted exceed the reasonable rate standard or
that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing justifies lower rates, the
City Council may order the rates reduced in accordance with division (G) or (H)
above, as applicable. In addition, the City Council may order the cable
operator to pay to subscribers refunds of the excessive portion of the rates
with interest (computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue
Service for tax refunds and additional tax payments), retroactive to September
1, 1993. The method for paying any refund and the interest rate will be in
accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the City Council's decision
resolution.
      (3)   Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If rates
proposed by a cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or if there
were objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the resolution
must state the reasons for the decision and the City Council must give public
notice of its decision. Public notice will be given by advertisement once in a
newspaper of general circulation.
   (J)   Appeal. The City Council's decision concerning rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in accordance
with applicable federal regulations.
('74 Code, § 94.02) (Ord. 94-1084, passed 1-4-94)
§ 111.03 REVIEW OF REQUEST FOR INCREASE IN BASIC CABLE RATES.
   (A)   Notice. A cable operator in the city who wishes to increase the rates
for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall file a request with
the city and the ICRC and notify all subscribers at least 30 days before the
cable operator desires the increase to take effect. This notice may not be
given more often than annually and not until at least one year after the
determination of the initial basic cable rates.
   (B)   Expedited determination and public hearing.
      (1)   If the City Council or the ICRC is able to expeditiously determine
that the cable operator's rate increase request for basic cable service is
within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as determined by the applicable
price cap, the City Council shall:
         (a)   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons may express
their views; and
         (b)   Act to approve the rate increase within 30 days from the date
the cable operator filed its request with the city.
      (2)   If the City Council takes no action within 30 days from the date
the cable operator filed its request with the city, the proposed rates will go
into effect.
   (C)   Extended review period.
      (1)   If the City Council and the ICRC are unable to determine whether
the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the
material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service showing,
the City Council shall, by adoption of a formal resolution, invoke the
following additional periods of time as applicable, to make a final
determination:
         (a)   90 days if the City Council or the ICRC needs more time to
ensure that the requested increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard
as determined by the applicable price cap; and
         (b)   150 days if the cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service
showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the applicable price cap.
      (2)   The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended review
period.
      (3)   If the City Council has not made a decision within the 90 to 150
day period, the City Council shall issue a brief written order at the end of
the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate account of all
amounts received by reason of the proposed rate increase and on whose behalf
the amounts are paid.
   (D)   Public hearing. During the extended review period and before taking
action on the requested rate increase, the City Council or the ICRC shall hold
at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views
and record objections.
   (E)   Objections. An interested person who wishes to make an objection to
the proposed rate increase may request the secretary to record the objection
during the public hearing or may submit the objection in writing anytime before
the decision resolution is adopted. In order for an objection to be made part
of the record, the objector must provide the secretary with the objector's name
and address.
   (F)   Delayed determination. If the City Council is unable to make a final
determination concerning a requested rate increase within the extended time
period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect, subject to
subsequent refund if the City Council later issued a decision disapproving any
portion of the increase.
   (G)   Price cap analysis. If a cable operator presents its request for a
rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the City Council
shall review the rate using a price cap analysis in accordance with the
standard form authorized by the FCC. Based on the City Council's findings, the
basic cable rates shall be established as follows:
      (1)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the price cap
established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new basic cable
rates.
      (2)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the price cap
established by the FCC, the City Council shall disapprove the proposed rate
increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the price cap.
   (H)   Cost-of-service showings. If a cable operator submits a cost-of-
service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the price cap,
the City Council will review the submission pursuant to the FCC standards for
cost-of-service review. The City Council may approve a rate increase above the
price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-
of-service determination resulting in a rate below the price cap or below the
cable operator's then current rate will prescribe the cable operator's new
rate.
   (I)   Decision. The City Council's decision concerning the requested rate
increase, shall be adopted by formal resolution. If a rate increase proposed by
a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or if objections were made
by other parties to the proposed rate increases, the resolution must state the
reasons for the decision.
   (J)   Refunds.
      (1)   The City Council may order refunds of subscribers' rate payments
with interest if:
         (a)   The City Council was unable to make a decision within the
extended time period as described in division (C) above; and
         (b)   The cable operator implemented the rate increase at the end of
the extended review period; and
         (c)   The City Council determines that the rate increase as submitted
exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable operator failed to justify
the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing, and the City Council
disapproves any portion of the rate increase.
      (2)   The method of paying any refund and the interest rate will be in
accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the City Council's decision
resolution.
   (K)   Appeal. The City Council's decision concerning rates for the basic
service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in accordance
with applicable federal regulations.
('74 Code, § 94.03) (Ord. 94-1084, passed 1-4-94)
§ 111.04 CABLE OPERATOR INFORMATION.
   (A)   The city may require:
      (1)   In those cases when the cable operator has submitted initial rates
or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate standard, the City
Council or the ICRC may require the cable operator to produce information in
addition to that submitted, including proprietary information, if needed to
make a rate determination. In these cases, a cable operator may request the
information be kept confidential in accordance with this section.
      (2)   In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the reasonable
rate standard, the City Council or the ICRC may request additional information
only in order to document that the cable operator's rates are in accord with
the standard.
   (B)   A cable operator submitting information to the City Council may
request in writing that the information may not be made routinely available for
public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and cover all of
the information and all copies of the information to which it applies.
('74 Code, § 94.04) (Ord. 94-1084, passed 1-4-94)
CHAPTER 112: CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
Section
   
112.01   Registration policy
§ 112.01 REGISTRATION POLICY.
   (A)   No person shall solicit contributions within the city for any
charitable purpose unless the person registers with the city. The applicant for
registration shall present positive identification and pay a registration fee
of $25.
   (B)   Charitable solicitations shall be permitted only during the hours of
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 113: COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENTS
Section
   
113.01   Bowling; billiards and pool
   
113.02   Circuses, carnivals, shows and other such entertainment
   
113.03   Deposit required
   
113.04   License fee for public entertainment or exhibition
   
113.05   License fee may be waived for civic interest
Cross-reference:
   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances, see §
132.13
§ 113.01 BOWLING; BILLIARDS AND POOL.
   (A)   Each proprietor of a billiard or pool table or of a bowling alley, or
a combination of both, shall pay an annual license fee of $25 for one such
table; $25 for one such alley; and $10 for each additional table or each
additional alley.
   (B)   No proprietor of a billiard parlor, or proprietor of a billiard table
at any other public place shall permit a minor under the age of 18 years to
play billiards or pool, or be and remain in such parlor or public place. A
minor under 18 years of age, when accompanied by either parent or his legal
guardian, may be permitted to play both billiards and pool, or be and remain in
such parlor or public place. An adult person, who is in charge of a group of
minor children under the age of 18 years, may bring such group into a billiard
or pool parlor for the purpose of permitting them to play both billiards and
pool or be in and remain in such a parlor or public place so long as they
remain under the supervision and control of the adult person.
('74 Code, § 113.01) Penalty, see §
110.99
Cross-reference:
   Gambling offenses, see
Ch. 134
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate billiards and bowling alleys, see R.C. § 715.51
§ 113.02 CIRCUSES, CARNIVALS, SHOWS AND OTHER SUCH ENTERTAINMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Each person, desiring to conduct, stage or give a circus,
carnival, theatrical exhibition, public show, athletic game or other such
entertainment, for which money or reward is demanded or received, shall first
obtain a license and pay the license fee or fees provided herein.
      (2)   Public school entertainment, lecture courses, and lectures on
historic, literary, or scientific subjects are not subject to the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   In addition to the requirements of §
110.02, the applicant for a license to conduct, stage, or give such exhibition
shall give at least one week's notice in writing to the Mayor or other
authorized official, stating the dates of the performances, and the location at
which the performances are to be presented. The Mayor or other chief
administrative officer shall give his or her consent to the issuance of such
license if he or she deems that the location is suitable for the purpose; that
it will properly accommodate the patrons; that the nature of the performance or
exhibition does not pose a threat to the health, safety or general welfare of
the public; and that the use of such location will not create too great a
burden upon the police department or the fire department.
   (C)   No circus, carnival, theatrical exhibition, public show, athletic game
or other such entertainment shall be given for more than two consecutive days,
except in cases where the Legislative Authority by special resolution shall
allow a longer period, or where such exhibition is to be conducted on municipal
property and the use thereof for a longer period shall have been approved by
the Legislative Authority.
('74 Code, §§ 113.02, 113.03) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate shows and games, exceptions, see R.C. § 715.48
   Preservation of peace and protection of property, see R.C. § 715.49
§ 113.03 DEPOSIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   At the time application for a license is made, where use of municipal
grounds is contemplated, the applicant shall deposit with the Clerk or other
designated municipal official a cash bond in an amount to be determined by the
Legislative Authority, conditioned upon the restoration and cleaning up of the
grounds in a manner satisfactory to the Mayor or other chief administrative
officer. In the event the grounds are restored and cleaned up properly
following the exhibition, the deposit shall be returned; otherwise the same
shall be forfeited to the municipality to the extent of actual costs to the
municipality for restoration and cleaning up of the grounds.
   (B)   No licensee shall fail to restore or clean up the grounds upon which
such circus, carnival or other such entertainment has taken place.
('74 Code, § 113.05) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 113.04 LICENSE FEE FOR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT OR EXHIBITION.
   The fee for such license shall be established by the Legislative Authority,
and a schedule of such fees shall be available from the Clerk or other
designated official.
§ 113.05 LICENSE FEE MAY BE WAIVED FOR CIVIC INTEREST.
   The Mayor or other chief administrative officer may, in his or her
discretion, grant without cost a license for the holding of a circus, carnival,
theatrical exhibition, public show, athletic game or other such entertainment
where all of the performances are fostered and supervised by civic interests of
the municipality, and a substantial part of the funds derived therefrom is
expended for charitable or civic purposes.
('74 Code, § 113.07)
CHAPTER 114: DISTRESS MERCHANDISE SALE
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   License required
   
114.03   Application for license
   
114.04   Bond required
   
114.05   Investigation of application; grounds for denial of license
   
114.06   Hiring of examiners
   
114.07   Issuance of license; conditions thereof
   
114.08   Revocation of license
   
114.09   Renewal of license
   
114.10   License fees
   
114.11   Exceptions
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISTRESS MERCHANDISE SALE. Any offer to sell to the public, or sale to the
public, of goods, wares, or merchandise on the implied or direct representation
that such sale is in anticipation of the termination of a business at its
present location, or that the sale is being held other than in the ordinary
course of business. Without limiting the generality of the above, distress
merchandise sales shall include any sale advertised either specifically or in
substance to be a fire sale, smoke and water damage sale, adjustment sale,
creditor's sale, trustee's sale, bankrupt sale, save us from bankruptcy sale,
insolvent sale, insurance salvage sale, mortgage sale, assignee's sale,
adjuster's sale, must vacate sale, quitting business sale, receiver's sale,
loss of lease sale, forced out of business sale, removal sale, or going out of
business sale.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, association, firm, or corporation.
('74 Code, § 118.01) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79)
§ 114.02 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall advertise or conduct a distress merchandise sale without
having obtained a license to do so in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
('74 Code, § 118.02) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Any person desiring to conduct a distress merchandise sale shall make
written application to the Mayor at least five days prior to the date on which
the sale is to commence, on forms furnished by the Mayor and verified by the
applicant before a person authorized to administer oaths. In cases where, due
to circumstances beyond the control of the applicant, other than economic
reverses, application cannot be made five days prior to commencement of the
sale, the Mayor may waive the five-day requirement.
   (B)   Each application shall contain the following information and such
other information as the Mayor may deem necessary.
      (1)   The name and address of the owner of the goods, wares, or
merchandise to be sold.
      (2)   A description of the place where the sale is to be held.
      (3)   The nature of the occupancy of the place where the sale is to be
held, whether by lease or otherwise, and the effective date of termination of
such occupancy.
      (4)   A full and complete statement of the facts regarding the distress
merchandise sale, including the reason why the sale is being conducted, the
manner in which the sale will be conducted, and the commencement and
termination date of the sale.
      (5)   A complete and detailed inventory of the goods, wares, and
merchandise to be offered at such sale as disclosed by applicant's record or a
statement of both the cost and retail value of the inventory of goods, wares,
and merchandise to be offered at such sale based on the physical inventory used
for the applicant's most recent federal income tax return adjusted for sales,
purchases, and mark-downs. Adjustments for sale, purchases, and mark-downs
shall be shown on a monthly basis to date of application. In addition, there
shall be shown on separate items in either form of inventory the retail value
of all goods, wares, and merchandise the applicant has on consignment which
will be offered for sale and the cost and retail value of all goods, wares, and
merchandise on back order.
   (C)   The filing of an application for a license, the contents of such
application, and the issuance of a license shall be confidential information
and no disclosure thereof shall be made except as may be necessary in the
administration of the provisions of this chapter; provided any disclosure may
be made with the consent of the applicant and the filing of an application, and
the issuance of a license shall not be considered confidential after public
notice has been given of the proposed sale. Disclosures made contrary to the
provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
110.99.
('74 Code, § 118.03) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 114.04 BOND REQUIRED.
   No license shall be issued for a distress merchandise sale unless there is
filed with the Mayor a bond, with good and sufficient sureties, conditioned
upon the faithful observance of all the provisions of this chapter and the
indemnification of any purchaser at the sale who suffers any loss by reason of
any misrepresentation made in connection with the sale, authorizing actions
thereunder by the city for the violation of any provision of this chapter, and
by any purchaser at the sale for damage or loss suffered by him by reason of
any misrepresentation made in connection with the sale. The amount of the bond
shall be determined as follows; 10% of the first $100,000 of the inventory cost
of all the goods, wares, and merchandise to be offered at sale; 5% on the next
$400,000 and 2% on the balance. The bond shall be approved as to form by the
Director of Law and as to sufficiency by the Auditor.
('74 Code, § 118.04) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79)
§ 114.05 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION; GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF LICENSE.
   Upon receipt of an application, the Mayor shall cause such investigation as
he deems necessary to be made of the facts contained therein. No license shall
be issued if any one or more of the following facts or circumstances are found
to exist:
   (A)   The applicant was granted more than one license hereunder for a going-
out-of-business sale within two years preceding the date of the filing of the
application.
   (B)   The applicant has heretofore been convicted of violation of this
chapter or has had a license issued to him pursuant to this chapter revoked
within a five-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application.
   (C)   The inventory includes goods, wares, or merchandise purchased by the
applicant or added to his stock in contemplation of such sale and for the
purpose of selling the same at the sale. For the purpose of this division, any
unusual addition to the stock of such goods, wares, and merchandise made within
60 days prior to the filing of such application shall be prima facie evidence
that the addition was made in contemplation of such sale and for the purpose of
selling the same at such sale.
   (D)   The applicant, in the ticketing of goods, wares, and merchandise to be
offered at the sale, has misrepresented the original retail price or value
thereof.
   (E)   Any representation made in the application is false.
('74 Code, § 118.05) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79)
§ 114.06 HIRING OF EXAMINERS.
   (A)   The Mayor may enter into contracts with competent, qualified persons
for the examination of the inventories and records of applicants for licenses
or may designate competent, qualified city employees for this purpose. Such
persons shall work under the direction and control of the Mayor and shall make
such examinations of records and inventories as are specified by the Mayor and
authorized by this chapter.
   (B)   All information obtained by these persons or any city employees or
officials through applications or examinations made pursuant to this chapter
shall be confidential, and any disclosure thereof, except where such disclosure
is necessary in the administration of the provisions of this chapter, shall
constitute a minor misdemeanor.
('74 Code, § 118.06) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79)
§ 114.07 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; CONDITIONS THEREOF.
   (A)   When it appears to the Mayor that all the statements in the
application are true and that the proposed sale is of the character represented
therein, that the application is in full compliance with the terms and
conditions of this chapter, and that the required license fee has been paid and
the required bond filed, the Mayor shall issue a license to the applicant
authorizing the applicant to advertise and conduct the sale as described in the
application, subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   The sale shall be held at the place named in the application and by
the particular licensee for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days
following the date specified in the license;
      (2)   Only the goods, wares, and merchandise included in the inventory
attached to the application shall be sold at the sale;
      (3)   Upon the commencement of the sale and for its duration, the license
issued hereunder shall be prominently displayed in the place of sale by the
licensee;
      (4)   The licensee shall keep suitable books during the sale, at the
location at which the sale is conducted, in which shall be made daily entries
showing:
         (a)   Dollar amount of retail sales.
         (b)   Dollar amount of mark-downs. (Without limiting the meaning of
the term MARK-DOWN, the difference between retail and wholesale price of goods
wholesaled by licensee shall be considered a mark-down.)
         (c)   Dollars amount, both retail and cost price, of goods on back
order received.
         (d)   Dollar amount of wholesale sales.
   (B)   Copies of such daily entries shall be sent to the Mayor weekly and all
books of the licensee shall be open for inspection by the Mayor or his duly
authorized representatives during business hours.
('74 Code, § 118.07) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79)
§ 114.08 REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Mayor shall revoke any license pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter if he finds that the licensee has:
   (A)   Violated the provisions of this chapter;
   (B)   Made any material misstatement in his application;
   (C)   Failed to include in the inventory required by the provisions of this
chapter all the goods, wares, and merchandise being offered for sale;
   (D)   Offered or permitted to be offered at the sale any goods, wares, or
merchandise not included in the inventory attached to the application;
   (E)   Failed to keep suitable records of the sale; or
   (F)   Made or permitted to be made any false or misleading statements or
representations in advertising said sale, or in displaying, ticketing or
pricing goods, wares, or merchandise offered for sale.
('74 Code, § 118.08) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79)
§ 114.09 RENEWAL OF LICENSE.
   The Mayor shall, upon application therefor, renew a license issued under the
provisions of this chapter for one or more periods of 30 days each, if the
licensee has not sold all the goods listed on the inventory submitted with the
original application. Such fact shall be sworn to by the applicant in the
appropriate place on the application for renewal of the license. Only such
goods as were listed on the original inventory filed with the application and
not previously sold may be sold during the renewal period. The fee for the
renewal of a license shall be $15.
('74 Code, § 118.09) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79)
§ 114.10 LICENSE FEES.
   The fee for licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be $50 or .5% of
the cost inventory value of the goods, wares, and merchandise to be sold at
said sale, whichever is the greater amount; provided no fee shall be charged
for a license in the case of a business holding a distressed merchandise sale
as the result of acquisition of the business premises by the city or by any
other governmental body, federal, state or local, which is invested with the
power of eminent domain. Nothing contained herein shall be interpreted as
waiving compliance with all other provisions of this chapter.
('74 Code, § 118.10) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79)
§ 114.11 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sale conducted by a
public officer as part of his official duties, to any sale an accounting of
which must be made to a court of law, to any sale conducted pursuant to an
order of a court of law, or to any sale for which a permit has been issued
under
Ch. 111.
('74 Code, § 118.11) (Ord. 616-A, passed 11-6-79)
CHAPTER 115: PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
115.01   Definitions
   
115.02   License requirement
   
115.03   Application procedure
   
115.04   Standards for issuance
   
115.05   Revocation procedure
   
115.06   Standards for revocation
   
115.07   Appeal procedure
   
115.08   Exhibition of identification
   
115.09   Municipal policy on soliciting
   
115.10   Notice regulating soliciting
   
115.11   Duty of solicitors
   
115.12   Uninvited soliciting prohibited
   
115.13   Time limit on soliciting
Statutory reference:
   Municipal power to regulate, see R.C. §§ 715.61, 715.63, and 715.64
   Revocation of licenses for conviction of certain fraud and theft offenses,
see R.C. § 2961.03
§ 115.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler, or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS. Merchandise of any description, and includes, but is not limited to,
wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the municipality and
who, in the furtherance of such business, uses any building, structure,
vehicle, or any place within the municipality.
   PEDDLER. Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale,
or making sales, or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the municipality.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a solicitor is not
a peddler.
§ 115.02 LICENSE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Any person who is an itinerant merchant, peddler, or solicitor shall
obtain a license before engaging in such activity within the municipality as
required by
Chapter 110.
   (B)   The fee for the license required by this chapter shall be as set from
time to time by the Legislative Authority.
   (C)   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferable.
   (D)    All licenses issued under this chapter shall be valid for 90
consecutive days in one calendar year or the applicant can divide up the
permitted time for several occasions, which the applicant must obtain a permit
for each period of time.
(Ord. 17-1826, passed 9-19-17) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.03 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall file an
application with the Clerk or other authorized official. This application shall
be signed by the applicant if an individual, or by all partners if a
partnership, or by the president if a corporation. The applicant may be
requested to provide information concerning the following items:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   (a)   The name of the individual having management authority or
supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed to
be carried on in the city;
         (b)   The local address of such individual;
         (c)   The permanent address of such individual;
         (d)   The capacity in which such individual will act;
      (3)   The name and address of the person, if any, for whose purpose the
business will be carried on, and, if a corporation, the state of incorporation;
      (4)   The time period or periods during which it is proposed to carry on
applicant's business;
      (5)   (a)   The nature, character, and quality of the goods or services
to be offered for sale or delivered;
         (b)   If goods, their invoice value and whether they are to be sold by
sample as well as from stock, where and by whom such goods are manufactured or
grown, and where such goods are at the time of application;
      (6)   The nature of the advertising proposed to be done for the business;
      (7)   Whether or not the applicant, or the individual identified in
division (A)(2)(a) above, or the person identified in division (A)(3) has been
convicted of any crime or misdemeanor and, if so, the nature of each offense
and the penalty assessed for each offense.
   (B)   Applicants for peddler or solicitor licenses may be required to
provide further information concerning the following items, in addition to that
requested under division (A) above:
      (1)   A description or photograph of the applicant;
      (2)   A description of any vehicle proposed to be used in the business,
including its registration number, if any.
   (C)   All applicants for licenses required by this chapter shall attach to
their application, if required by the municipality, credentials from the
person, if any, for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing
the applicant to act as such representative.
   (D)   Applicants who propose to handle foodstuffs shall also attach to their
application, in addition to any attachments required under division (C), a
statement from a licensed physician, dated not more than 14 days prior to the
date of application, certifying the applicant to be free of contagious or
communicable disease.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.04 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application, an investigation of the applicant's
business reputation and character shall be made.
   (B)   The application shall be approved unless such investigation discloses
tangible evidence that the conduct of the applicant's business would pose a
substantial threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare. In
particular, the following tangible evidence will constitute valid reasons for
disapproval of an application:
      (1)   The applicant has been conviction within the last three years of
any felony, or conviction within the last three year of any misdemeanor
involving a sex offense, a drug trafficking offense, or any offense of violence
against persons or property;
      (2)   The applicant has made willful misrepresentations in the
application;
      (3)   The applicant as committed prior violations of ordinances
pertaining to itinerant merchants, peddlers, solicitors, and the like;
      (4)   The applicant as committed prior fraudulent acts; or
      (5)   The applicant as a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts.
§ 115.05 REVOCATION PROCEDURE.
   Any license or permit granted under this chapter may be revoked by the Clerk
or other designated official after notice and hearing, pursuant to the
standards in §
115.06. Notice of hearing for revocation shall be given in writing, setting
forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the licensee at his or her last known
address, at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 115.06 STANDARDS FOR REVOCATION.
   A license granted under this chapter may be revoked for any of the following
reasons:
   (A)   Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the license application;
   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement made in connection with
the business being conducted under the license;
   (C)   Violation of this chapter;
   (D)   Conviction of the licensee of any felony, or conviction of the
licensee of any misdemeanor involving a sex offense, a drug trafficking
offense, or any offense of violence against persons or property; or
   (E)   Conducting the business licensed in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the
public.
§ 115.07 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision under §§
115.04 or
115.06 shall have the right to appeal to the Legislative Authority. The appeal
shall be taken by filing with the Legislative Authority, within 14 days after
notice of the decision has been mailed to such person's last known address, a
written statement setting forth the grounds for appeal. The Legislative
Authority shall set the time and place for a hearing, and notice for such
hearing shall be given to such person in the same manner as provided in §
115.05.
   (B)   The order of the Legislative Authority after the hearing shall be
final.
§ 115.08 EXHIBITION OF IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   Any license issued to an itinerant merchant under this chapter shall
be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein. In the event more
than one place within the municipality shall be used to conduct the business
licensed, separate licenses shall be issued for each place.
   (B)   The Clerk or other authorized official shall issue a license to each
peddler or solicitor licensed under this chapter. The license shall contain the
words “Licensed Peddler” or “Licensed Solicitor,” the expiration date of the
license, and the number of the license. The license shall be kept with the
licensee during such time as he or she is engaged in the business licensed.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.09 MUNICIPAL POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the municipality that the
residents in the municipality shall make the determination of whether
solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective residences.
§ 115.10 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors to any residence
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
   “NO SOLICITORS INVITED”
   (B)   The letters shall be at least one-third of an inch in height. For the
purpose of uniformity, the Police Chief may provide the cards to persons
requesting, at the cost thereof, if available.
   (C)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
§ 115.11 DUTY OF SOLICITORS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the municipality upon which a residence is located to first examine the
notice provided for in §
115.10 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” then the solicitor,
whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the
premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.12 UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
115.10 above.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 115.13 TIME LIMIT ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a
residence located thereon, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound
in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such
residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof
and engage in soliciting, prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m.
Penalty, see §
110.99
CHAPTER 116: TAXICABS
Section
   
116.01   Definitions
   
116.02   Certificate of public convenience and necessity required
   
116.03   Application for certificate
   
116.04   Issuance of certificate
   
116.05   Liability insurance required
   
116.06   License fees
   
116.07   Transfer of certificates and licenses
   
116.08   Suspension and revocation of certificates
   
116.09   Taxicab driver's license
   
116.10   Application for driver's license
   
116.11   Examination of applicant; motor vehicle operator's permit required
   
116.12   Police investigation of applicant; traffic and police record
   
116.13   Consideration of application
   
116.14   Issuance of license; duration; annual fee
   
116.15   Display of license
   
116.16   Suspension and revocation of license
   
116.17   Failure to comply with federal, state and municipal laws
   
116.18   Vehicle equipment and maintenance
   
116.19   Designation of taxicabs
   
116.20   Taximeter and display of rates required
   
116.21   Number of passengers allowed
   
116.22   Articles left in vehicles
   
116.23   Vehicles from other municipalities
   
116.24   Receipts
   
116.25   Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare
   
116.26   Solicitation, acceptance and discharge of passengers
   
116.27   Open stands; use
   
116.28   Taxicab service
   
116.29   Manifests
   
116.30   Records and reports of holders
   
116.31   Police department; duty to enforce chapter
   
116.32   Disposition of vehicle license fees
Cross-reference:
   Traffic Code, see Title VII
Statutory reference:
   Power to establish taxi stands and fix rates, see R.C. § 715.25
   Power to regulate, see R.C. §§ 715.22 and 715.66
§ 116.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CERTIFICATE. A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the
Legislative Authority authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab
business in this municipality.
   DRIVER'S LICENSE. The permission granted by the municipality to a person to
drive a taxicab upon the streets of the municipality.
   HOLDER. A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity
has been issued.
   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. Means the Legislative Authority of the municipality
or an authorized municipal official designated by the Legislative Authority of
the municipality.
   MANIFEST.  A daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made by
such driver showing time and place of origin, destination, number of
passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip.
   OPEN STAND. A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere, in
the municipality which has been designated and reserved exclusively for the use
of taxicabs.
   PERSONS. Includes an individual, a corporation or other legal entity, a
partnership, and any unincorporated association.
   TAXICAB. A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than five passengers and
not operated on a fixed route.
   TAXIMETER. A meter, instrument or device attached to a taxicab which
measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the
fare is based.
   WAITING TIME. The time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of
acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but does not
include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause other
than the request, act or fault of a passenger.
§ 116.02 CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him or
her to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the municipality
without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity
from the Legislative Authority.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.03 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE.
   An application for a certificate shall be filed with the Legislative
Authority upon forms provided by the municipality; and such application shall
be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant.
   (B)   The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all
unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or
acts giving rise to such judgement.
   (C)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers.
   (D)   Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public
convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate.
   (E)   The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant
and the location of proposed depots and terminals.
   (F)   The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle of
the applicant.
   (G)   Such further information as the Legislative Authority may require.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.04 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   If the Legislative Authority finds that further taxicab service in the
municipality is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the
applicant is fit, willing, and able to perform such public transportation and
to conform to the provisions of this chapter and the rules promulgated by the
Legislative Authority, then the Legislative Authority shall issue a certificate
stating the name and address of the applicant, number of vehicles authorized
under such certificate and the date of issuance; otherwise, the application
shall be denied.
   (B)   In making the above findings, the Legislative Authority shall take
into consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation, whether
existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable
effect of increased service in local traffic conditions, and the character,
experience, and responsibility of the applicant.
§ 116.05 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect liability
insurance for each vehicle authorized in the amount of $100,000 for bodily
injury to any one person, $300,000 for injuries to more than one person which
are sustained in the accident, and $50,000 for property damage resulting from
any one accident. Such liability insurance shall inure to the benefit of any
person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately
caused by the negligence of a holder, his or her servants or agents. Policies
shall be filed with the Legislative Authority prior to issuance of license, and
shall be retained by the Legislative Authority during the term of the license.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.06 LICENSE FEES.
   No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation unless the holder
has paid an annual license fee of an amount to be determined by the Legislative
Authority for the right to engage in the taxicab business and an amount to be
determined by the Legislative Authority for each vehicle operated under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity. Such license fees shall be for
the calendar year and shall be in addition to any other license fees or charges
established by the proper authority and applicable to such holder or the
vehicles under his or her operation and control.
§ 116.07 TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATES AND LICENSES.
   No certificate of public convenience and necessity or license may be sold,
assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the
Legislative Authority.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.08 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   A certificate issued under the provisions of this section may be
revoked or suspended by the Legislative Authority if the holder thereof has:
      (1)   Violated any of the provisions of this section;
      (2)   Discontinued operations for more than 30 days;
      (3)   Violated any state or local law or regulations which reflects
unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation.
   (B)   Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of
the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard.
§ 116.09 TAXICAB DRIVER'S LICENSE.
   No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the
municipality, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to
be so driven, and no taxicab licensed by the municipality shall be so driven at
any time for hire, unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained
and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's license under the provisions of
this section.
Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Minors not to drive taxicabs, see R.C. § 4507.321
   State driver's license law, see R.C. Chapter 4507
§ 116.10 APPLICATION FOR DRIVER'S LICENSE.
   (A)   An application for a taxicab driver's license shall be filed with the
Police Chief on forms provided by the municipality, and such application shall
be verified under oath and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The names and addresses of four residents of the municipality who
have known the applicant for a period of one year and who will vouch for the
sobriety, honesty, and general good character of the applicant.
      (2)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers.
      (3)   The educational background of the applicant.
      (4)   The concise history of his or her employment.
   (B)   Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a
reputable physician of the municipality certifying that, in his or her opinion,
the applicant is not inflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make
him or her an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. At the time the application is
filed the applicant shall pay a fee of $5.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.11 EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT; MOTOR VEHICLE OPERATOR'S PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before any application is finally passed upon by the Police Chief the
applicant shall be required to pass a satisfactory examination as to his or her
knowledge of the municipality and to show that he or she has a current motor
vehicle operator's permit issued by the State of Ohio.
§ 116.12 POLICE INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; TRAFFIC AND POLICE RECORD.
   The Police Chief shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a
taxicab driver's license and a report of such investigation and a copy of the
traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the
application.
§ 116.13 CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION.
   The Police Chief, upon consideration of the application and the reports and
certificates required to be attached thereto, shall approve or reject the
application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a
personal appearance before the Police Chief to offer evidence why the
application should be reconsidered.
§ 116.14 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE; DURATION; ANNUAL FEE.
   (A)   Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver's license, the
Police Chief shall issue a license to the applicant which shall bear the name,
address, age, signature and photograph of the applicant.
   (B)   Such license shall be in effect for the remainder of the calendar
year. A license for every calendar year thereafter shall issue upon the payment
of $3 unless the license for the preceding year has been revoked.
§ 116.15 DISPLAY OF LICENSE AND RATES.
   Every driver licensed under this chapter shall post his or her driver's
license in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while the
driver is operating a taxicab.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.16 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   The Police Chief is hereby given the authority to suspend any driver's
license issued under this section for a driver's failing or refusing to comply
with the provisions of this section, such suspension to last for a period of
not more than 14 days. The Police Chief is also given authority to revoke any
driver's license for failure to comply with the provisions of this section.
However, a license may not be revoked unless the driver has received notice and
has had an opportunity to present evidence on his or her behalf.
§ 116.17 FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH FEDERAL, STATE AND MUNICIPAL LAWS.
   Every driver licensed under this chapter shall comply with all federal,
state and municipal laws. Failure to do so will justify the suspending or
revoking of a license by the Police Chief.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.18 VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the provisions of
this section, a license shall be issued for such vehicle by the Legislative
Authority. Each application for a license shall be filed with the police
department. The Police Chief shall endorse thereon approval of the mechanical
conditions as set forth hereunder. The applicant must present to the Police
Chief a certificate of a local garage whose name appears on a list prepared and
approved by the Police Chief. Such certificate shall be on a form provided by
the municipality stating that the taxicab has been inspected and that it meets
the standard of safety as prescribed by the Police Chief. Furthermore, the
certificate must state that the vehicle is found to be in a good condition of
mechanical operation. Each taxicab must receive a similar inspection every
third month thereafter by an approved local garage, and a similar certificate
shall be provided the Police Chief on each occasion. All costs of inspection
shall be borne by the applicant.
   (B)   Every vehicle operating under this section shall be periodically
inspected by the police department at such intervals as shall be established by
the Police Chief to insure the continued maintenance of safe operating
conditions.
   (C)   Every vehicle operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean
and sanitary condition, according to rules and regulations promulgated by the
Police Chief.
Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Seat belts required in, see R.C. § 4513.263
§ 116.19 DESIGNATION OF TAXICABS.
   Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each rear door, in painted letters
not less than four inches nor more than six inches in height, the name of the
owner or cab company and in addition, may bear an identifying design, approved
by the Legislative Authority. No taxicab shall have a color scheme or
identifying design, which in the opinion of the Legislative Authority,
conflicts with or imitates any color scheme or identifying design used on
vehicles already operating under this chapter, in such a manner as to be
misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.20 TAXIMETER AND DISPLAY OF RATES REQUIRED.
   (A)   All taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter shall be
equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them
at all times day and night; and after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall
be illuminated. Such taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism or
from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving
mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections that would effect
their correct reading and recording if manipulated. Each taximeter shall have
thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not
employed; and it shall be the duty of the driver to place the flag of such
taximeter into a nonrecording position on the termination of each trip. The
taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the police
department. Any inspector or other officer of the police department is hereby
authorized either on complaint of any person or without such complaint to
inspect any meter and upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the
person operating such taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon such taxicab shall
be kept off the highways until the taximeter is repaired and in the required
working condition.
   (B)   Every taxicab shall display at all times a printed rate card of the
fares and rates to be charged passengers for transportation. No operator shall
charge a fare or rate in excess of those so displayed.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.21 NUMBER OF PASSENGERS ALLOWED.
   No taxicab operator shall seat or transport more passengers within the
taxicab than the number of passengers rated by the manufacturer of the vehicle.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.22 ARTICLES LEFT IN VEHICLES.
   Drivers of taxicabs shall promptly deliver to the police department all
property of value left in their vehicles by passengers.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.23 VEHICLES FROM OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   Taxicabs having no license with this municipality and the place of business
of the owner of which is not in the municipality may bring passengers into the
municipality but may not pick up new passengers or accept any business within
the municipality.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.24 RECEIPTS.
   The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to
such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically
printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name
of the owner, license number or vehicle number, amount of meter reading or
charges and date of transaction.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.25 REFUSAL OF PASSENGER TO PAY LEGAL FARE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the fare of any taxicab
after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any persons to hire
any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the
value of such service. Whoever violates this section shall be charged with
theft pursuant to either appropriate state law or pursuant to the appropriate
theft offense under
Chapter 131 of this code.
Cross-reference:
   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud, see §
131.14
   Theft, see §
131.08
§ 116.26 SOLICITATION, ACCEPTANCE AND DISCHARGE OF PASSENGERS.
   (A)   Solicitation of passengers by driver. No driver shall solicit
passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of
such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof.
The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or
immediately adjacent to his or her vehicle at all times when such vehicle is
upon the public street, except that when necessary, a driver may be absent from
his or her taxicab for not more than five consecutive minutes, and provided
further that nothing herein contained shall be held to prohibit any driver from
alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers
into or out of such vehicle.
   (B)   Prohibited solicitation.  No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud
or annoying tone of voice or by sign or in any manner to annoy any person or
obstruct the movement of any persons, or follow any person for the purpose of
soliciting patronage.
   (C)   Receipt and discharge of passengers on sidewalk only. Drivers of
taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall
pull up to the right hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or in the absence of a
sidewalk, to the extreme right hand side of the road and there receive or
discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets, where passengers may be
discharged at either the right or left sidewalk, or the side of the roadway in
the absence of a sidewalk.
   (D)   Additional passengers.  No driver shall permit any other persons to
occupy or ride in such taxicab, unless the person first employing the taxicab
shall consent to the acceptance of additional passenger or passengers, except
for the transportation of school children to or from school on a regular pickup
schedule. No charge shall be made for an additional passenger except when the
additional passenger rides beyond the previous passengers destination and then
only for the additional distance so traveled. If two or more passengers are
transported to different destinations, the taximeter shall be reset at the end
of each trip.
   (E)   Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. No driver shall refuse
or neglect to convey any orderly person, upon request, unless previously
engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so.
   (F)   Prohibitions of drivers.  It shall be a violation of this chapter for
any driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel, or to attempt to
divert patronage from one hotel to another. Neither shall such driver engage in
selling intoxicating liquors or solicit business for any house of ill repute or
use his or her vehicle for any purpose other than the transporting of
passengers, or the transporting of parcels or packages not exceeding 100
pounds.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.27 OPEN STANDS; USE.
   Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first come-first
served basis. The driver shall pull on to the open stand from the rear and
shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within
five feet of their cabs; they shall not solicit passengers or engage in loud or
boisterous talk while at an open stand. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of his or her choice
that is parked at open stands.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.28 TAXICAB SERVICE.
   All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the municipality operating
under the provisions of this chapter shall render a comprehensive taxicab
service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of
public convenience and necessity shall maintain a central place of business for
the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. They shall answer all
calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the
municipality, as soon as they can do so and if such services cannot be rendered
within a reasonable time they shall notify the prospective passengers how long
it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any
holder who refuses to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the
municipality, at any time when such holder has available cabs, or who fails or
refuses to give comprehensive taxicab service, shall be deemed a violator of
this chapter and the certificate granted to such holder shall be revoked at the
discretion of the Legislative Authority.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.29 MANIFESTS.
   (A)   Each driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded
all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of
each trip and amount of fare, and all such completed manifests shall be
returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his or her tour of
duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner
and shall be of a character approved by the Police Chief.
   (B)   Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity
shall retain and preserve all driver's manifests in a safe place for at least
the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year, and such manifests
shall be available to the Legislative Authority, Police Chief, or other
authorized official.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.30 RECORDS AND REPORTS OF HOLDERS.
   (A)   Every holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations,
operating, and other expenses, capital expenditures, and such other operating
information as may be required by the Legislative Authority. Every holder shall
maintain the records containing such information and other data required by
this chapter at a place readily accessible for examination by the Legislative
Authority.
   (B)   Every holder shall submit reports or receipts, expenses, and
statistics of operation to the Legislative Authority for each calendar year, in
accordance with a uniform system prescribed by the Legislative Authority. Such
reports shall reach the Legislative Authority on or before the 15th of February
of the year following the calendar year for which such reports are prepared.
   (C)   All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of
taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to any
vehicle or to any property in the amount exceeding the sum of $25 shall be
reported within 24 hours from the time of occurrence to the police department
in a form of report to be furnished by the department.
Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 116.31 POLICE DEPARTMENT; DUTY TO ENFORCE CHAPTER.
   The police department is hereby given the authority and is instructed to
watch and observe the conduct of holders and drivers operating under this
chapter. Upon discovering a violation of the provision of this chapter, the
police department shall report the same to the Mayor or other designated
official, who will order or take appropriate action.
§ 116.32 DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE LICENSE FEES.
   All monies and receipts which are derived from the enforcement of the
vehicle licensing fees of this chapter shall be credited and paid into a
separate fund, known as the “Public Service Street Repair Fund.” All monies and
receipts credited to such fund shall be used for the sole purpose of repairing
streets, avenues, alleys, and lanes within the municipality.
Statutory reference:
   Vehicle license money to be used for street repairs, see R.C. § 715.66
CHAPTER 117: VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Fee
   
117.03   Notice provision
   
117.04   Management authorization
   
117.05   Regulatory authorization
   
117.06   Video service provider access provision
   
117.07   Access programming requirements
   
117.08   Fee payment requirements
   
117.09   PEG origination point
   
117.10   Notice requirement
   
117.11   Application to incumbent cable providers
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INTERCOMMUNITY CABLE REGULATORY COMMISSION. The Intercommunity Cable
Regulatory Commission of the City of Mt. Healthy.
   INCUMBENT CABLE PROVIDER. Any person who on the effective date of Ordinance
08-1520, is the holder of a cable franchise agreement with the city as granted
pursuant to requirements of 47 U.S.C. 541.
   PEG. The activities or actions performed for the benefit of public,
educational government video programming by the city or CPB.
   VIDEO SERVICE. The service defined in R.C. § 1332.21(J).
   VIDEO SERVICE AUTHORIZATION or VSA. The authorization granted to a video
service provider in accordance with the requirements of R.C. §§ 1332.21 to
1332.34 et seq.
   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE or VSP FEE. The fee paid by a VSP in Ordinance
Number 94-1111 in accordance with the requirements of R.C. § 1332.32.
   VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER or VSP. A person, firm, or corporation granted a
video service authorization under R.C. §§ 1332.21 to 1332.34 et seq.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
§ 117.02 FEE.
   In accordance with the requirements of R.C. § 1332.32, all VSP's providing
video service in the city pursuant to a VSA obtained from the Director of the
Ohio Department of Commerce shall pay a VSP fee in the amount of 5% of gross
revenues received from providing video service in the city, which gross revenue
base shall include advertising revenues. The VSP fee shall be paid quarterly,
not later than 60 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
§ 117.03 NOTICE PROVISION.
   Upon receipt of notice from a VSP that it will begin providing video service
in the city pursuant to a state-issued video service authorization, the City
Manager or his designee is authorized and directed to provide such VSP with
notice of the VSP fee as determined by this chapter which notice shall be
delivered in a manner that provides for proof of timely delivery.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
§ 117.04 MANAGEMENT AUTHORIZATION.
   The city authorizes the Intercommunity Cable Regulatory Commission ("ICRC")
to manage and direct the city's cable franchise management, public, educational
and government access programming and franchise fee collection activities and
further directs ICRC to manage and direct the city's VSA public access
programming as may be necessary under R.C. §§ 1332.21 through 1332.34 et seq.,
all until such time as the city may terminate or revoke such grant of
authority. Nothing in this provision shall authorize the ICRC to collect the
VSP fees authorized by R.C. §§ 1332.21 through 1332.34 or to complete any audit
of VSP fee calculations authorized by R.C. § 1332.33.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
§ 117.05 REGULATORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The ICRC shall coordinate regulatory efforts for the city and provide
expertise other matters regarding cable franchises, cable service providers,
VSA's, VSP's, and other electronic media. Additional responsibilities shall
include the creation and promotion of the community media center and PEG access
channels, the establishment and review of programming policies, resolution of
policy disputes and questions of equal treatment for access users, and fiscal
controls. If matters of contract interpretation arise concerning community
programming, the ICRC shall be consulted.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
§ 117.06 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER ACCESS PROVISION.
   Upon receipt of notice from a VSP that it will begin providing video service
in the city pursuant to a VSA, the City Manager or his designee is authorized
and directed to provide such VSP with notice that the VSP shall be required to
provide the same number of PEG channels in the city under the same service tier
conditions and subject to the same channel reclamation conditions as may be
proscribed by R.C. § 1332.30(A)(1)(a-b) for the incumbent cable provider with
the most recent obligation in the city, which notice shall be delivered in a
manner that provides for proof of timely delivery and shall state the
appropriate number of PEG channels and service tiers required to be provided by
the VSP within the city within 120 days after delivery of such notice.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
§ 117.07 ACCESS PROGRAMMING REQUIREMENTS.
   In accordance with the requirements of R.C. § 1332.30(A)(1)(a) when more
than three PEG access channels are provided to the city by an incumbent cable
provider or VSP, such additional channel shall be programmed by the city with
at least 40 hours of non-character generated content per week with at least 60%
of the programming being non-repeat and locally produced. For the purposes of
this section "non-repeat and locally produced" shall mean, the first three
playbacks of programming produced or provided by any local resident, the city
or its affiliates, or any local public or private agency that provides services
to residents of Hamilton County and Butler County, or any transmission of a
meeting or proceeding of any local, state, or federal governmental entity.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
§ 117.08 FEE PAYMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   Any VSP fee or community service fee payments required to be paid to the
city by a VSP shall be made quarterly and be remitted directly to the city via
appropriate negotiable instrument made payable to City of Mt. Healthy, 7700
Perry St., Mt. Healthy, OH 45231, not later than 60 days after the end of each
calendar quarter.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
§ 117.09 PEG ORIGINATION POINT.
   The PEG programming origination point of the city for the delivery of VSP
access services shall be located at 7700 Perry St., Mt. Healthy, OH 45231.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
§ 117.10 NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   Any notice to the city that is required of a VSP in accordance with R.C. §§
1332.21 through 1332.34 shall be provided in written form to the City Manager
and the Chairman of the ICRC either by certified mail, express mail or upon
personal delivery, all evidenced by a return receipt.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
§ 117.11 APPLICATION TO INCUMBENT CABLE PROVIDERS.
   The additional requirements applicable to VSP's enacted in this chapter
shall not apply to incumbent cable providers. The relationship between the city
and such providers shall continue to be governed by the franchise agreement
between the parties until its expiration or until the incumbent cable provider
is granted a VSA in accordance with R.C. § 1332.21 through 1331.34 et seq.
(Ord. 08-1520, passed 4-1-08)
CHAPTER 118: TEEN CLUB PERMIT AND LICENSE
Section
   
118.01   Definitions
   
118.02   Permit required
   
118.03   Application investigation process
   
118.04   Issuance of a permit
   
118.05   Annual permit fee
   
118.06   Expiration of permit
   
118.07   Suspension of permit
   
118.08   Revocation of permit
   
118.09   Review of permit denial, suspension or revocation
   
118.10   Transfer of permit
   
118.11   Teen club business or teen event employee license
   
118.12   Hours of operation
   
118.13   Admission
   
118.14   Additional operating conditions
   
118.15   Exemption of certain organizations
§ 118.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who works in and/or for a teen club business or teen
event, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other
compensation by the operator of said business and whether or not the person is
determined an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise. The term
EMPLOYEE does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or
maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
   PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE. Any person in whose name a permit and/or license
to operate a teen club business or teen event has been issued, as well as  the
individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.
   TEEN CLUB. All buildings and places of assembly where the intended occupancy
on any given occasion is either overwhelmingly or exclusively persons aged
between 13 and up to but not including 21 years of age unaccompanied by an
adult parent or guardian shall constitute a TEEN CLUB. TEEN CLUB shall include,
but not be limited to teen nightclubs, teen dance clubs and teen entertainment
establishments, even if the teen events are only occasional events at a
facility that on other days or occasions promotes adult events.
   TEEN EVENT. Any event in which at least ten or more participants under the
age of 18 and where any participant will be charged admission to attend or in
which food is available for purchase, or entertainment is available for a fee.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19)
§ 118.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No teen club business or teen event shall be permitted to operate
without a valid teen club business or teen event permit issued by the city.
Operation of such a business or event without a permit shall be a violation of
this chapter and shall result in a fine of up to $1,000 and a suspension of
license/permit for 30 days for a first offense, and a fine of up to $2,000 and
immediate revocation of license/permit for a second offense and each subsequent
offense thereafter.
   (B)   The City Manager, or his designee, is responsible for granting,
denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling permits for proposed or
existing teen club businesses or teen events. To be approved, applications must
comply with all requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Applications must be made on a form provided by the city. Applicants
must provide an original and two copies of a sworn application which must
contain the following information and documents.
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual: the individual's legal name, aliases, social
security number, and proof of age over 18.
         (b)   A partnership: the complete name and tax identification number
for the partnership, names of all partners, and a copy of any partnership
agreement.
         (c)   A corporation: its complete name, date and place of
incorporation, tax identification number, names of all officers, directors, and
stockholders owning 5% or more of all outstanding stock, name and address of
its registered agent, and evidence of good standing under Ohio law.
      (2)   The name of the teen club business or teen event permittee/licensee
if different from the applicant's and any required registration documents.
      (3)   Whether the applicant or any other listed individuals has had a
teen club business or teen event permit revoked, suspended, or denied, and the
name of the business, the city or county of occurrence and the date on which
the permit was suspended, revoked, or denied within the last five years.
      (4)   Whether the applicant or other listed individuals hold any other
teen club business or teen event permits and the names and locations of all
other such businesses.
      (5)   The proposed teen event or teen club location, including a legal
description of the property, street address and telephone number.
      (6)   The applicant's business and residential addresses and telephone
numbers. If the applicant has been at his current address for less than five
years, then all business and residential addresses of applicant for five years
prior to the date of the application must be included.
      (7)   The applicant's tax identification number and written proof of age
in the form of picture identification issued by a governmental agency.
      (8)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration and total floor space
of the premises, drawn to scale.
      (9)   A lighting plan for all parking areas and at all entrances and
exits of the teen club or teen event designed to provide a safe and secure
environment.
      (10)   A maximum occupancy statement.
      (11)   A security plan demonstrating that the teen club or teen event has
met all city and state building and fire code requirements, and including the
number and location of all access doors, including emergency exits.
      (12)   A sound-proofing plan that demonstrates that noise and/or
vibrations shall not be heard or felt beyond the property line of any teen club
or teen event.
      (13)   (a)   The application must be signed by the individual applicant,
and each person who has at least a 5% interest in the business.
         (b)   Applicants are under a continuing duty to promptly update their
application information. Failure to do so within 30 days of the date of a
change in application information shall be grounds for permit suspension or
revocation.
         (c)   If the City Manager learns that an applicant improperly
completed the permit application, the City Manager shall promptly notify the
applicant and allow ten days for correction.
         (d)   A $500 non-refundable application fee is due at the time the
applicant files an application under this chapter. A $100 non-efundable
application fee is due for subsequent teen events held within one year of the
initial application at the same location of the same type and approximately the
same number of teen patrons as the initial teen event.
   (D)   Prior to obtaining a permit to operate a teen club business or teen
event, the applicant shall certify that the proposed location complies with the
location requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   By filing an application under this chapter, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the
investigation of the application by the City Manager and his designees. Such
investigation shall include, but not be limited to, a criminal background check
of all owner(s) and operator(s) listed on the application.
   (F)   The applicant is required to provide the city with the names of all
employees required to be licensed under §
118.11. This obligation continues even after a permit is granted or renewed.
All new employees required to obtain a license under this chapter must be
reported to the city no later than ten business days after the employee is
hired.
   (G)   A teen club business or teen event permit may be renewed annually upon
written application, subject to the payment of a $1,000 annual renewal fee, and
a finding that the permit holder is still in conformance with the permit
requirements.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.03 APPLICATION INVESTIGATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed application the city shall send
photocopies of the application to all city departments responsible for the
enforcement of health, fire, building and zoning codes and laws. Each
department shall investigate the application for compliance with its respective
policies and codes and approve or disapprove the application within 20 days of
the receipt of the application by the city. A department shall disapprove an
application if it finds that the business would be in violation of a specific
provision of a statute, code, resolution regulation or other law in effect in
the city.
   (B)   An application shall be disapproved if a criminal background check
reveals that any owner, operator, partner, principal shareholder, permittee,
licensee or employee has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the
following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2919.22; R.C. § 2919.24; any crime of
violence as defined in the Ohio Revised Code; any violation of R.C. Chapter
2907; or any violation of R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of this state, any
political subdivision of this state, any other state, or the United States that
is substantially equivalent to any of the offenses or violations described in
division (B)(1) of this section.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.04 ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT.
   (A)   An application shall be granted or denied within 30 days from the date
of the city's receipt of a completed application except as provided under
division (D) of this section.
   (B)   The permit shall state on its face the name of the person or persons
to whom it is granted, the address of the teen club business or teen event, and
the permit expiration date. The permit shall be posted at all times in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the teen club business or teen
event.
   (C)   An application may be denied for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an employee who
does not have a valid license as required in §
118.11.
      (2)   An applicant is overdue on the filing of any tax return, or overdue
on the payment of any taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed by any
governmental agency in relation to a teen club business or teen event.
      (3)   An applicant's permit to operate a teen club business or teen event
has been denied or revoked within the preceding 12 months.
      (4)   The premises to be used are not in compliance with city, county or
state health, fire, and/or building codes as determined by the governmental
agency responsible for determining such compliance.
      (5)   An applicant has failed to provide information as requested in the
application or has supplied false information.
      (6)   The application fee or renewal fee has not been paid.
      (7)   To grant the application would violate a statute, resolution, or
court order.
      (8)   The applicant has a teen club or teen event permit which has been
suspended or revoked.
      (9)   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an employee who
does not have a valid license as required in this chapter.
      (10)   Any owner, operator, licensee or permittee who fails to pass the
criminal background check as set forth in §
118.03.
      (11)   The business or event for which a permit is sought, or for which
renewal of a permit is sought, has been declared a nuisance as defined under
the Ohio Revised Code.
      (12)   If, after an investigation is conducted by the police, that the
issuance of the permit will disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding
neighborhood.
   (D)   As set forth in §
118.03, all city departments responsible for the enforcement of health, fire,
building and zoning codes and laws shall determine if the proposed business or
event is in compliance with its area of regulation within 20 days of receipt of
a completed application. If the applicant requests additional time to comply
with a statute, code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the city,
a one-time extension of an additional 30 days may be given for the city to
grant or deny the application. The City Manager or his designee and City Police
Officers shall at all times have access to any premises for which a permit for
a teen club or teen event has been issued.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.05 ANNUAL PERMIT FEE.
   The annual renewal fee for a teen club business or teen event permit is
$1,000.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19)
§ 118.06 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed by making an application under §
118.02 at least 30 days before the expiration date. If a renewal is denied, a
renewal shall not be issued for one year from the date of denial. If the basis
for denial is delinquency in fees or taxes or an incomplete or false
application, and the original defect has been corrected, and at least 90 days
have elapsed from the date the denial became final, a renewal may be granted.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19)
§ 118.07 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   A permit to operate a teen club business or teen event may be suspended for
a period not to exceed 30 days if a permittee/licensee knowingly, or an
employee of a permittee/licensee intentionally violates or is not in compliance
with this chapter; works at the teen club business or teen event while under
the influence of alcohol; fails to correct a violation of a building, fire,
health or zoning code within seven days of notification of such violation;
transfers the teen club business or teen event permit to another in violation
of this chapter; or employs a person without a valid license as required in §
118.11.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19)
§ 118.08 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit to operate a teen club business or teen event shall be
revoked upon a determination that either a permit is to be suspended for a
second time within a 12-month period or that a permittee/licensee or an
employee of a permittee/licensee:
      (1)   Gave false or misleading information on the permit application
which enhanced the permittee's/licensee's opportunity to obtain a permit;
      (2)   Knowingly allowed the possession, sale or use of a controlled
substance or alcohol on the premises;
      (3)   Knowingly operated the business or event while under permit
suspension;
      (4)   Has been convicted of tax violations for taxes or fees related to a
teen club business or teen event; or
      (5)   Knowingly operated the business or event in violation of the
additional operating conditions of §
118.14.
   (B)   Any permit revocation shall be for a period of one year, during which
time a permittee/licensee shall not receive any other permits for any other
teen club business or teen event.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19)
§ 118.09 REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   An applicant or permittee/licensee may seek review within 30 days of the
denial of an application, denial of a renewal of an application, suspension or
revocation of a permit before the City Council. If an applicant properly
appeals to the Council, the denial will continue during the pendency of the
appeal.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19)
§ 118.10 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permittee/licensee shall not operate a teen club business or teen
event at any place other than the address designated in the application for
permit.
   (B)   A permittee/licensee shall not transfer a permit to another person
unless that person:
      (1)   Obtains an amendment to the permit upon the satisfactory completion
of an application; and
      (2)   Pays a transfer fee of 20% of the annual permit fee.
   (C)   A permit may not be transferred after the permittee/licensee has been
notified that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought
against the permittee/licensee.
   (D)   A permit shall not be transferred to another location.
   (E)   Any transfer attempted in violation of this chapter will result in
revocation of the permit.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19)
§ 118.11 TEEN CLUB BUSINESS OR TEEN EVENT EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (A)   All employees of a teen club business or teen event are required to
obtain a teen club business or teen event employee license and shall submit to
a criminal background check as set forth in §
118.03, and shall pay a permit fee of $25 to cover reasonable administrative
costs. In addition, at the discretion of the Police Chief, employees may be
required to submit to a BCI and/or FBI fingerprint check, cost of which shall
be borne by the employee.
   (B)   On a form provided by the city the applicant shall provide his or her
name, current resident and business addresses and phone numbers, proof of
minimum age of 18 in the form of a state driver's license or other form of
picture identification issued by a governmental agency; and a color photograph
and fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department.
   (C)   The application review shall be completed within ten days of filing.
If requested, a temporary license may be issued pending review of the
application, if the prior history of the applicant demonstrates responsible use
under this chapter and the laws of Ohio.
   (D)   The employee license shall be issued unless the city finds that:
      (1)   The employee applicant knowingly made a false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of material fact;
      (2)   The employee applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (3)   The employee applicant has had an employee license revoked within
two years of the date of the current application; or
      (4)   The employee applicant fails to meet the requirements of the
criminal background check as set forth in §
118.03.
   (E)   An employee license may be renewed annually upon written application
subject to the payment of a $10 renewal fee and a finding that the employee
applicant is still in conformance with all application requirements.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.12 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   All teen clubs or teen events allowing persons under the age of 14 may
operate no later than 10:00 p.m.
   (B)   All teen clubs or teen events allowing persons aged 14 and older may
operate no later than 11:00 p.m.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.13 ADMISSION.
   (A)   No re-admission of any person shall be allowed without payment of the
full admission fee required of all patrons entering the club or event.
   (B)   Parents and/or guardians and on-duty police officers shall be allowed
to enter the club or event during all hours of operation.
   (C)   Parents and/or guardians and on-duty police officers shall not be
subject to payment of any admission fee.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.14 ADDITIONAL OPERATING CONDITIONS.
   (A)   The permittee/licensee shall notify the Police Chief of the maximum
number of teens that will be permitted to occupy the premises at any time
during any event. The notification shall be required to be submitted to the
Police Chief at least seven days prior to the event. The permittee/licensee
shall then provide at least four off-duty police officers for the first 200
teens permitted to attend, and one additional officer for every additional 100
teens that will be permitted to attend. Additional off-duty officers shall be
hired if so directed by the Police Chief or his designated officer, as the
circumstances warrant or as deemed necessary based on prior history.
   (B)   No noise and/or vibrations shall be heard or felt beyond the property
line of any teen club or teen event, and there shall be no speaker, sound
system or other device emitting noise and/or vibrations on the exterior of the
building.
   (C)   Teen clubs or teen events shall not be allowed within 200 feet of any
single- family residential structure.
   (D)   Teen clubs or teen events shall not be allowed within 200 feet of any
establishment selling alcohol.
   (E)   Firearms shall not be permitted on the premises except for police and
certified security personnel hired by the sponsor of the event.
   (F)   Alcohol consumption shall not be permitted on the premises during any
teen event.
   (G)   Although alcohol may be stored on the premises during a teen event, it
must be secured so that it is not accessible by anyone during the event.
   (H)   All rules shall be clearly posted for all patrons on the premises.
   (I)   Nothing in this section relieves the permittee/licensee from
compliance with any ordinance of the city.
   (J)   Additional security measures, including, but not limited to ending
times, security requirements, notice to potentially affected neighborhoods,
parking and pick-up areas, and identification of attendees, may be instituted
by the City Manager to ensure the safety and welfare of the participants where
prior violations by the applicant in the city or any other jurisdiction justify
additional security measures be taken.
   (K)   Permittee/licensee shall be obligated to take affirmative steps to
prevent loitering on the premises of persons not within the confines of the
building's teen club or teen event.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 118.15 EXEMPTION OF CERTAIN ORGANIZATIONS.
   The following shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Nonprofit organizations such as churches and educational institutions;
   (B)   Fraternal orders or societies conducting dances where admission is
restricted to members of such clubs, orders or societies and families of
members, whether held on their own premises or in a hall leased or donated for
such purposes; and
   (C)   Places of organized sporting events where teen activities are sport-
related, including bowling lanes, basketball leagues, and baseball leagues.
(Ord. 10-1570, passed 4-6-10; Am. Ord. 19-1888, passed 8-20-19)
CHAPTER 119: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Section
   
119.01   Purpose
   
119.02   Definitions
   
119.03   Establishment and classification of regulated businesses
   
119.04   Measurement of distance
   
119.05   Nonconforming uses
   
119.06   Permit required
   
119.07   Application investigation process
   
119.08   Issuance of permit
   
119.09   Annual permit fee
   
119.10   Inspection
   
119.11   Expiration of permit
   
119.12   Suspension of permit
   
119.13   Revocation of permit
   
119.14   Judicial review of permit denial, suspension or revocation
   
119.15   Transfer of permit
   
119.16   Sexually oriented business employee license
   
119.17   Location of sexually oriented business
   
119.18   Minors prohibited
   
119.19   Advertising and lighting regulations
   
119.20   Hours of operation
   
119.21   Nudity prohibited
   
119.22   Criminal penalties for the operation of a sexually oriented business
without a valid permit
   
119.23   Exemptions
   
119.24   Criminal penalties and legal, equitable and injunctive relief
   
119.25   Immunity from prosecution
§ 119.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate sexually oriented businesses
through the application of uniform zoning and licensing requirements to promote
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of Mt. Healthy
and establish reasonable and uniform regulations for the operation of sexually
oriented businesses, with the goal of reducing or eliminating the adverse
secondary effects associated with sexually oriented businesses. It is not the
intent of this chapter to limit or restrict the content of communicative
materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this section, certain terms and words are defined as
follows:
   EMPLOYEE. A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business.
   ESCORT. A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a strip tease for another
person.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in this
chapter;
      (3)   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in
this chapter to any other existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
   LIQUOR LICENSE. A license issued by the State of Ohio to serve or sell
alcohol as permitted under R.C. Chapter 4301.
   NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY.
      (1)   The appearance of the human bare buttock, anus, male genitals,
female genitals, or the areola or nipple of the female breast; or
      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human
buttocks, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region or areola or nipple of
the female breast.
   OPERATOR. Includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager, operator,
or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
   PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES. Any premises that requires a license and/or
permit that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
   PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE. A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   PROTECTED USES. Those uses listed below and defined as:
      (1)   PUBLIC BUILDING. Any building owned, leased, or held by the United
States, the state, the county, the city, any special district, school district,
or any other agency or political subdivision of the state or the United States,
which building is used for governmental purposes.
      (2)   PUBLIC PARK or RECREATION AREA. Public land which has been designed
for park or recreational activities, including but not limited to a park,
playground, nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball
or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, wilderness areas, or
similar public land within the city which is under the control, operation, or
management of the city park and recreation authorities.
      (3)   RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION. Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or
building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.
      (4)   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE. A single-family, duplex, townhouse,
multiple family, or mobile park or subdivision and campground as defined in the
Zoning Code.
      (5)   SCHOOL. Any public or private educational facility including but
not limited to child day care facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, vocational schools,
secondary schools, continuation schools, special education schools, junior
colleges, and universities. SCHOOL includes the school grounds, but does not
include any facilities used primarily for another purpose and only incidentally
as a school.
   PUBLIC USE. Any use designed for the benefit and/or accommodation of the
general public which is available to all persons, without restriction,
regardless of whether or not a fee is charged for admission.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and  areolae of the female breast, as well as portions
of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES. Those businesses defined as:
      (1)   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE, meaning
a commercial establishment which has as a significant or substantia] portion of
its stock-in-trade or derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues or devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration,
of any one or more of the following:
         (a)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein;
         (b)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse.
      (2)   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, bottle club, or
similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, which regularly features:
         (a)   Persons who appear nude, semi- nude or in a state of nudity;
         (b)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities, or
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      (3)   ADULT MOTEL. A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment
which offers public accommodations, for any form of consideration, which
provides patrons with closed-circuit televisions transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas and which advertises the availability of this
sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign visible from the public
right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including but not
limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television.
      (4)   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
for any form of consideration.
      (5)   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are
characterized by exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual
activities.
      (6)   ESCORT AGENCY. A person or business association who furnishes,
offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
      (7)   MASSAGE PARLOR. Any place where, for any form of consideration or
gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or
magnetic treatments, or any other treatment manipulation of the human body
which occurs as a part of or in connection with specified sexual activities, or
where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service related
thereto,  exposes his or her specified anatomical areas. The definition of
sexually oriented businesses shall not include the practice of massage in any
licensed hospital, nor by a licensed hospital, nor by a licensed physician,
surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any nurse or technician working
under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or
osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semi- professional or professional
athlete or athletic team or school athletic program nor by any licensed massage
therapist licensed in the State of Ohio pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15.
      (8)   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person, who regularly appears
in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided for
money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons.
      (9)   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT. A business or commercial
establishment, that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any
form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate,
associate, or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or activities when one or more of the
persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity. The definition of sexually
oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual
therapy.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. As used in this division means and includes any
of the following:
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areolae; or
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTS. Sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, rape,
gross sexual imposition, and other crimes connected with sexually oriented
businesses, including but not limited to distribution of obscenity or other
material harmful to minors, pandering, prostitution or tax violations in
connection with a sexually oriented business.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. As used in this division means and includes any
of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated;
      (4)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence; or
      (5)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in division (1) through (4) of this definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Increase in the
floor areas occupied by the business by more than 15%, as the floor areas exist
on the date of passage of this chapter.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Includes
any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means;
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal devise
which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the
ownership or control.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.03 ESTABLISHMENT AND CLASSIFICATION OF REGULATED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Sexually oriented businesses shall be established only in identified
commercial and industrial zones and shall be subject to the restrictions of
this chapter. Specifically, sexually oriented businesses shall be allowed in
Light Industrial (F), Planned Light Industrial (FF) and Heavy Industrial (G)
districts, provided all other requirements of this chapter are satisfied. No
person shall establish a sexually oriented business within 200 feet of another
such business or within 200 feet of any establishment holding a liquor license
or within 200 feet of any protected uses, defined as any religious institution,
school, park or other public use, or within 200 feet of any property zoned or
used for residential purposes. Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in §
119.02, are classified as follows:
      (1)   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store;
      (2)   Adult cabaret;
      (3)   Adult motel;
      (4)   Adult motion picture theater;
      (5)   Adult theater;
      (6)   Massage parlor;
      (7)   Sexual encounter establishment;
      (8)   Escort agency; or
      (9)   Nude model studio.
   (B)   Nothing in this section prohibits the location of sexually oriented
businesses within retail shopping centers in specified commercial zones where
such activities will have their only frontage upon enclosed malls or malls
isolated from direct view from public streets, religious institutions, schools,
parks, or other public facilities and residential areas without regard to the
distance requirements of division (A) above, except where a protected use, such
as a day care facility, is located within an enclosed or isolated mall, or
where another tenant in the mall holds a valid liquor license for the sale or
service of alcohol and there is less than 200 feet between the sexually
oriented business and the establishment holding a valid license to serve or
sell alcohol.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.04 MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE.
   For the purposes of this chapter, distance between any two sexually oriented
businesses or any sexually oriented businesses and any establishment holding a
valid liquor license shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each
business. The distance between any sexually oriented business and any protected
use as defined in this chapter shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the sexually
oriented business to the nearest property line of the protected use.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.05 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating at the time of the
enactment of this section that is in violation of §
119.03 shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use may continue
for one year, and may be extended by the Planning Commission upon a showing of
extreme financial hardship, unless voluntarily discontinued for a period of 30
days or more. Such nonconforming uses may not be increased, enlarged, extended
or altered unless to a conforming use. Where two or more sexually oriented
businesses are operating in a permissible area, the first business to have been
established and continually operating is the conforming use.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered nonconforming by the subsequent location of a protected use within
200 feet of the sexually oriented business. This division does not apply to a
business whose permit and/or license has been expired or revoked. Similarly, a
sexually oriented business is not rendered nonconforming by the subsequent
location of a business holding a valid liquor license or the issuance of a
valid liquor license to an existing business within 200 feet of the sexually
oriented business.
   (C)   Any establishment subject to the provisions of this section shall
apply for a permit as provided under §
119.06 within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.06 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a
valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the city. Operation of such a
business without a permit is a misdemeanor.
   (B)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, is responsible for granting,
denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling permits for proposed or
existing sexually oriented businesses. To be approved, applications must comply
with all locational and zoning requirements of this chapter and the Zoning and
Building Codes of the city.
   (C)   Applications must be made on a form provided by the city. Applicants
must provide an original and two copies of a sworn application which must
contain the following information and documents:
      (1)   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual: the individual's legal name, aliases and proof of
age over 18.
         (b)   A partnership: the complete name, all partners names, and a copy
of any partnership agreement.
         (c)   A corporation: its complete name; date of incorporation; names
of all officers, directors and principal stockholders, name and address of its
registered agent and evidence of good standing under Ohio law.
      (2)   The name of the sexually oriented business, if different from the
applicant's and any required registration documents.
      (3)   Whether the applicant or any individual listed in division (C)(1)
of this section has been convicted of a specified criminal act as defined under
§
119.02 within either two years for misdemeanor offenses, or five years for
felony offenses or two or more misdemeanor offenses, immediately preceding the
application date, and, if so, the act involved and the date and place of the
conviction.
      (4)   Whether the applicant or other listed individuals has had a
sexually oriented business permit revoked, suspended, or denied and the name of
the business, the city or county of occurrence and the date on which the permit
was suspended, revoked, or denied.
      (5)   Whether the applicant or other listed individuals hold any other
sexually oriented business permits and the names and locations of all other
such businesses.
      (6)   The proposed location of the business including a legal description
of the property, street address and telephone number.
      (7)   The applicant's business and residential addresses and telephone
numbers. If the applicant has been at his, her or its current address for less
than five years, then all business and residential addresses of the applicant
for five years prior to the date of the application must be included. The
applicant shall designate the dates he, she or it resided at each address.
      (8)   The applicant's driver's license number, social security number,
tax identification number and recent photograph.
      (9)   A sketch or diagram showing the configuration and total floor space
of the premises. The sketch need not be professional, but must be drawn to
scale and accurate to plus or minus six inches.
      (10)   A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within 30
days prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting property
lines and structures and the property lines of any existing protected uses
within 200 feet of the proposed business and/or any existing establishments
holding a valid liquor license within 200 feet of the proposed business. A
protected use is established if it is in existence at the time the application
is submitted.
   (D)   Applicants are under a continuing duty to promptly update their
application information. Failure to do so within 30 days of the date of a
change in application information shall be grounds for permit suspension.
   (E)   If the City Manager learns that an applicant improperly completed the
permit application, the City Manager shall promptly notify the applicant and
allow ten days for correction.
   (F)   A $100 non-refundable application fee is due at the time the applicant
files an application under this section.
   (G)   Prior to obtaining a permit to operate a sexually oriented business,
the applicant shall obtain a certification that the proposed location complies
with the locational requirements of this chapter and the Zoning Code.
   (H)   The possession of other types of state or city permits and/or
licenses, including a liquor license, does not exempt an applicant from the
requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.
   (I)   By filing an application under this section, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the
investigation of the application by the City Manager and his designees.
   (J)   The applicant is required to provide the city with the names of all
employees required to be licensed under §
119.16. This obligation continues even after a permit is granted or renewed.
   (K)   A sexually oriented business permit may be renewed annually upon
written application, subject to the payment of a $30 renewal fee, and a finding
that the permit holder is still in conformance with the permit requirements.
This fee is in addition to the payment of an annual permit fee required under §
119.09.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.07 APPLICATION INVESTIGATION PROCESS.
   Upon receipt of an application the city shall send photocopies of the
application to all city agencies responsible for the enforcement of health,
fire, building and zoning codes and laws. Each agency shall investigate the
application for compliance with its respective code and approve or disapprove
the application within 20 days of the receipt of the application by the city.
An agency shall disapprove an application if it finds that the business would
be in violation of any provision of any statute, code, ordinance, regulation or
other law in effect in the city and the reason(s) for disapproval must be
stated.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.08 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   An application shall be granted or denied within 30 days from the date
of its proper filing.
   (B)   Grant of application for permit.
      (1)   An application shall be granted unless one of the criteria of
division (C) of this section is met.
      (2)   The permit shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted and the address of the sexually oriented business
and the permit expiration date. The permit shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so it can be
read at any time.
   (C)   Denial of application for permit.
      (1)   An application may be denied for any of the following reasons:
         (a)   An applicant is under 18 years of age;
         (b)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue on the payment
of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed by the city in relation to a
sexually oriented business.
         (c)   An applicant has failed to provide information as requested in
the application or has supplied false information.
         (d)   The premises to be used are not in compliance with city health,
fire, and/or building codes as determined by the city agency responsible for
determining such compliance.
         (e)   The $100 application fee has not been paid.
         (f)   The proposed business does not comply with the 200 feet location
requirement of §
119.03(A).
         (g)   To grant the application would violate a statute, ordinance or
court order.
         (h)   The applicant has a permit under this chapter which has been
suspended or revoked.
         (i)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act
within the time limitation of §
119.06(C)(3).
         (j)   An applicant knowingly has in his or her employ an employee who
does not have a valid license as required in §
119.16.
      (2)   Applicants shall be promptly notified of an application denial and
the reasons for denial.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.09 ANNUAL PERMIT FEE.
   The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit is $850.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.10 INSPECTION.
   Representatives of the city enforcement agencies, including, but not limited
to, the city Police Department, Fire Department, Building Department and Health
Department, shall be permitted to inspect a sexually oriented business to
determine compliance with their respective departments, at any time it is
occupied or open for business. The failure to allow inspection is unlawful and
is a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.11 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
   Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed by making an application under §
119.06 at least 30 days before the expiration date. If a renewal is denied, a
new permit shall not be issued for one year from the date of denial. If the
basis for denial has been corrected and at least 90 days have elapsed from the
date the denial became final, a new permit may be granted.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.12 SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   A permit to operate a sexually oriented business may be suspended until the
violation causing the suspension has been corrected, provided that the period
is not to exceed 30 days, if a permittee or an employee of a permittee:
   (A)   Violates or is not in compliance with this chapter; or
   (B)   Works at the sexually oriented business while under the influence of
alcohol; or
   (C)   Refuses to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business in
accord with this chapter; or
   (D)   Knowingly permits gambling on the premises of the sexually oriented
business; or
   (E)   Fails to correct a violation of a building, fire, health or zoning
code within seven days of notification of such violation; or
   (F)   Transfers the sexually oriented business permit to another in
violation of this chapter; or
   (G)   Knowingly employs a person without a valid license as required in §
119.16.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.13 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit to operate a sexually oriented business shall be revoked upon
a determination that either a permit is to be suspended for a second time
within a 12-month period, or that a permittee or employee of a permittee:
      (1)   Gave false or misleading information on the permit application
which enhanced the permittee's opportunity to obtain a permit; or
      (2)   Knowingly allowed the possession, sale or use of a controlled
substance on the premises; or
      (3)   Knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; or
      (4)   Knowingly operated the business while under permit suspension; or
      (5)   Has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the time
period required in §
119.06(C)(3) has not elapsed; or
      (6)   Committed a specified criminal act on the permitted premises on one
or more occasions within a 12-month period while employed by the permit holder;
or
      (7)   Has been convicted of tax violations for taxes or fees related to a
sexually oriented business; or
      (8)   Allowed any act of sexual intercourse, sexual conduct or any other
specified sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises; or
      (9)   Operated more than one sexually oriented business under a single
roof.
   (B)   A permit shall be revoked for one year and a permittee shall not
receive any other permits for any other sexually oriented businesses during the
one-year revocation period. If the basis for revocation is corrected, the
applicant may be granted a new permit if at least 90 days have elapsed since
the date the revocation became effective.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.14 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   An applicant or permittee may seek review of a denial of an application,
denial of a renewal of an application, suspension or revocation of a permit
through the City Council or special review board if one is established. If the
denial, suspension or revocation is affirmed on review, the applicant or
permittee may seek review of the administrative decision in the Hamilton County
Court of Common Pleas.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.15 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permittee shall not operate a sexually oriented business at any
place other than the address designated in the application for permit.
   (B)   A permittee shall not transfer a permit to another person unless that
person:
      (1)   Obtains an amendment to the permit upon the satisfactory completion
of an application;
      (2)   Pays a transfer fee of 20% of the annual permit fee.
   (C)   A permit may not be transferred when the permittee has been notified
that suspension or revocation proceedings have been or will be brought against
the permittee.
   (D)   A permit shall not be transferred to another location.
   (E)   Any transfer attempted in violation of this section is void and will
revoke the permit.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.16 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
   (A)   All employees of a sexually oriented business who engage in the
services rendered by a nude model studio, escort or escort agency, sexual
encounter establishment, massage parlor, or a live performer or entertainer,
are required to obtain a sexually oriented business employee license. Each
applicant shall pay a permit fee of $25 to cover reasonable administration
costs.
   (B)   On a form provided by the city the applicant shall provide his or her:
      (1)   Name, including any stage names or aliases;
      (2)   Age, birth date and birth place;
      (3)   Current resident and business addresses and phone numbers;
      (4)   Height, weight, hair and eye color;
      (5)   State driver's license or identification number and social security
number;
      (6)   Proof of minimum age of 18;
      (7)   A color photograph and fingerprints on a form provided by the
Police Department;
      (8)   A statement detailing the license or permit history of the
applicant for the previous five years including information as to whether a
permit had ever been denied, revoked or suspended, the reason for such action,
the date of such action, and the jurisdiction in which such action occurred;
and
      (9)   Information as to whether the applicant has been convicted of a
specified criminal act as defined in §
119.02 and the date, place, jurisdiction and nature of such conviction.
   (C)   The application review shall be completed within ten days of filing.
The employee license shall be issued unless the city finds that;
      (1)   The applicant knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of material fact;
      (2)   The applicant is under 18 years of age;
      (3)   The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act as
defined in §
119.02;
      (4)   The license is to be used in a business prohibited by this chapter
or other local or state law; or
      (5)   The applicant has had an employee license revoked within two years
of the date of the current application.
   (D)   An employee license may be renewed annually upon written application,
subject to the payment of a $10 renewal fee and a finding that the applicant is
still in conformance with the application requirements.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.17 LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business:
   (A)   In any manner except as provided under this chapter;
   (B)   Within 200 feet of any religious institution, school, boundary of a
residential district, public park or other similar public property;
   (C)   Within 200 feet of any other sexually oriented business;
   (D)   Within 200 feet of any establishment holding a valid liquor license
for the sale or service of alcohol;
   (E)   In the same building as an existing sexually oriented business, or
causes the substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business;
   (F)   Without a valid permit as required under §
119.06.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.18 MINORS PROHIBITED.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business and knowingly or with reasonable cause to
know, permits, suffers or allows:
   (A)   A person under 18 years of age to be admitted, remain or purchase
goods or services at the business premises without the specific consent of a
parent or guardian; or
   (B)   A person under 18 years of age to be employed at the premises.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.19 ADVERTISING AND LIGHTING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business; and
   (B)   Advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by this chapter
or other local or state regulation; or
   (C)   Displays or exhibits the materials and performances in advertising
which is visible outside the premises except for advertising showing the
existence or location of a sexually oriented business; or
   (D)   Allows any portion of the interior premises to be visible from outside
the establishment; or
   (E)   Fails to illuminate the premise entries and off-street parking areas
from dusk until closing with a lighting system which provides an average
maintained horizontal illumination of one foot candle of light on the parking
surface and walkways.
   (F)   Nothing in this section relieves the permittee from compliance with
any other provision of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Mt. Healthy,
Ohio.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.20 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business and allows the business to remain open,
or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance,
make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. Any employee who
engages in the above activity also commits a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.21 NUDITY PROHIBITED.
   Public nudity, as defined under §
119.02 and R.C. § 2907.01(H) is prohibited in sexually oriented businesses. Any
sexually oriented business which is found in violation of this section shall
have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of §
119.12.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 119.22 CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR THE OPERATION OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
WITHOUT A VALID PERMIT.
   In addition to the criminal penalties found in other sections of this
chapter, it shall be unlawful and a person commits a misdemeanor if he or she
operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business and knows or
should know that the business does not have a sexually oriented business permit
or has a permit which has expired or which has been suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.23 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution for violation of this chapter that a
person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      (1)   By a college, junior college, or university supported in whole or
in part by taxation;
      (2)   By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferrable to a college, junior
college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
      (3)   In a structure:
         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three days in advance of the class; and
         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is permitted at a time.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution for violation of this chapter that an
employee of a sexually oriented business exposed any specified anatomical area
during the bona fide use of a restroom or dressing room accessible only to
employees.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.24 CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND LEGAL, EQUITABLE AND INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   In addition to any applicable penalties under state or county law, any
person convicted of a criminal offense under this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 or by imprisonment not
to exceed 60 days, or both. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered
as a separate offense as will each day of continued violation cr noncompliance.
   (B)   The city may take any such lawful action to prevent or remedy any
violation or noncompliance, including but not limited to an equitable action
for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
§ 119.25 IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION.
   The city, the Police Department and all other city officers, agents and
employees, charged with enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be
immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass
upon a sexually oriented business while acting within the scope of authority
conferred by this chapter.
(Ord. 10-1575, passed 4-6-10)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
         
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
         
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
         
133.   SEX OFFENSES
         
134.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
         
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
         
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
         
137.   WEAPONS CONTROL
         
138.   DRUG OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Application of Title XIII
   
130.02   Definitions
   
130.03   Classification of offenses
   
130.04   Common law offenses abrogated
   
130.05   Rules of construction
   
130.06   Limitation of criminal prosecutions
   
130.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication
   
130.08   Culpable mental states
   
130.09   Organizational criminal liability
   
130.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct
   
130.11   Attempt
   
130.12   Complicity
   
130.13   Presumption of innocence; proof of offense; affirmative defense
   
130.14   Battered woman syndrome
   
130.15   Delinquency adjudications deemed convictions
   
130.16   Criminal law jurisdiction
   
130.17   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department
   
130.18   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor
   
130.19   Multiple sentences
   
130.20   Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
   
130.21   Apprehension, detention, or arrest of persons on bond
 
   
130.99   Penalty for Title XIII
Statutory reference:
   Mayor's Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1905
   Municipal Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1901
   Trials, Magistrate Courts, see R.C. Chapter 2938
§ 130.01 APPLICATION OF TITLE XIII.
   (A)   Title XIII of this code of ordinances embodies and prescribes
penalties for offenses against the municipality not classifiable in previous
titles and chapters. The word MISDEMEANORS, as used in this Title, is not
exhaustive and does not imply that offenses found elsewhere in this code of
ordinances are not also misdemeanors and punishable as such.
   (B)   Each act or omission for which a fine, imprisonment, or both is
provided under this Title or elsewhere in this code, or each act or omission
which is declared a violation of this code, is unlawful and is hereby made a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the penalty or penalties so provided shall be
imposed by the court.
§ 130.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess
under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. CONTRABAND includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose history,
character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will be a
danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by any
means upon or against a person or thing.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member's appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C. § 737.10 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans' home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C.
§§ 4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms;
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF
INSANITY relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the
offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division (A)(1)
of R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or of
division (B)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious sexual
penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition ;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   PERSON.
      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, PERSON includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that
does not set forth a criminal offense, PERSON includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in no case
shall the portion of the definition of the term PERSON that is set forth in
division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal offense in any
of the following manners:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. §§ 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable.  An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
R.C. §§ 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division if it is
of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.
         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to property
that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or
enjoyment. PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY does not include wear and tear occasioned
by normal use.
   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or bestowed by
express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office, or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. PROPERTY includes, but is not limited to,
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. “Financial instruments associated with
computers” include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information service”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in
this section, “cable television service,” “computer,” “computer network,”
“computer software,” “computer system,” “data,” and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal activity
and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a repeat
offender if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent sexually oriented
offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent felony drug abuse
offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.
   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
   SCHOOL, SCHOOL BUILDING, and SCHOOL PREMISES. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school premises,
school activity, and school bus.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that does
either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2935.36(E))
§ 130.03 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this Title:
   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.
   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100;
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02)
§ 130.04 COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED.
   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this code.
   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this code state a
positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty for
violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty.
   (C)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03)
§ 130.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) or (D) of this section,
sections of this code defining offenses or penalties shall be strictly
construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of the
accused.
   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this code providing for
criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair, impartial,
speedy, and sure administration of justice.
   (C)   Any provision of a section of this code that refers to a previous
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of this code, the
Revised Code or a division of a section of this code or the Revised Code shall
be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a
substantially equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this
municipality, state, another state, or the United States or under an existing
or former municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Any provision of this Code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this Code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or
to an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or
ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a
substantially equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04)
§ 130.06 LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5),
or (A)(6) of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a
prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods
after an offense is committed:
         (a)   For a felony, six years;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         (c)   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a conspiracy to
commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation of R.C. §
2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) to (J) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, or 2917.02, a
violation of R.C. §§ 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former R.C. §
2907.12.
         (b)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (A)(3)(a) of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D) to (L) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(5)(b) and (E)
to (I) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         (b)   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (A)(5)
(a) of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person’s legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         (c)   As used in division (A)(5)(b) of this section, “aggrieved
person” includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of
R.C. § 2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
      (6)   A prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2151.421(A)(1) or (A)(4),
which is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, or a misdemeanor of the first
degree under circumstances specified in R.C. § 2151.99, is barred unless it is
commenced within four years after the violation is committed.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public
servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter;
         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   As used in this division:
         (a)   The phrase OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN
OFFICE OF A PUBLIC SERVANT includes, but is  not limited to, a violation of
R.C. § 101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43
(A) or (B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense
involving misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code
sections listed in this division (C)(2)(a).
         (b)   PUBLIC SERVANT has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (D)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is
determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if
the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined to
match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time of
the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, DNA RECORD has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.573.
   (E)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused's accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (F)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation, or other process unless reasonable diligence
is exercised to execute the same.
   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused's identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused's purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (I)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the prosecution
is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or process are
set aside or reversed on appeal.
   (J)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Title or Title XXIX
of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to
have occurred.
   (K) As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2935.01.
   (L)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (A) and (D) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (A)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(R.C. § 2901.13)
Statutory reference:
   Limitation for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.12
§ 130.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CULPABILITY. Purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence, as defined
in R.C. § 2901.22.
      INTOXICATION. Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting from
the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor's volition are involuntary acts.
      POSSESSION. A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21)
§ 130.08 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22)
§ 130.09 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent,
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer,
agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the
scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except
that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or
employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the
circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated, or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent, or employee acting in behalf of the
organization and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or
employment.
   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (D)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity. ORGANIZATION does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23)
§ 130.10 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C.
§ 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if
he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24)
§ 130.11 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt
is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.
In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C.
Chapter 3734, other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an
attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under
this section.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02)
Statutory reference:
   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01
   Solid and hazardous wastes, see R.C. Chapter 3734
§ 130.12 COMPLICITY.
   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03)
Statutory reference:
   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01
§ 130.13 PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE; PROOF OF OFFENSE; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   (A)   Every person accused of an offense is presumed innocent until proven
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and the burden of proof for all elements of
the offense is upon the prosecution. The burden of going forward with the
evidence of an affirmative defense, and the burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence, for an affirmative defense other than self-defense, defense of
another, or defense of the accused’s residence presented as described in
division (B)(1) of this section, is upon the accused.
   (B)   (1)   A person is allowed to act in self-defense, defense of another,
or defense of that person’s residence. If, at the trial of a person who is
accused of an offense that involved the person’s use of force against another,
there is evidence presented that tends to support that the accused person used
the force in self-defense, defense of another, or defense of that person’s
residence, the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused person did not use the force in self-defense, defense of another, or
defense of that person’s residence, as the case may be.
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(3) of this section, a person is presumed to
have acted in self-defense or defense of another when using defensive force
that is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily harm to another if
the person against whom the defensive force is used is in the process of
unlawfully and without privilege to do so entering, or has unlawfully and
without privilege to do so entered, the residence or vehicle occupied by the
person using the defensive force.
      (3)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section does
not apply if either of the following is true:
         (a)   The person against whom the defensive force is used has a right
to be in, or is a lawful resident of, the residence or vehicle.
         (b)   The person who uses the defensive force uses it while in a
residence or vehicle and the person is unlawfully, and without privilege to be,
in that residence or vehicle.
      (4)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section is a
rebuttable presumption and may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence,
provided that the prosecution’s burden of proof remains proof beyond a
reasonable doubt as described in divisions (A) and (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   As part of its charge to the jury in a criminal case, the court shall
read the definitions of “reasonable doubt” and “proof beyond a reasonable
doubt”, contained in division (E) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. An affirmative defense is either of the following:
         (a)   A defense expressly designated as affirmative;
         (b)   A defense involving an excuse or justification peculiarly within
the knowledge of the accused, on which the accused can fairly be required to
adduce supporting evidence.
      DWELLING. Means a building or conveyance of any kind that has a roof over
it and that is designed to be occupied by people lodging in the building or
conveyance at night, regardless of whether the building or conveyance is
temporary or permanent or is mobile or immobile. As used in this division, a
building or conveyance includes but is not limited to an attached porch, and a
building or conveyance with a roof over it includes but is not limited to a
tent.
      RESIDENCE. Means a dwelling in which a person resides either temporarily
or permanently or is visiting as a guest.
      VEHICLE. Means a conveyance of any kind, whether or not motorized, that
is designed to transport people or property.
   (E)   “Reasonable doubt” is present when the jurors, after they have
carefully considered and compared all the evidence, cannot say they are firmly
convinced of the truth of the charge. It is a doubt based on reasonable and
common sense. Reasonable doubt is not mere possible doubt, because everything
relating to human affairs or depending on moral evidence is open to some
possible or imaginary doubt. “Proof beyond a reasonable doubt” is proof of such
character that an ordinary person would be willing to rely and act upon it in
the most important of the person's own affairs.
(R.C. § 2901.05)
§ 130.14 BATTERED WOMAN SYNDROME.
   (A)   The municipality hereby declares that it recognizes both of the
following, in relation to the “battered woman syndrome”: that the syndrome
currently is a matter of commonly accepted scientific knowledge, and that the
subject matter and details of the syndrome are not within the general
understanding or experience of a person who is a member of the general populace
and are not within the field of common knowledge.
   (B)   If a person is charged with an offense involving the use of force
against another and the person, as a defense to the offense charged, raises the
affirmative defense of self-defense, the person may introduce expert testimony
of the “battered woman syndrome” and expert testimony that the person suffered
from that syndrome as evidence to establish the requisite belief of an imminent
danger of death or great bodily harm that is necessary, as an element of the
affirmative defense, to justify the person's use of force in question. The
introduction of any expert testimony under this division shall be in accordance
with the Ohio Rules of Evidence.
(R.C. § 2901.06)
§ 130.15 DELINQUENCY ADJUDICATIONS DEEMED CONVICTIONS.
   (A)   If a person is alleged to have committed an offense and if the person
previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or juvenile traffic offender
for a violation of a law or ordinance, except as provided in division (B) of
this section, the adjudication as a delinquent child or as a juvenile traffic
offender is a conviction for a violation of the law for purposes of determining
the offense with which the person should be charged and, if the person is
convicted of or pleads guilty to an offense, the sentence to be imposed upon
the person relative to the conviction or guilty plea.
   (B)   A previous adjudication of a person as a delinquent child or juvenile
traffic offender for a violation of a law or ordinance is not a conviction for
a violation of the law or ordinance for purposes of determining any of the
following:
      (1)   Whether the person is a repeat violent offender, as defined in R.C.
§ 2929.01, or whether the person should be sentenced as a repeat violent
offender under R.C. § 2929.14(B)(2) and R.C. § 2941.149.
      (2)    Whether the person is a violent career criminal as defined in R.C.
§ 2923.132, whether the person has committed unlawful use of a weapon by a
violent career criminal in violation of R.C. § 2923.132 or should be sentenced
for that offense under that section, or whether the person should be sentenced
under R.C. § 2929.14(K) as a violent career criminal who had a firearm on or
about the person’s person or under the person’s control while committing a
violent felony offense and displayed or brandished the firearm, indicated that
the offender possessed a firearm, or used the firearm to facilitate the
offense.
(R.C. § 2901.08)
§ 130.16 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (A)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (B)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (C)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio river extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio river with
any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio river and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio river under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (D)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (E)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (F)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (G)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (H)   For purposes of division (A)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (I)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER NETWORK,
INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11)
Statutory reference:
   State criminal law jurisdiction, see R.C. § 2901.11
§ 130.17 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   (a)   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         (b)   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any
of the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (B)(1)(f) of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of, or that is identified by the department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in division (B)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   (a)   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include, but not be limited to, both of the
following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold, and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         (b)   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)    (a)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be
disposed of under this section or R.C. § 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a
reasonable effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to
notify them of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to
them at the earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying
persons entitled to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise using at
least one of the following methods:
            1.   In the print or digital edition of a newspaper of general
circulation in the county;
            2.   On the official public notice web site established under R.C.
§ 125.182;
            3.   On the web site and social media account of the county.
         (b)   The notices shall briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.92.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY includes correctional institutions.
         TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means an organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (B)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (A)(1)(b) of this
section, shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has
territorial jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         (a)   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         (b)   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors' items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         (c)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         (d)   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or R.C. § 4301.53
shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that
it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit
in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to
law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any
moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (B)(1)(d) shall be paid into the State
Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division
determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         (e)   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from
an unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates’ industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         (f)   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter
2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the
mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants
the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         (g)   Computers, computer networks, computer systems, and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (B)(2) of this section.
         (h)   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(B)(1) of this section or division (A)(1)(b) of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (B)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the general revenue fund of the state, or the general fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (B)(3) of this section.
      (5)   (a)   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens' reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         (b)   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (B)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. §
5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (C)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12.
If the property is to be sold under division (B) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C Chapter 2981
§ 130.18 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C.
§§ 1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Revised
Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under this
chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has discretion
to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and principles of
sentencing set forth in §
130.99(B).
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §§
130.99 or
133.99 of this Code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any
sanction or combination of sanctions under §
130.99(C) to (G). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (B)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         (a)   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         (b)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         (c)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character, and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         (d)   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability, or other factor
made the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of
the offense more serious;
         (e)   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (B)(1)(b) and
(c) of this section;
         (f)   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         (g)   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, if the
offender enters an Alford plea, the sentencing court shall not consider whether
the offender showed genuine remorse for the offense.
      (3)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (B)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
130.99(B).
   (C)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
130.99(D), (E), (F), and (G). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
130.99(C) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (D)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim’s representative, the victim’s
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2743.51 to 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22)
§ 130.19 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, R.C. § 2929.14(C),
or R.C. § 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail
term, or sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, the
state, another state, or the United States. Except as provided in division (B)
(2) of this section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor
shall be served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for
felony served in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (B)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §§
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)    A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21, or 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to
a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08
or 4511.19 or a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving the operation of a
vehicle by the offender and that is served in a state correctional institution
when the trial court specifies that it is to be served consecutively. When
consecutive jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and prison terms are
imposed for one or more misdemeanors and one or more felonies under this
division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the consecutive terms
imposed, and the offender shall serve all terms imposed for a felony before
serving any term imposed for a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41)
§ 130.20 SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (B)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self- defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (C)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09)
§ 130.21 APPREHENSION, DETENTION, OR ARREST OF PERSON ON BOND.
   (A)   No person, other than a law enforcement officer, shall apprehend,
detain, or arrest a principal on bond, wherever issued, unless that person
meets all of the following criteria:
      (1)   The person is any of the following:
         (a)   Qualified, licensed, and appointed as a surety bail bond agent
under R.C. §§ 3905.83 to 3905.95;
         (b)   Licensed as a surety bail bond agent by the state where the bond
was written;
         (c)   Licensed as a private investigator under R.C. Chapter 4749;
         (d)   Licensed as a private investigator by the state where the bond
was written;
         (e)   An off-duty peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2921.51.
      (2)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or arresting the
principal, has entered into a written contract with the surety or with a
licensed surety bail bond agent appointed by the surety, which contract sets
forth the name of the principal who is to be apprehended, detained, or
arrested. For purposes of this division (A)(2), SURETY has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 3905.83.
      (3)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or arresting the
principal, has notified the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction
over the area in which such activities will be performed and has provided any
form or identification or other information requested by the law enforcement
agency.
   (B)   No person shall represent the person’s self to be a bail enforcement
agent or bounty hunter, or claim any similar title, in this municipality.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal bail bond agent
practices.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of division (A) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of division (B) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.27) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII.
   (A)   Except where otherwise specifically classified within the body of the
section of a chapter of this title, a violation of such section shall be deemed
a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than $500,
imprisonment of not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 715.67)
   (B)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (B)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (B)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender,
or religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) to (B)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21))
   (C)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in § 130.18 or 133.99 of this code or R.C. §
2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (C)(5) of this section and unless another term
is required or authorized pursuant to law, if the sentencing court imposing a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor elects or is required to impose a
jail term on the offender pursuant to this chapter, the court shall impose a
definite jail term that shall be one of the following:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (C) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (E)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (C)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has
established a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the county jail industry program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (C) of
this section, the court may
 
2023 S-17
   General Provisions   23
impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 a reimbursement
sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which the term is to be
served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. §§ 307.93, 341.14,
341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or 2947.19 and R.C. §
2929.37, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(C)(4)(a)1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
R.C. § 2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (C)(4)(a)2. of this section.
      (5)   (a)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (C)(5)(a)2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in
R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more of those violations, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 120 days.
         (b)   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (C)(5)(a) of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (C)(5)(a) of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24,
2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
any residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (E) of this
section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (D) of
this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all provisions of this Code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(C), the sentencing court
2023 S-17
24   Mt. Healthy - General Offenses
retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail term. Upon motion of either
party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in the court’s sole discretion
and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute one or more community control
sanctions under division (E) or (F) of this section for any jail days that are
not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (D)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in §§ 130.18 and 133.99 of this Code or
R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is required by law, in
sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, the
sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (E), (F), or (G) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (C) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (E), (F), or (G) of this section.
         (b)   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         (c)   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)
(1)(a)1. of this section, the court shall state the
duration of the community control sanctions imposed and shall notify the
offender that if any of the conditions of the community control sanctions are
violated the court may do any of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (C) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)(1)(a)1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   (a)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a department of
probation in the
2023 S-17
   General Provisions   25
jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting to the court a
violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If the offender
resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has been
established to serve the municipal court or county court in that jurisdiction,
the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the county court to
receive the offender into the general control and supervision of that
department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing court a
violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The sentencing
court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for the duration
of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         (b)   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   (a)   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the department of probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the department of probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         (b)   Except as provided in division (D)(4)(c) of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         (c)   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b),
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related provision
under R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14, or R.C. § 2925.141, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the conditions of a
community control sanction based on a minor drug possession offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2925.11, or violated R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. §
2925.141, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the sentencing
court shall not impose any of the penalties described in division (D)(4)(b) of
this section based on the violation.
         (d)   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (D)(4)(b) of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (D)(4)(b) of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (E), (F), or (G) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community
 
2023 S-17
26   Mt. Healthy - General Offenses
control sanction. Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction
does not relieve the offender of a duty to make restitution under division (G)
of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (E)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (E). Community residential
sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         (b)   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (E)
(1)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (E) may do either or both of the following:
         (a)   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the
offender’s occupation or care for the offender’s family;
         (b)   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (E)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (G) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (E)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C, and other contagious
diseases. The person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction may cause a convicted offender in the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place who refuses to be tested or
2017 S-14
   General Provisions   27
treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including, but not limited
to, hepatitis A, B, and C, or another contagious disease to be tested and
treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (E)(1)(a) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (F)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. Nonresidential
sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A term of day reporting;
         (b)   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         (c)   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor
of the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third, or
fourth degree;
         (d)   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         (e)   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         (f)   A term of basic probation supervision;
         (g)   A term of monitored time;
         (h)   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         (i)   A curfew term;
         (j)   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         (k)   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         (l)   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         (m)   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         (n)   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian, or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (F)(1)(c) of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender
2017 S-14
28   Mt. Healthy - General Offenses
demonstrates a change in circumstances from the date the court imposes the
sentence or that the modification would otherwise be in the interests of
justice. If the court grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable
contribution to the court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that
contribution into the general fund of the county, municipality, or other local
entity that provides funding to the court. If more than one entity provides
funding to the court, the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable
contribution equal to the percentage of funding the entity provides to the
court in that entity’s general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (F)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (F)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (G)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the
court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this division (G) and, if the offender
is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in R.C. § 2930.01, shall
sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this
division (G) and R.C. § 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as
required by this division (G), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the
financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this division (G) include,
but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender’s crime or the victim’s estate,
in an amount based on the victim’s economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor’s designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim’s costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or victim’s estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
2023 S-17
   General Provisions   29
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim’s estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (G) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim’s estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in R.C. § 2929.281(A).
         (b)   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (G)(1)(b)1. and
2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               A.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               B.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               C.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               D.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
               E.   For a minor mis- demeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         (c)   Reimbursement.
            1.    Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to, the
following:
               A.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               B.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room
and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of
repairing property damaged by the offender while confined;
               C.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (G)(1)(c)1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.   
      (2)   (a)   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         (b)   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial
2023 S-17
30   Mt. Healthy - General Offenses
sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing and may impose a
term of community service under division (F)(1) of this section in lieu of
imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court does not determine
that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term of community service
under division (F)(1) of this section in lieu of or in addition to imposing a
financial sanction under this division (G) and in addition to imposing court
costs. The court may order community service for a minor misdemeanor pursuant
to division (F)(4) of this section in lieu of or in addition to imposing a
financial sanction under this section and in addition to imposing court costs.
If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court costs, the court may
order community service in lieu of the financial sanction or court costs.
      (3)   (a)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F),
or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section to the county
treasurer. The county treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s general fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section.
         (b)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F),
or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section to the
treasurer of the municipal corporation. The treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s general fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section.
         (c)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(c) of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   (a)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under
this section, the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall, except as provided in divisions (G)(4)(b)
and (G)(4)(c) of this section, be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to be
credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. § 111.48.
         (b)   A court that imposes a fine under division (G)(4)(a) of this
section may retain up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to cover administrative costs.
         (c)   A court that imposes a fine under division (G)(4)(a) of this
section may assign up to 25% of amounts collected in satisfaction of the fine
to reimburse the prosecuting attorney for costs associated with prosecution of
the offense.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (G)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (G)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.A. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.B.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(a) of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (G)(5)(b)1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (G)(5)(b)2. of this section or through an order as
described in division (G)(5)(b)3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         (b)   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order
under this division, the victim, private provider, state, or political
subdivision may do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (G)(5) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (G) may designate the clerk of the court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         (a)   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 to 307.92.
         (b)   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just. If the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the board of county commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         (c)   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (G) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
   (H)   Organizational penalties.
      (1)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in this section, an
organization convicted of an offense pursuant to § 130.09 shall be fined by the
court as follows:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
2023 S-17
30B   Mt. Healthy - General Offenses
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
         (e)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
         (f)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000;
         (g)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more
than $1,000.
      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
      (3)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
      (4)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to § 130.09,
either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2929.31)
Cross-reference:
   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration,
see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Citation issuance and limitations on arrest for minor misdemeanors, see R.C.
§ 2935.26
   Crime victim's reparations fund, see R.C. § 2929.32
   Habitual sex offender and sexual predator registration, see R.C. Chapter
2950
   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
   Reports to health care licensing boards of criminal offenses, see R.C. §
2929.42
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Arson; determining property value or amount of physical harm
   
131.03   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
   
131.04   Criminal mischief
   
131.05   Damaging or endangering aircraft or airport operations
   
131.06   Criminal trespass; aggravated trespass
   
131.07   Tampering with coin machines
   
131.08   Theft
   
131.09   Unauthorized use of a vehicle
   
131.10   Unauthorized use of property, including telecommunication property and
computers; possession of municipal property
   
131.11   Passing bad checks
   
131.12   Misuse of credit cards
   
131.13   Making or using slugs
   
131.14   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
   
131.15   Tampering with records
   
131.16   Securing writings by deception
   
131.17   Defrauding creditors
   
131.18   Receiving stolen property
   
131.19   Value of stolen property
   
131.20   Degree of offense when certain property involved
   
131.21   Injuring vines, bushes, trees, or crops
   
131.22   Detention and arrest of shoplifters and those committing motion
picture piracy; protection of institutional property
   
131.23   Insurance fraud; workers' compensation fraud; medicaid fraud
   
131.24   Injury to property by hunters
   
131.25   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property; evidence of
lack of capacity to consent
   
131.26   Forgery of identification cards
   
131.27   Criminal simulation
   
131.28   Personating an officer
   
131.29   Trademark counterfeiting
   
131.30   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
   
131.31   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
   
131.32   Prosecutions for theft of utilities
   
131.33   Motion picture piracy
   
131.34   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism.
   
131.35   Desecration
Cross-reference:
   Animals, offenses against, see §§
90.10 et seq.
   Property recovered by police, deposit of stolen property, see §§ 34.10 et
seq.
Statutory reference:
   Cable television service devices, unauthorized sale or possession, felony,
see R.C. § 2913.041
   Deceptive acts or practices in connection with consumer transactions, see
O.A.C. Ch. 109:4-3
   Disrupting public services, felony, see R.C. § 2909.04
   E-mail advertisements, civil offenses and felony forgery offense, see R.C. §
2307.64
   E-mail spam, civil offenses and felony offenses, see R.C. § 2913.421
   Food stamps, illegal use, see R.C. § 2913.46
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
   Terrorism involving agricultural products or equipment, see R.C. § 901.511
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the United
States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the facilities
of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable
communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in
connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system.
   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the
following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license.
   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and memory
functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. COMPUTER
includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing, storage,
computer program, or communication facilities that are connected, or related,
in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.
   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to modify,
damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access
to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information within a computer,
computer system, or computer network without the express or implied consent of
the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or
kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or
kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   COMPUTER HACKING means any of the following:
         (a)   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system, or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         (b)   Misusing computer or network services including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         (c)   1.   Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system, or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system, or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services, or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system, or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)
(c)1. of this definition does not include standard computer software used for
the normal operation, administration, management, and test of a computer,
computer system, or computer network including but not limited to domain name
services, mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer
programs commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         (d)   The intentional use of a computer, computer system, or a
computer network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by
the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent.
      (2)   COMPUTER HACKING does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program, or computer network.
   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers and
communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has
the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded instructions or
statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the computer to process
data.
   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes, but is not limited to, the use of a computer
system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer
use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer network.
   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures, and other documentation
associated with the operation of a computer system.
   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device that,
alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed,
manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or otherwise
facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information service
without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications
service or information service. The phrase includes but is not limited to a
clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or tumbler microchip; a
wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving, or
otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information
service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or
software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the electronic
serial number in a wireless telephone.
   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON. Includes
the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any emergency
personnel.
   CREDIT CARD. Includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device, or other
means of access to a customer's account for the purpose of obtaining money,
property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic fund
transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a cash
dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued under
R.C. § 301.29.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.
   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived by
any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by
preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act, or
omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in another,
including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other
objective or subjective fact.
   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or
another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision, or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned of
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal, or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
   FIREARM and DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any
spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or otherwise
purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   INFORMATION SERVICE does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control,
or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure, vehicle, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is actually
present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other
than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who
has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership,
possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession and use
of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for
consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession of the
property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of
consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the
property.
   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services, rental
services, public utility services including wireless service as defined in R.C.
§ 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food,  drink, transportation,
entertainment, and cable television services and, for purposes of R.C. §
2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes cable
services as defined in that section.
   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or other
quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an
improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that purpose.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination, transmission,
or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or
equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any communications system by any
method, including but not limited to a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic,
optical, digital or analog method.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine, or other
device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13,
2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.08, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. §§ 2913.47 or 2913.48, or R.C.
§§ 2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §§
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation,
deliver, or display.
   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper,
plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written, type-
written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge,
trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license, or
identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 131.02 ARSON; DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE OR AMOUNT OF PHYSICAL HARM.
   (A)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush- covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (B)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1)
or (B)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1) or (B)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03)
   (E)   Determining property value or amount of physical harm.
      (1)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of division (A)(1)
or (B)(1) of this section:
         (a)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector's item,
antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that is
either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial
time, effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical
harm involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
         (b)   If the property is not covered under division (E)(1)(a) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
         (c)   If the property is not covered under division (E)(1)(a) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
      (2)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2913.61.
      (3)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C.
§ 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D)) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Negligent burning, see §
92.39
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Arson offender registration, see R.C. §§ 2909.13, 2909.14 and 2909.15
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.71
§ 131.03 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (A)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person's consent:
         (a)   Knowingly, by any means; or
         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (B)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         ALLEY, STREET, and VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
         HIGHWAY. Means any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.
         VESSEL and WATERS IN THIS STATE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
1547.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway;
         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (B) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.101
   Railroad vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.10
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 131.04 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         (a)   The property of another;
         (b)   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation
station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of
another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety
of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to,
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      IMPROPERLY TAMPER. Means to change the physical location or the physical
condition of the property.
      SAFETY DEVICE. Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or
any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (C)(2), (C)(3), or (C)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.05 DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT OR AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GUN. A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by means of
releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.
   AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE. Any surface of land or water that is developed,
posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that the surface
is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking, taxiing, or
operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is actually being used
for any of those purposes.
   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   SPRING-OPERATED GUN. A hand pistol or rifle that propels a projectile not
less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by means of a spring.
   (B)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun, or spring- operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring- operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This division does not apply
to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (C) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E))
§ 131.06 CRIMINAL TRESPASS; AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes, or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used an all-purpose vehicle, the court shall impose
a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used an all-purpose vehicle, the court, in addition to or independent of all
other penalties imposed for the violation, may impound the certificate of
registration and license plate of that all-purpose vehicle for not less than 60
days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47 applies.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (F)   As used in divisions (A) through (E) of this section:
      ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         (a)   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel- making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security’s Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above-ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, “video service network” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above- ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above- ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         (b)   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above- ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         (c)   Any railroad property;
         (d)   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (G)   Aggravated trespass.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
         (b)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (G)(1)(a) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(G)(1)(b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   As used in this division (G), CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
   (H)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT means a
stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (H)(4)(a)
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include, but is not limited to, a playing field,
an athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting
event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This
division does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force
beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement,
an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a
place of public amusement.
      (4)   (a)   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         (b)   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (H)(4)(a) of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (H)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         (b)   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other sentence, penalty,
or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (H)(5)(a) of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
§ 131.07 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32)
§ 131.08 THEFT.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor
theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the elements set forth in R.C. §
2913.02(B) for felony theft, grand theft, or aggravated theft are met, then a
violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (2)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
         (a)   Unless division (B)(2)(b) of this section applies, suspend for
not more than six months the offenders driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
         (b)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to
division (B)(2)(a) of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state
or local law, impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s license,
permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided
that the suspension shall be at least six months;
         (c)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (B)
(2)(a) or (B)(2)(b) of this section, instead may require the offender to
perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
      (3)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B)(1) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is
not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the
cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (C)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (B)(2) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)
§ 131.09 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat, or other motor- propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner
or person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a violation
of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (A) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving a motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see R.C. § 2913.82
§ 131.10 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY, INCLUDING TELECOMMUNICATION PROPERTY AND
COMPUTERS; POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
   (C)    Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR means any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      CABLE SERVICE means any of the following:
         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (a)
of this definition;
         (c)   Any cable television service.
      CABLE SYSTEM means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
CABLE SYSTEM does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (b)   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         (c)   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         (d)   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         (e)   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04)
   (K)   Possession of municipal property.
      (1)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her
control or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property
belonging to the municipality.
(R.C. § 5589.12)
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (K) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 131.11 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or
similar negotiable or non- negotiable instrument;
         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.
      ISSUE A CHECK. Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit account.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (D)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (E)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (B) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11)
§ 131.12 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)    Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (A), (B)(1), or (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (D)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (B)(2), (3), or (4) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of the property
and services involved in one or more violations of division (B)(2), (3), or (4)
of this section which violations involve one or more credit card accounts and
occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on the date of the
first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21)
§ 131.13 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33)
§ 131.14 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.15 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data, or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (A)(1) of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   If division (B)(1)(b) of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (A) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.16 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or
the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or
spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.17 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount, or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.18 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.19 VALUE OF STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. §§ 2913.02, 2913.03, or
2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. §§ 2913.31 or 2913.43
involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender's same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is
an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. The value of the property or services involved in the series of
offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61
(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all
offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A),
R.C. §§ 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C.
§§ 2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more than one
victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, pursuant
to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a
single offense. If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed
against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active
duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a
scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single
offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the
property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value as
required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender's same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property
and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or more
offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2) or
(B)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender's same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in division (B)
(1) or (B)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in division (B)(2) of this section. While it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of
this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to
prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector's item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is the amount which
would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (C)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
such property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (C)(1) or (2) of this section, and the value of services, is the
fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section, FAIR
MARKET VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a seller
would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is willing to
buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed as to all
facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any compulsion to
act.
   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry, or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is established
by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E))
§ 131.20 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
131.08 or §
131.18 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (A)   A credit card;
   (B)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (C)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (D)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer's or
importer's certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;
   (E)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71)
§ 131.21 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES, OR CROPS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or
crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A)) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.22 DETENTION AND ARREST OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION
PICTURE PIRACY; PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
   ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Any public or private building, structure, or shelter
in which are stored historical documents, devices, records, manuscripts, or
items of public interest, which historical materials are stored to preserve the
materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate the information
contained in the materials, or to make the materials available for public
inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a particular interest
in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
   AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION and FACILITY. Have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2913.07.
   MUSEUM. Any public or private nonprofit institution that is permanently
organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or borrows
objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the public
the objects or items.
   PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM.  A rehabilitative, educational program designed
to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at least four
hours in length and that has been approved by any court in this state.
   (B)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (C)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (D) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival institution, if the
officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent
of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (D)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or archival
institution pursuant to division (C) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief, or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (E)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (F)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions (B), (C) or
(E) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person's consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (G)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
divisions (C)(1) or (2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by R.C.
§ 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable time
after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest without a warrant generally, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Probable cause, see R.C. § 2933.22
§ 131.23 INSURANCE FRAUD; WORKERS' COMPENSATION FRAUD; MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (A)   Insurance fraud.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   DATA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally includes
any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
   DECEPTIVE. Means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause another
to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation, withholds
information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other conduct,
act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression,
including, but not limited to, a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
   INSURER. Means any person that is authorized to engage in the business of
insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting
Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and
any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or
members.
   POLICY. Means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is issued by an
insurer.
   STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or memorandum;
proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice, account, or other
financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for services; diagnosis
or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental chart or other record;
x- ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test result; other evidence of
loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated document; and data in any form.
      (2)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written
or oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for
insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other
benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the
statement, is false or deceptive;
         (b)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of insurance fraud.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is
$1,000 or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (4)   This division (A) shall not be construed to abrogate, waive, or
modify R.C. § 2317.02(A).
(R.C. § 2913.47)
   (B)   Workers' compensation fraud.
      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Receive workers' compensation benefits to which the person is
not entitled;
         (b)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure workers'
compensation benefits;
         (c)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any record or
document that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed
with, or necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and
services for which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from
the Bureau of Workers' Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C.
Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;
         (d)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau or
Workers' Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers' compensation
benefits;
         (e)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false
statement concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
         (f)   Alter, forge, or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
         (g)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of workers'
compensation fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers'
compensation fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of
premiums and assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in divisions (B)
(1)(e), (B)(1)(f), or (B)(1)(g) of this section, or goods, services, property,
or money stolen is $1,000 or more, workers' compensation fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this division (B), the court
shall order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the
governmental body its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These
costs are in addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal,
state or local law.
      (4)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (B) are not
exclusive remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other
criminal or civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this
division (B).
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (B), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   CLAIM. Means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers' Compensation, an
independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers' compensation benefits.
   EMPLOYER, EMPLOYEE, and SELF- INSURING EMPLOYER. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 4123.01.
   EMPLOYMENT. Means participating in any trade, occupation, business, service,
or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
   FALSE. Means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
   GOODS. Includes but is not limited to medical supplies, appliances,
rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or
used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for workers'
compensation benefits.
   RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial, or business record
relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services provided
to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any person,
or any record that the administrator of workers' compensation requires pursuant
to rule.
   REMUNERATION. Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions, rebates,
and any other reward or consideration.
   SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service provided by any health
care provider to a claimant for workers' compensation benefits and any and all
services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation insurance
coverage.
   STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice, letter, memorandum,
receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement or bill for
services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical, or dental
chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
   WORKERS' COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Means any compensation or benefits payable
under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48)
   (C)   Medicaid fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
      (2)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement,
charge, solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person
provides under the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration
in addition to the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the
person’s provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing
expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
         (b)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
      (3)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or
services under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a
period of at least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
         (a)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
         (b)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of Medicaid fraud.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained
in violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (5)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
      (6)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
      (7)   For the purpose of this division (C), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         PROVIDER. Means any person who has signed a provider agreement with
the Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the
Medicaid program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such
a provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
         PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         RECIPIENT. Means any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
         RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial or business
records relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or
services provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services
provided to any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of
the Medicaid Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
         STATEMENT OR REPRESENTATION. Means any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (D)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         (a)   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         (b)   Conceal an interest in property;
         (c)   1.   Except as provided in division (D)(1)(c)2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (D) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (D) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         (b)   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (D) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (D).
      (3)   This division (D) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (D) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (D), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         PROPERTY. Means any real or personal property or other asset in which
a person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
§ 131.24 INJURY TO PROPERTY BY HUNTERS.
   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing a wild
animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to injure
property.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) – (E)
§ 131.25 EVIDENCE OF INTENT TO COMMIT THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY; EVIDENCE OF
LACK OF CAPACITY TO CONSENT.
   (A)   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (A), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      RENTER. A person who owns rented property.
      RENTEE. A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use of rented
property.
      (2)    Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services:
         (a)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious,
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment, or other
relevant information.
         (b)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (A)(3) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
      (3)    To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (A)(2)(b) above, a renter may issue
a notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee's agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
      (4)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a
prerequisite for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or
rental services. The evidence specified in division (A)(2) above does not
constitute the only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property.
(R.C. § 2913.72)
   (B)   Evidence of lack of capacity to consent.
      (1)   In a prosecution for any alleged violation of §
131.08 to
131.20,
131.23,
131.25 to
131.29, or
132.11, if the lack of consent of the victim is an element of the provision
that allegedly was violated, evidence that, at the time of the alleged
violation, the victim lacked the capacity to give consent is admissible to show
that the victim did not give consent.
      (2)   As used in this section, LACKS THE CAPACITY TO CONSENT means being
impaired for any reason to the extent that the person lacks sufficient
understanding or capacity to make and carry out reasonable decisions concerning
the person or the person's resources.
(R.C. § 2913.73)
§ 131.26 FORGERY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (B)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity,” “identification,” “identification card,” or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (C)    (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (A) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
      (2)   If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 131.27 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently
cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any wrapper,
label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under
R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (A)(1), (2) or (3)
of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, criminal
simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32)
§ 131.28 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44)
Cross-reference:
   Impersonating an officer (non-fraud offense), see §
132.12
§ 131.29 TRADEMARK COUNTERFEITING.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Attach, affix, or otherwise use a counterfeit mark in connection
with the manufacture of goods or services, whether or not the goods or services
are intended for sale or resale.
      (2)   Possess, sell, or offer for sale tools, machines, instruments,
materials, articles, or other items of personal property with the knowledge
that they are designed for the production or reproduction of counterfeit marks.
      (3)   Purchase or otherwise acquire goods, and keep or otherwise have the
goods in the person's possession, with the knowledge that a counterfeit mark is
attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with the goods and
with the intent to sell or otherwise dispose of the goods.
      (4)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispose of goods with the
knowledge that a counterfeit mark is attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used
in connection with the goods.
      (5)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide services with the
knowledge that a counterfeit mark is used in connection with that sale, offer
for sale, or other provision of the services.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trademark counterfeiting.
      (1)   A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)    Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
circumstances of the violation indicate that the tools, machines, instruments,
materials, articles, or other items of personal property involved in the
violation were intended for use in the commission of a felony, a violation of
division (A)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the cumulative sales price of the goods or services to which or in
connection with which the counterfeit mark is attached, affixed or otherwise
used in the offense is $1,000 or more, a violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4)
or (A)(5) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   A defendant may assert as an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of this section defenses, affirmative defenses, and limitations on
remedies that would be available in a civil, criminal or administrative action
or proceeding under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 - 1127, as amended,
the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as amended,
R.C. Chapter 1329 or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or common law.
   (D)   (1)   Law enforcement officers may seize pursuant to Criminal Rule 41,
R.C. Chapter 2933, or R.C. Chapter 2981 either of the following:
         (a)   Goods to which or in connection with which a person attached,
affixed, otherwise used, or intended to attach, affix or otherwise use a
counterfeit mark in violation of this section.
         (b)   Tools, machines, instruments, materials, articles, vehicles or
other items of personal property that are possessed, sold, offered for sale, or
used in a violation of this section or in an attempt to commit or complicity in
the commission of a violation of this section.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. Chapter 2981, if a
person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, an
attempt to violate this section, or complicity in a violation of this section,
the court involved shall declare that the goods described in division (D)(1)(a)
of this section and the personal property described in division (D)(1)(b) of
this section are contraband and are forfeited. Prior to the court's entry of
judgment under Criminal Rule 32, the owner of a registered trademark or service
mark that is the subject to the counterfeit mark may recommend a manner in
which the forfeited goods and forfeited personal property should be disposed
of. If that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition, the
court is not bound by the recommendation. If that owner makes a timely
recommendation of a manner of disposition, the court may include in its entry
of judgment an order that requires appropriate persons to dispose of the
forfeited goods and forfeited personal property in the recommended manner. If
the owner fails to make a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition or
if that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition but the
court determines to not follow the recommendation, the court shall include in
its entry of judgement an order that requires the law enforcement agency that
employs the law enforcement officer who seized the forfeited goods or the
forfeited personal property to destroy them or cause their destruction.
   (E)   This section does not affect the rights of an owner of a trademark or
service mark, or the enforcement in a civil action or in administrative
proceedings of the rights of an owner or a trademark or service mark under the
Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 - 1127, as amended, the Trademark
Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as amended, R.C. Chapter
1329, or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or common law.
   (F)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   COUNTERFEIT MARK.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (2) of this definition, COUNTERFEIT
MARK means a spurious trademark or a spurious service mark that satisfies both
of the following:
         (a)   It is identical with or substantially indistinguishable from a
mark that is registered on the principal register in the United States Patent
and Trademark Office for the same goods or services as the goods or services to
which or in connection with which the spurious trademark or spurious service
mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise used, or from a mark that is registered
with the Secretary of State pursuant to R.C. §§ 1329.54 through 1329.67 for the
same goods or services as the goods or services to which or in connection with
which the spurious trademark or spurious service mark is attached, affixed, or
otherwise used, and the owner of the registration uses that registered
trademark, whether or not the offender knows that the mark is registered in a
manner described in this division (1)(a).
         (b)   Its use is likely to cause confusion or mistake or to deceive
other persons.
      (2)   COUNTERFEIT MARK does not include a mark or other designation that
is attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with goods or
services if the holder of the right to use the mark or other designation
authorizes the manufacturer, producer, or vendor of those goods or services to
attach, affix, or otherwise use the mark or other designation in connection
with those goods or services at the time of their manufacture, production or
sale.
   CUMULATIVE SALES PRICE. The product of the lowest single unit sales price
charged or sought to be charged by an offender for goods to which or in
connection with which a counterfeit mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise
used or of the lowest single service transaction price charged or sought to be
charged by an offender for services in connection with which a counterfeit mark
is used, multiplied by the total number of those goods or services, whether or
not units of goods are sold or are in an offender's possession, custody or
control.
   REGISTERED TRADEMARK OR SERVICE MARK. A trademark or service mark that is
registered in a manner described in division (1) of the definition of
“counterfeit mark.”
   TRADEMARK and SERVICE MARK. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 1329.54
(R.C. § 2913.34)
§ 131.30 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C. Chapter
2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07)
§ 131.31 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (A)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 1349.17)
   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99)
§ 131.32 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (B)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      UTILITY means any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
      TAMPER means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter, conduit
or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a meter or
the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the amount of
utility service that is registered on the meter.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
   (D)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees or
receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
§ 131.33 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION means the capability of a device to record
or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of any
technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      FACILITY means a movie theater.
   (B)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (D)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (E)   Division (B) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (B) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.34 RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (C)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (A), (B), or
(C) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (E) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
§ 131.35 DESECRATION.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute, or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing, or site of great historical or
archaeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. A violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   As used in this section, “cemetery” means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
(R.C. § 2927.11)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
132.01   Riot
   
132.02   Failure to disperse
   
132.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
   
132.04   Disorderly conduct
   
132.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting
   
132.06   Misconduct at an emergency
   
132.07   Telecommunications harassment
   
132.08   Inducing panic
   
132.09   Making false alarms
   
132.10   Inciting to violence
   
132.11   Unlawful display of law enforcement emblem
   
132.12   Impersonating a peace officer
   
132.13   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
   
132.14   Misconduct involving a public transportation system
   
132.15   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder
Curfew
   
132.25   Definitions
   
132.26   Curfew
   
132.27   Exceptions
   
132.28   Parental responsibility
   
132.29   Compulsory school age to be in attendance at school
   
132.30   Minors suspended or expelled from school
   
132.31   Business operator responsibility
   
132.32   Notice of citation
   
132.33   Violations
Noise
   
132.40   Unlawful noises
   
132.41   Specific noise prohibitions
   
132.42   Parties regulated
   
132.43   Liability for second police response
   
132.44   Violations
Cross-reference:
   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see §
131.28
Statutory reference:
   Misuse of “Block Parent” symbol, see R.C. § 2917.46
§ 132.01 RIOT.
   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede,
or obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
§ 132.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (A) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (A)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (B)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05)
§ 132.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway, or right- of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he
or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(B) of this section.
   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)    Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2) and (E)(3) of
this section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         (a)   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         (b)   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         (c)   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person's duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
         (d)   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 2917.11(B),
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation
of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2925.01.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession, or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive video
conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person engaged in the person's duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer's duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative's duties.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.07 TELECOMMUNICATIONS HARASSMENT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person's control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient's family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person's control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)
(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10), or (A)(11) or (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (A)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider's, officer's, employee's, or agent's provision of information,
facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider's, officer's,
employees, or agent's provision of information, facilities, or assistance in
accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (F)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (G)   As used in divisions (A) through (D) of this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      CALLER. Means the person described in division (A) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person's control.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means all direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         (a)   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(A)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
division (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law marital
relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who otherwise
has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date of the
alleged commission of the act in question.
      SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATION and TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act,” 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act,” 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.08 INDUCING PANIC.
   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1) is a school or an
institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this Code of Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (E)    As used in this section:
      BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. “Economic harm” as described
in this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as
a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that
constituted the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all
costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue
personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subdivision.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2133.21.
      INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)
(1), community college, state community college, university branch, or
technical college;
         (b)   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-
secondary institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of
authorization issued by the Chancellor of Higher Education pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 1713;
         (c)   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      SCHOOL. Means any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a
violation of this section is committed.
      WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or
serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or
radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;
         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one- quarter ounce, mine, or
similar device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
(d)1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31)
§ 132.09 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur.
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
$1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a purported,
threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this Code of Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32)
§ 132.10 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01)
§ 132.11 UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEM.
   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441)
§ 132.12 IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An employee of the United States who serves
in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
   IMPERSONATE. To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the uniform or
any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a particular
person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make another person
believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member of that class
of persons.
   INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND INVESTIGATION. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
   PEACE OFFICER. Means a sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal,
member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation, or
township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer
appointed under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under
R.C. § 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under
R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the state or any
of its agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by
statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of
that statutory duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose
primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to
enforce  the laws, ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its political
subdivisions.
   PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Any security guard, special police officer, private
detective, or other person who is privately employed in a police capacity.
   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person, or search the property of any person.
   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a
violation of division (D) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (D) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division (E) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51)
Cross-reference:
   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see §
131.28
§ 132.13 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONCERT. A musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A CONCERT
does not include any performance in which music is a part of the presentation
and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion picture, a
demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an instrument,
an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
   FACILITY. Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that has walls
that wholly surround the area on all sides, including, but not limited to, a
stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall, convention
center or music hall.
   LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. A LIVE
ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
   PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified in R.C. §
1.59(C), any governmental entity.
   RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Any wholly or partially enclosed area,
whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         (a)   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (D) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         (b)   A concert that is not exempted under division (D) of this
section and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section or any concert as described in
division (B)(1)(b) of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only.”
   (C)   Unless exempted by division (D)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (E)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (D)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         (a)   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         (b)   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   (a)   The officer responsible for public safety in the municipality
may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by division (B) of
this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that division if such
officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and
spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the
provisions of that division. In determining whether to grant an exemption, the
officer shall consider the following factors:
            1.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
            2.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected to
attend the concert;
            3.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the expected
crowd.
         If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption under
this division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate official on a form
prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an order that grants or
denies the exemption within five days after receipt of the application. The
sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         (b)   If an official grants an exemption under division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(D)(2)(a) of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         (b)   If the officer grants an exemption under division (D)(3)(a) of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (E)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(D)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (C) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (E)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04.
   (F)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (H)   This section does not prohibit the Legislative Authority from imposing
additional requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or
holding of live entertainment performances.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (B), (C) or (F) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to
his or her person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40)
§ 132.14 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county
transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 to 306.13, a regional
transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.71, or a
regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.80 to
306.90.
   (B)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (C)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (D)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (E)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (F)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (G)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (B), (C), or (F) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (E) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the treasury of the County and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the treasury of the County.
(R.C. § 2917.41) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.15 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (A) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2903.13.
(R.C. § 2917.14)
CURFEW
§ 132.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLOW. To permit or to neglect to restrain or prevent.
   EMERGENCY. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state
that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a
fire, natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring
immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
   MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 who is unemancipated.
   PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a juvenile as a natural or
adoptive parent, as a legal guardian, as a person who stands in loco parentis,
or as a person to whom legal custody has been given by court order.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground, or
place to which the general public has access and a right to resort for any
lawful purpose, or any business establishment, including but not limited to any
store, shop, restaurant, tavern, bowling alley, café, theater, drugstore, pool
room, shopping center and any other place devoted to amusement or entertainment
of the general public.
('74 Code, § 132.35) (Ord. 95-1146, passed 5-16-95)
§ 132.26 CURFEW.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 14 to be or remain
in or upon a public place within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 to be or remain
in or upon a public place within the city between the hours of:
      (1)   10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday; and
      (2)   12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. Friday through Saturday.
('74 Code, § 132.36) (Ord. 95-1146, passed 5-16-95)
§ 132.27 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise herein set forth, this chapter shall not apply to
the following situations:
      (1)   When a minor is accompanied by a parent of such minor;
      (2)   When a minor, who is a duly authorized and licensed driver, is
operating a motor vehicle within the city for the purpose of passing through,
by direct route, from one location to another either within or out of the city,
including all minors that may be also within the vehicle, in a vehicle involved
in interstate travel;
      (3)   When a minor is returning home, by a direct route from, and within
one hour of the termination of, a school activity, or any activity of a
religious, civic, or other voluntary association, providing that justification
indicating time of termination of such event can be given to any investigating
officer of the Police Department;
      (4)   When a minor is on the sidewalk or property where the minor
resides, or on either side of or across the street from the place where the
minor resides and the adult owner or resident of that property has given
permission for the minor to be there;
      (5)   In case of reasonable necessity for the minor remaining in a public
place but only after the minor's parent has communicated to the Chief of Police
or the person designated by the Chief of Police to receive such notifications
the facts establishing the reasonable necessity relating to a specified public
place at a designated time for a described purpose including points of origin
and destination. If the reasonable necessity arises out of a special event, it
shall be sufficient if the sponsor of the special event, rather than the parent
of each attending minor, makes such communication to the Chief of Police. A
copy of the communication, or of the police record thereof, duly certified by
the Chief of Police to be correct, with an appropriate notation of the time it
was received and of the names and addresses of the parent and minor or of the
sponsor, as the case may be, shall be admissible evidence;
      (6)   When a minor is involved in an employment activity, or going to or
returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (7)   A minor who is married or had been married; or
      (8)   A minor who is involved in an emergency.
   (B)   The foregoing exceptions do not apply to §§
132.29 and
132.30.
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under §
132.31 that the owner, operator or employee of a business establishment
promptly notified the Police Department that a minor was present on the
premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
('74 Code, § 132.37) (Ord. 95-1146, passed 5-16-95)
§ 132.28 PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for a parent of a minor knowingly to permit or by
inefficient control to allow the minor to remain in any city public place under
circumstances not constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope
of this subchapter. The term “knowingly” includes knowledge that a parent
should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in
that parent's legal custody. This requirement is intended to hold a neglectful
or careless parent up to a reasonable community standard of parental
responsibility through an objective test. It shall, therefore, be no defense
that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or
whereabouts of such minor.
('74 Code, § 132.38) (Ord. 95-1146, passed 5-16-95)
§ 132.29 COMPULSORY SCHOOL AGE TO BE IN ATTENDANCE AT SCHOOL.
   (A)   No minor between the ages of six and 16, inclusive, other than a minor
that has been suspended or expelled from school, shall be at any place within
the city except in attendance at school during normal school hours, during any
school day, unless the minor has written proof from school authorities excusing
him or her from attending school at that particular time, or unless the minor
is accompanied by a parent, or a responsible adult selected by the parent to
supervise the minor.
   (B)   Each parent of a minor between the ages of six and 16, inclusive,
shall have a duty to prohibit the minor from behaving contrary to division (A)
of this section.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that
the minor, at the time he or she was found at a place other than in school, was
not required by law to be in attendance at school.
('74 Code, § 132.39) (Ord. 95-1146, passed 5-16-95)
§ 132.30 MINORS SUSPENDED OR EXPELLED FROM SCHOOL.
   (A)   If a minor between the ages of six and 16, inclusive, is suspended or
expelled from school, then each parent of the minor shall have the following
duties for the duration of the suspension or expulsion:
      (1)   The duty to personally supervise the minor, or to arrange for a
responsible adult to supervise the minor, at the times that the minor would
have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been
suspended or expelled; and
      (2)   The duty to prohibit the minor from being at any public place at
the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school
had he or she not been suspended or expelled.
   (B)   No minor between the ages of six and 16, inclusive, that has been
suspended or expelled from school shall fail to comply with supervision
provided or arranged by a parent pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section.
   (C)   No minor between the ages of six and 16, inclusive, that has been
suspended or expelled from school shall be in any public place at the time that
he or she would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she
not been suspended or expelled.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with
criminal negligence violate this section.
('74 Code, § 132.40) (Ord. 95-1146, passed 5-16-95)
§ 132.31 BUSINESS OPERATOR RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator of any business establishment to
knowingly permit a minor to remain at the establishment under circumstances not
constituting an exception to, or otherwise beyond the scope of this subchapter.
The term “knowingly” includes knowledge that an operator should reasonably be
expected to have concerning the patrons of the establishment. The standard for
“knowingly” shall be applied through an objective test: whether a reasonable
person in the operator's position should have known that the patron was a minor
in violation of the subchapter.
('74 Code, § 132.41) (Ord. 95-1146, passed 5-16-95)
§ 132.32 NOTICE OF CITATION.
   The Chief of Police shall send the parent of the minor written notice of the
violation.
('74 Code, § 132.42) (Ord. 95-1146, passed 5-16-95)
§ 132.33 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The first violation of §§
132.25 through
132.32 by any person shall be a minor misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not
more than $100.
   (B)   The second violation of §§
132.25 through
132.32 by any person shall be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, punishable by
a fine of not more than $250 and by community service of not more than eight
hours, or by a combination of part or all of the foregoing.
   (C)   The third and all subsequent violations of §§
132.25 through
132.32 by any person shall be a misdemeanor of the third degree, punishable by
a fine of not more than $500 and by community service of not more than 40 hours
and by imprisonment up to 30 days, or by a combination of part or all of the
foregoing.
('74 Code, § 132.99(B)) (Ord. 95-1146, passed 5-16-95)
NOISE
§ 132.40 UNLAWFUL NOISES.
   (A)   No person shall make, or cause or permit to be made or caused, upon
any premises owned, occupied, possessed, or controlled by them or upon any
public street, alley, or thoroughfare any unnecessary noise or sound which is
physically annoying to persons of ordinary and normal sensitivity or which is
so harsh or so prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in its use, time, and place as
to cause physical discomfort, or which is injurious to the lives, health,
peace, and comfort of the inhabitants of the city.
   (B)   The provisions of this subchapter shall not be construed to apply to
any public celebration, public holiday or public occasion generally celebrated
or public parades held under authorized permits; nor shall such provisions
apply to any sporting event or activity conducted under the direction and
supervision of any public or private school; nor shall such provisions apply to
the operation of any mechanical devices used by public employees or utility
companies involved in remedying a dangerous, hazardous or unhealthful situation
at any time of the day or night.
('74 Code, § 132.55) (Ord. 94-1121, passed 10-4-94)
§ 132.41 SPECIFIC NOISE PROHIBITIONS.
   The following activities are specifically prohibited:
   (A)   Operating, playing, or permitting the operation or playing of any
radio, television set, loudspeaker, stereo, drum, musical instrument, or
similar device which produces or reproduces sound which is in violation of the
provisions of §
132.40.
   (B)   Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day:
operation or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in
construction, drilling, repair, alteration, or demolition work which creates
sound which is in violation of §
132.40.
   (C)   Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day:
operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill,
grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool which creates sound which is in
violation of §
132.40.
('74 Code, § 132.56) (Ord. 94-1121, passed 10-4-94)
§ 132.42 PARTIES REGULATED.
   (A)   Every person who conducts or allows to be conducted a party as defined
herein which has present and uses any electronic sound reproduction and or
amplification device and or similar system between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m. of the following day, that produces sound in violation of §
132.40 is guilty of a violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   For purposes of this section the term PARTY means a gathering for
social and/or entertainment purposes at a private residence or other location.
   (C)   Any noise, commotion, or sound resulting from a party which can be
plainly heard at a distance of 50 feet from the location of the party or from
inside a neighboring residence shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of
this subchapter.
('74 Code, § 132.57) (Ord. 94-1121, passed 10-4-94)
§ 132.43 LIABILITY FOR SECOND POLICE RESPONSE.
   (A)   (1)   A second or subsequent response by police personnel within 30
days of the first response, to a location at which there was a violation of
this subchapter, shall cause all persons responsible for such response to be
jointly and severally liable for the cost thereof. A second or subsequent
response to such an incident is an emergency response inasmuch as such response
requires immediate action in order to safeguard the public health, welfare, and
safety of the residents in the neighborhood where such violation is occurring.
      (2)   The person responsible for the party, and/or in charge of the
premises at which the noise originated, shall be deemed liable for the cost of
the second police response. If either of those persons is a minor, the parents
or guardians of that minor shall beheld jointly and equally liable for such
costs.
   (B)   The costs of any second or subsequent police response shall include
all reasonable costs incurred by the city in responding to the party location.
Costs shall include, but are not limited to, salary and benefits of the city
personnel, use of and/or damages to city equipment, treatment of injuries to
city personnel, and administrative costs incurred to process, bill, and collect
appropriate costs of police response. It is hereby stipulated that the expense
to the city for each hour or portion thereof which is used in responding to a
violation of the provisions of this subchapter is reasonably expected to be $25
per person responding.
   (C)   An invoice shall be prepared and sent to the responsible party
notifying such persons or persons of the specific charges for all reasonable
costs incurred by the city attributable to the second police response. The
responsible person or persons shall have a right to present any evidence or
argument challenging the invoiced amount within ten days of the date the
invoice was mailed. All challenges shall be made to the City Manager of the
city or his or her designee.
   (D)   The amount of all reasonable costs incurred by the city shall be
deemed a debt owed to the city by the person or persons liable for such costs
pursuant to division (A) of this section.
   (E)   If the persons liable for such costs pursuant to division (A) of this
section are minors, both the minor and the parents or guardians of such minor
are jointly and severally liable for the costs of the second response. Any
person liable for such second response costs pursuant to this section shall be
liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of such costs,
including reasonable attorney's fees.
   (F)   The liability imposed by this section for second response shall be in
addition to any fines, penalties, or forfeitures imposed for violation of any
of the provisions of the city code of ordinances.
('74 Code, § 132.58) (Ord. 94-1121, passed 10-4-94)
§ 132.44 VIOLATIONS.
   The violation of any provision of §§
132.40 through
132.43 is a minor misdemeanor. The first violation of any provision of §§
132.40 through
132.43 shall be punishable by a fine of $100. Any subsequent infraction
occurring within 30 days from a previous infraction shall be punishable by a
fine not to exceed $250. The fines set out herein are in addition to the
obligation for reimbursement of expenses set out in §
132.43.
('74 Code, § 132.99(C)) (Ord. 94-1121, passed 10-4-94)
CHAPTER 133: SEX OFFENSES
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
   
133.03   Sexual imposition
   
133.04   Public indecency
   
133.05   Voyeurism
   
133.06   Polygraph examinations for victims; restrictions on use
   
133.07   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire
   
133.08   Soliciting; loitering to engage in
   
133.09   Prostitution
   
133.10   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.11   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.12   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.13   Rules of evidence
   
133.14   Declaratory judgment
   
133.15   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
   
133.16   Notice concerning sex offenders
   
133.17   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
   
133.18   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited
   
133.19   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
   
133.20   Unlawful advertising of massage
   
133.21   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images
   
133.22   Grooming
 
   
133.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration
Statutory reference:
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see R.C. §§ 2907.28 - 2907.30
   Child victim, disposition of, see R.C. § 2945.481
   Suppression of information at trial, see R.C. § 2907.11
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance describing
or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic
abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Any of the following medical professionals:
      (1)   A physician assistant licensed under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (2)   A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to practice medicine
and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and
surgery;
      (3)   A massage therapist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4731.
   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser disc,
phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing capable
of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or
text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal
display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer
hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or similar data
storage device.
   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.51.
   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   NUDITY. The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of
a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible
group, judged with reference to that group, any material or performance is
OBSCENE if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance,
or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place where
a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast below the
top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity
for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to
another.
   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the
person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense,
except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the
following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01)
§ 133.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (A)    No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another when the offender knows the other person is 13 years of
age or older but less than 16 years of age, or the offender is reckless in that
regard.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. §§ 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another; cause another to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when the offender knows that the sexual contact is
offensive to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in
that regard.
   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any combination of those
sections, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree and,
notwithstanding the range of jail terms prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court
may impose on the offender a definite jail term of not more than one year.
(R.C. § 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 133.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the persons’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4), and (C)(5)
of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), a violation
of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was likely
to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), a violation
of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(5), a violation
of division (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (D)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (B)(4) of this
section:
         (a)   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         (b)   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person
and the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (E)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
§ 133.05 VOYEURISM.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08)
§ 133.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS; RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant’s attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender’s
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      ALLEGED JUVENILE OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
      POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Means any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      PROSECUTION. Means the prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
      SEX OFFENSE. Means a violation of any provision of §§
133.02 to
133.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10)
§ 133.07 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         (a)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         (b)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured,
patronized, or otherwise involved in a violation of division (A)(1)(b) of this
section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of
whether the offender who violates division (A)(1)(b) of this section knows the
prostitute’s age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in
premises used in violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
   (B)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         PERSON WITH A DEVELOP-MENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2905.32.
         SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. An implicit or explicit agreement to provide
sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person engaging
in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to any
person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of engaging in prostitution with a
person with a developmental disability, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In sentencing an offender under this division for a
violation of division (B)(2) of this section, the court shall require the
offender to attend an education or treatment program aimed at preventing
persons from inducing, enticing, or procuring another to engage in sexual
activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything of value to the
other person. Notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a) for
a misdemeanor of the first degree, in sentencing an offender under this
division for a violation of division (B)(2) of this section, the court may
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231)
§ 133.08 SOLICITING; LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
   (E)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (F)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (E) of this section.
   (G)   As used in division (E) of this section:
      PUBLIC PLACE means any of the following:
         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (1) of this definition.
         (c)   A place not described in division (a) or (b) of this definition
that is open to the public.
      VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (H)   (1)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.09 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.10 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver's license, birth record, marriage license, or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31)
   (F)   Presumptions, notice and defense.
      (1)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager,
of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged
in selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by this section is presumed to have knowledge
of the character of the material or performance involved if the owner, manager,
or agent or employee of the owner or manager has actual notice of the nature of
such material or performance, whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or
employee of the owner or manager has precise knowledge of its contents.
      (2)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. Such notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.
      (3)   This §
133.10 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
      (4)   (a)   The provisions of §§
133.10,
133.11 and
133.12(A) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
         (b)   Division (E)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §
133.10,
133.11, or
133.12 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
         (c)   Division (E)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely
transferring information that is engaged in the violation of §
133.10,
133.11, or
133.12 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
      (5)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §
133.10,
133.11, or
133.12 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
         (a)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the
employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
         (b)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
      (6)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §
133.10 or
133.11 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.11 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2907.311) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.12 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (B) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Chapter 2151
§ 133.13 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation
of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of
whether such place is or is not a brothel.
   (B)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the
question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
   (C)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
133.07 to
133.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (D)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a
husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and the
accused's spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
133.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender's premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
133.08(A) or §
133.09.
(R.C. § 2907.26)
§ 133.14 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving the
same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(A) of this section is entitled, upon the party's request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (C)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (A) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (D)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (E)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36)
§ 133.15 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation. The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to
trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the
court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (B)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or
R.C. § 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37)
Statutory reference:
   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles, felony, see R.C. § 2907.31
   Pandering obscenity, felony, see R.C. § 2907.32
§ 133.16 NOTICE CONCERNING SEX OFFENDERS
   (A)   Within 72 hours of receiving a § 2950.11 notice, the Police Department
shall deliver a copy of the notice to the occupant of each residential dwelling
unit, commercial or other unit on both sides of the street for three blocks in
each direction of the address of the residence of the sexual predator or
habitual sex offender as the said address is set forth in the notice. The
notice shall also be delivered within any additional geographical area or areas
adopted by the Ohio Attorney General. Such delivery may be accomplished by hand
carrying and/or by mailing a copy to, or conspicuously posting a copy at each
such dwelling, commercial or other unit.
   (B)   A copy of any such notice shall be incorporated into the city's weekly
crime report and forwarded to the newspaper which normally publishes the said
report with a written request that the said notice be published in its entirety
with the report.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall be construed to create any liability on the part
of the city or its employees and agents in any civil action to recover damages
for injury, death, or loss to person or property allegedly caused by any act or
omission relating to this section.
(Ord. 98-1272, passed 9-1-98)
Statutory reference:
   Community notification of sex offender registration, see R.C. § 2950.11
§ 133.17 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT means an entity that is open to the public and
to which either of the following applies:
         (a)   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances
depicting sexual conduct.
         (b)   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental, or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES means films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video, or other motion pictures.
   (B)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any aperture, hole, or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge,
or other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or
performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38)
§ 133.18 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ADULT ARCADE means any place to which the public is permitted or invited
in which coin- operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
         (a)   Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         (b)   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. §
2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials exhibiting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      ADULT CABARET means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club,
or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are
served, that regularly features any of the following:
         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         (b)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals, or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT means an adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual encounter
establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an “adult
entertainment establishment”.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      ADULT THEATER means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON means the dominant
or principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so described are
those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         (a)   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         (b)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         (c)   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY means the showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN means a consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY means a state of dress in which opaque
clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
         (a)   Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         (b)   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a “sexual
encounter establishment”.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS means the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male or
female genitals, or the female breast.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY means any of the following:
         (a)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         (b)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of
the activities described in division (a) of this definition.
   (B)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including, but not
limited to, a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on
the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (C)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (D)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (B) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor made a
bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance
to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification
presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the
identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the
identification had not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (E)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (D) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy
Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39)
§ 133.19 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment that has
as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or inventory in,
derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from, devotes a
significant or substantial portion of its interior business or advertising to,
or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display space for the sale
or rental, for any form of consideration, of books, magazines, periodicals, or
other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
compact discs, slides, or other visual representations, that are characterized
by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions
that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown to more than five
individuals for any form of consideration.
      CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of an
item.
      EMPLOYEE. Any individual who performs any service on the premises of a
sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2907.39.
      OPERATOR. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented business
who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the
business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      PATRON. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented business
except for any of the following:
         (a)   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         (b)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         (c)   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      PREMISES. The real property on which the sexually oriented business is
located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but not limited,
to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking
lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the ownership,
control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually oriented
business.
      REGULARLY. Consistently or repeatedly.
      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2907.39.
      SEXUAL DEVICE. Any three-dimensional object designed and marketed for
stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts or
for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including, but not
limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the
human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. A commercial establishment that regularly features
sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, or
establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products
or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does not
restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one
of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult bookstore, adult video store, adult
cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or sexual encounter
center, but does not include a business solely by reason of its showing,
selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic region, and
buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 may
remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the
performers appear nude.
   (C)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55
§ 133.20 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17)
§ 133.21 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. §
303, as amended.
      DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer device,
computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or other
depiction or portrayal of a person.
      INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      INTERNET PROVIDER. Means a provider of internet service, including all of
the following:
         (a)   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         (b)   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         (c)   Internet protocol- enabled services, as defined in R.C. §
4927.01.
      MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended.
      SEXUAL ACT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sexual activity;
         (b)   Masturbation;
         (c)   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         (d)   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153,
as amended.
      VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (D)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (E)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(1)(b), (F)(1)
(c), or (F)(1)(d) of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is
a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of
private sexual images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (d)   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         (a)   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         (b)   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (G)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
§ 133.22 GROOMING.
   (A)   As used in this section, PATTERN OF CONDUCT has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2903.211.
   (B)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor who is less than 16 years of age and who is four or more
years younger than the person, when the pattern of conduct would cause a
reasonable adult person to believe that the person is communicating with the
minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (C)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in a pattern of
conduct with a minor if the person and the minor are in any of the
relationships described in R.C. § 2907.03(A)(5) to (A)(13), when the pattern of
conduct would cause a reasonable adult person to believe that the person is
communicating with the minor with purpose to do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity,
and when the person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to
entice, coerce, or solicit the minor to engage in sexual activity with the
person or a third person;
      (2)   Prepare the minor to engage in sexual activity, and when the
person’s purpose in engaging in the pattern of conduct is to prepare the minor
to engage in sexual activity with the person or a third person that would be a
violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, or 2907.07.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of grooming.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age or if the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of age and if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense
or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the
offense, a violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually
oriented offense or a child-victim oriented offense and the offender supplied
alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender supplied alcohol or a drug of abuse to the victim of the offense, a
violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less than 13 years of
age or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or a child-victim
oriented offense, a violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the victim of the offense is less
than 13 years of age and if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or a sexually oriented offense or
a child-victim oriented offense or the offender supplied alcohol or a drug of
abuse to the victim of the offense, a violation of division (C) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution of a violation of any other section of the this code or the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under this section or any other section of this code or the
Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the other section of
this code or the Revised Code, or both sections.
(R.C. § 2907.071)
§ 133.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (A)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C. §
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C. §
2901.07.
   (B)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and
2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender,
at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required
under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in
that section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall
perform the duties specified in that division.
(R.C. § 2929.23)
Cross-reference:
   Sentencing generally, see
Ch. 130
CHAPTER 134: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
134.01   Definitions
   
134.02   Prohibitions against gambling; exception
   
134.03   Operating a gambling house
   
134.04   Public gaming
   
134.05   Cheating
   
134.06   Regulations concerning operation of licensed bingo game
   
134.07   Records to be kept
   
134.08   Requirements for bingo game operators
   
134.09   Bingo games for amusement only
   
134.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
   
134.11   Raffle drawings
   
134.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
   
134.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
   
134.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
   
134.15   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct
Statutory reference:
   Conducting an illegal bingo game, felony, see R.C. § 2915.07
   Licensing bingo games by Attorney General, see R.C. § 2915.08
   Licensing distributors of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §
2915.081
   Licensing manufacturers of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §
2915.082
§ 134.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   BINGO. Means either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in 5 horizontal and 5 vertical rows of spaces, with each
space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a letter
and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space;
         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this definition, that a
predetermined and preannounced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who performs
work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to collecting
money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover
spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that
contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or
sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing
prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, selling or
redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers, accessing an
electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant, supervising the
operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets
from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and
preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. BINGO GAME OPERATOR does not
include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or repairing an
electronic instant bingo system.
   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of BINGO in this section,
instant bingo, and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are “bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, BINGO SUPPLIES are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals, and
businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(6).
   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2) of
the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a charitable
organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08 and the
proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3) and is
a charitable organization as defined in this section. A CHARITABLE INSTANT
BINGO ORGANIZATION does not include a charitable organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3)
and that is created by a veteran's organization, a fraternal organization, or a
sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran's
organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to
R.C. § 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means either of the following:
         (a)   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or
otherwise transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or
509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran's organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter's organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter's
organization” in this section.
   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or prepare
for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a
sweepstakes.
   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of electronic
instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does
either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant
to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID does not include any device into which a coin,
currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant’s electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         (b)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         (c)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         (d)   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo
ticket, the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         (e)   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate
an entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         (f)   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   The term shall not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, “video lottery terminal” has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         (b)   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         (c)   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         (b)   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran’s or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of
the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization's
facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Means any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a board or
placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer's name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to produce
income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not
include bingo.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section
plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in
division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   GROSS PROFIT. Means gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for
the payment of prize awards.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a person
receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or
for the expenses of conducting bingo. GROSS RECEIPTS does not include any money
directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a
railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or
paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as
prize winners, and may also include games  in which some winners are determined
by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card
or bingo blower. “Instant bingo” also includes a punch board game. In all
“instant bingo” the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term
does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated by
the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains
as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying
numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   IRC or INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw
materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   NET PROFIT. Means gross profit minus expenses.
   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR ELECTRONIC
INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable
expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose of
conducting instant bingo or electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm or any
other legal entity, however organized.
   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a number
of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and
randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from
the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper
from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if
the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board
includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or
more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the
raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from
a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to
all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the drawing of a
ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a
professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other noncash
representation of value.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that is
not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership for
regular worship and religious observances.
   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a
license issued under R.C. §§ 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SCHEME OF CHANCE. 
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of
chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by
participants at any one location;
         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than
20% of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain
any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic
device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors. “Electronic
device” does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or symbols.
   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a sheriff, deputy
sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer's training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 to 109.79 and who is
hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE. 
      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill- based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the players score;
         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined
by game features not visible or known to the player;
         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         (a)   As used in this As used in this definition of “skill-based
amusement machine”, GAME and PLAY mean one event from the initial activation of
the machine until the results of play are determined without payment of
additional consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a
single game, play, contest, competition, or tournament may be awarded
redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes based on the results of play.
         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play.
         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest,
competition, or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a
defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in competition for
scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest,
competition, or tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill- based amusement machine.
   SLOT MACHINE. 
      (1)   Means either of the following:
         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   SLOT MACHINE does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization, other
than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for
profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization,
including but not limited to, the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and that has been
in continuous existence in this state for a period of three years.
   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. §§ 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Chapter
2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770,
and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
134.02:
         ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize
offered in a sweepstakes.
         ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward, or
any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this state where
a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant, except
as provided in §
134.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   VETERAN'S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of a
national veteran's association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a
national veteran's association, which post, state headquarters, or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the National Veteran's Association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the National Veteran's Association or has received a letter from the National
Veteran's Association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the National Veteran's Association. As used in this definition,
NATIONAL VETERAN'S ASSOCIATION means any veteran's association that has been in
continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either is
incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-
paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER'S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.
   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as defined
in R.C. § 4765.01.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit,
that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or
to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or younger
by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support
of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         (a)   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support of an
athletic team, club, league, or association.
         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity
at any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01)
§ 134.02 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST GAMBLING; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use
in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or
with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         (a)   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         (b)   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6)
of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any gambling device.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged
in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (A)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such
game or scheme.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         (b)   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         (c)   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran's or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran's or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran's or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran's
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises twelve times during
the preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a
charitable organization leases premises from a veteran's or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable
organization shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the
festival that exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable
organization may pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable
organization to conduct bingo games.
         (d)   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         (e)   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (E)   Division (D) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (F)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (G)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         (a)   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         (b)   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         (c)   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         (d)   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         (e)   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         (f)   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.02)
§ 134.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. §
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03)
§ 134.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (A)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04)
§ 134.05 CHEATING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is
$1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05)
§ 134.06 REGULATIONS CONCERNING OPERATION OF LICENSED BINGO GAME.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for “expenses” in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising, or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size, and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a charitable
organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is
empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per calendar
week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than
nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall not do any of
the following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter's organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo.
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran's organization, or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization's members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee's compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11), or (D) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)
(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11), or (D) of this section, a violation of division (A)(1),
(A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11), or (D) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (C)(12) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (C)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09)
§ 134.07 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), R.C. § 2915.02(D), or R.C. § 2915.101,
a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each
purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C. § 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (B)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (A) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (C)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be deposited
into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game.
Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or
game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo
session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn
on the bingo session or game account.
   (D)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (E)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and reporting to
ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted
for.
   (F)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (G)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (H)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games
of chance;
         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (I)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (A) or (I) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10)
§ 134.08 REQUIREMENTS FOR BINGO GAME OPERATORS.
   (A)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (B) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11)
§ 134.09 BINGO GAMES FOR AMUSEMENT ONLY.
   (A)   Sections
134.06 through
134.13 and
134.15 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (A)(1) or
(A)(2) of this section.
      (1)   (a)   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         (b)   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.
         (c)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (d)   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten
hours of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in R.C. §
2915.01(O)(2).
         (e)   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   (a)   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         (b)   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.
         (c)   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to
cover spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay
winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         (d)   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.
         (e)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (f)   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.15 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).
         (g)   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         (h)   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (B)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12)
§ 134.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following apply:
         (a)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in
compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;
         (b)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19) or is a veteran's
organization described in IRC 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under R.C.
§ 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization's license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling,
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   (a)   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo
game operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo
tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are
working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         (b)   Division (A)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (B)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (C)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (A) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (C) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         (a)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         (c)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (A)(1)(c) of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state,
or any political subdivision.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (B) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092)
§ 134.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
means the  income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services,
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (B)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (F) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (B) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items provided for
in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (4)   As used in this division, FULL GROSS PROFIT means the amount by
which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal has been
sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all prizes were
redeemed.
   (E)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (B) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (B) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (F)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (G)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         (b)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         (c)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC §
509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written
contract with that organization as required in division (G)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing
in this state, the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is
described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order
to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo. That contract shall
include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s,
fraternal, or sporting organization will be distributing to the organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this
state.
      (3)   (a)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation, or cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         (b)   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (G)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (G) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
§ 134.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (A)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (B)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (C)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in
violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (D)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C) or
(D) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (C) or (D) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner's or
lessor's premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094)
§ 134.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(1), (2), (3), or (4) of the definition for “merchandise prize” in §
134.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward
for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or
reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
R.C. § 2915.06)
   (C)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.
(R.C. § 2915.061)
§ 134.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran’s organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in IRC § 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), and is described in
IRC § 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization’s type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization’s principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         (a)   The charitable organization’s bingo license;
         (b)   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(12)(b) of this
section, pay compensation
to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic instant bingo.
         (b)   Division (B)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit an
employee of a veteran’s organization or fraternal organization from redeeming
electronic instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization’s members or
invited guests, so long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (D)   Whoever knowingly violates division (A), (B), or (C) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Negligent homicide
   
135.03   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault
   
135.04   Assault; negligent assault
   
135.05   Injury to persons by hunters
   
135.06   Menacing; aggravated menacing; menacing by stalking
   
135.07   Unlawful restraint
   
135.08   (Reserved)
   
135.09   Coercion
   
135.10   Bigamy
   
135.11   Illegal use of a tracking device or application
   
135.12   Misrepresentation relating to provision of child care
   
135.13   Nonsupport of dependents
   
135.14   Endangering children
   
135.15   Interference with custody; interference with support orders
   
135.16   Domestic violence
   
135.17   Hazing prohibited
   
135.18   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child
   
135.19   Failure to provide for a person with a functional impairment
   
135.20   Patient abuse or neglect; patient endangerment; exceptions; false
statements; retaliation
   
135.21   Interference with right of person to engage in housing transactions
because of race, religion, or the like
   
135.22   Ethnic intimidation
   
135.23   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state
   
135.24   Adulteration of food
   
135.25   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans
   
135.26   Nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly
   
135.27   Spreading contagion
   
135.28   Abuse of a corpse
   
135.29   Unlawful collection of bodily substances
Statutory reference:
   Extortionate extension of credit, see R.C. §§ 2905.21 through 2905.24
   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
   Rights of victims of crimes, see R.C. Chapter 2930
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of §§
135.01 through
135.06, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANOTHER'S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON'S UNBORN. A member of the species Homo
sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
   UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER'S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of an unborn
member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of
another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins with
fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms ANOTHER'S UNBORN, OTHER PERSON'S UNBORN and UNLAWFUL
TERMINATION OF ANOTHER'S PREGNANCY that are set forth in division (A) of this
section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)    Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(1) of this section,
in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of R.C. §§ 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C. §§ 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of such section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         (a)   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         (b)   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
         (c)   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         (d)   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         (e)   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09)
§ 135.02 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another's pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
§ 135.03 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, snowmobile, locomotive,
watercraft, or aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   As the proximate result of committing an OVI offense.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Recklessly;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided
that this division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose
pregnancy is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of
the offender’s commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Negligently;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck,
or motorcycle in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply
as described in division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal
of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without
examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-
related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, any
traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, or a traffic-
related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class four
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (A)(3)(b) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (A)(1), (A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a), or (A)(4) of this section
in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section:
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY PRISON TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MINI-TRUCK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         OVI OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), a violation R.C.
§ 1547.11(A), a violation of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE means a violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE means a violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MAN-SLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE means a
violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that
section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT, OR ATTEMPTED MURDER OFFENSE
means a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 in circumstances in which
the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the violation, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the deadly weapon
used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an attempt to
commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
         UTILITY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06)
   (F)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, utility vehicle, or mini-truck, shall cause serious
physical harm to another person or another’s unborn as the proximate result of
committing, while operating or participating in the operation of a motor
vehicle, utility vehicle, mini-truck, or motorcycle in a construction zone, a
speeding offense, provided that this division applies only if the person to
whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose unborn the serious
physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (F)(4) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (F)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (F)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (F)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (F)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (F)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (F):
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (F), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
   Trial court to suspend driver's license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 135.04 ASSAULT; NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (A)   Assault.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to another or to another's unborn.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another
or to another's unborn.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of assault. Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when
it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment, or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
      (5)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of
the Ohio Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of
behavior that can be prosecuted under division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section and also is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct involving the same
victim that was the basis of the violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import under R.C. §
2941.25.
(R.C. § 2903.13)
   (B)   Negligent assault.
      (1)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another
or to another's unborn.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
negligent assault, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see R.C. § 2903.08
   Felony assault offenses, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Petition for protection order in menacing by stalking cases, see R.C. §
2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
   Strangulation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.18
§ 135.05 INJURY TO PERSONS BY HUNTERS.
   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing a wild
animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to injure
persons.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C))
Statutory Reference:
   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) – (E)
§ 135.06 MENACING; AGGRAVATED MENACING; MENACING BY STALKING.
   (A)   Menacing.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
         (b)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
            1.   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
            2.   The other person is a family or household member or co- worker
of an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know
that the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage
in the specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder’s official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense
related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or to the responder’s performance of the
responder’s official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this section does
not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (A) of this section or any other section of
the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (A) of this section, the
other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or both sections. However, if an
offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of
this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. §
2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance, based on the same
conduct involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of
division (A) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         CO-WORKER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
         EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
   (B)   Aggravated menacing.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, such other person's unborn, or a member of such other person's
immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief
that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of
the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
aggravated menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(2),
aggravated menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the
offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a
private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or
employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities
or duties, aggravated menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   As used in this division (B), ORGANIZATION includes an entity that
is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.21)
   (C)   Menacing by stalking.
      (1)   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         (b)   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (C)(1)(a) of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (C)
(1)(a) of this section.
         (c)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (C)
(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (C)
(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an
offense committed under division (C)(1)(b) of this section, a third person
induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a) of this
section or a violation of division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct
in violation of division (C)(1)(a) of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender's person or under the offender's control.
Division (C)(2)(b)6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this section or a violation of
division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct in violation of division
(C)(1)(b) of this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or R.C. §
2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the
order is the victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (C)(1)(b) of this section or
an offense committed under division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on a
violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property, or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
      (4)   As used in division (C) of this section:
         COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER PROGRAM, COMPUTER SYSTEM, and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04
         EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section is committed is
the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         MENTAL DISTRESS. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
         (b)   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Two or more actions or incidents closely related
in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those
actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely related in
time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those
actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or belonging
to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions or
incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official's,
firefighter's, rescuer's, emergency medical services person's, or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct.”
         PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived
with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this
section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         POST A MESSAGE. Transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer,  send,
post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating
another.
         PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
         SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
         THIRD PERSON. In relation to conduct as described in division (C)(1)
(b) of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim
of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (C) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (2) of
the definition for “mental distress” in this section.
      (6)   (a)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a person
solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to
providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely
transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the
content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In
addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control
shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the
receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes
is or will be sent in violation of division (C) of this section.
         (b)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not create an
affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any
information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (C) of
this section except as otherwise provided by law.
         (c)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (C) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
Statutory reference:
   Authority of corporations to seek protection orders in certain
circumstances, see R.C. § 2903.215
   Conditions of bail for violators, see R.C. § 2903.212
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
§ 135.07 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of he other person’s liberty.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2971.01
(R.C. § 2905.03)
§ 135.08 (RESERVED)
§ 135.09 COERCION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of choice, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage his or her personal or
business repute, or to impair his or her credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which he or she is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including without
limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to the victim
of his or her offense.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3), (4),
or (5) of this section that the actor's conduct was a reasonable response to
the circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her purpose was limited
to:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (E)   As used in this section, THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat
by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12)
§ 135.10 BIGAMY.
   (A)   No married person shall marry another or continue to cohabit with such
other person in this municipality.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor's spouse was continuously absent for five years immediately preceding the
purported subsequent marriage, and was not known by the actor to be alive
within that time.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of bigamy, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.01)
§ 135.11 ILLEGAL USE OF A TRACKING DEVICE OR APPLICATION.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      BUSINESS ENTITY. Means any form of corporation, partnership, association,
cooperative, joint venture, business trust, or sole proprietorship that
conducts business in this state.
      BUSINESS OF PRIVATE INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4749.01.
      DISABLED ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      ELDERLY PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means any organization or unit comprised of law
enforcement officers, and also includes any federal or military law enforcement
agency.
      OHIO PROTECTION ORDER. Means a protection order filed or issued or a
consent agreement approved pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26 or 3113.31, a protection
order filed or issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, or 2903.214, or a
no contact order issued as any of the following:
         (a)   As part of a person’s sentence under a community control
sanction imposed under R.C. § 2929.16, 2929.17, 2929.26, or 2929.27;
         (b)   As a term or condition of a person’s release under R.C. §
2929.20;
         (c)   As a post-release control sanction imposed as a condition of a
person’s post-release control under R.C. § 2967.28;
         (d)   As a term of supervision for a person transferred to
transitional control under R.C. § 2967.26;
         (e)   As a term or condition of the intervention plan of a person
granted intervention in lieu of conviction under R.C. § 2951.041.
      PERSON. Means an individual, but does not include a business entity.
      PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4749.01.
      PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE. Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2919.27.
      TRACKING APPLICATION. Means any software program that permits a person to
remotely determine or track the position or movement of another person or
another person’s property.
      TRACKING DEVICE. Means an electronic or mechanical device that permits a
person to remotely determine or track the position or movement of another
person or another person’s property, including an electronic monitoring device.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D) of this section, no
person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Install a tracking device or tracking application on another
person’s property without the other person’s consent or cause a tracking device
or tracking application to track the position or movement of another person or
another person’s property without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   If the person installed a tracking device or tracking application
on another’s property with the other person’s consent and the other person
subsequently revokes that consent, fail to remove or ensure the removal of the
device or application after the other person revokes the consent.
   (C)   (1)   For purposes of this section, if a person has given consent for
another to install a tracking device or tracking application on the consenting
person’s property, it is presumed that the consenting person has revoked that
consent if any of the following applies:
         (a)   The consenting person and the person to whom consent was given
are lawfully married and one of them files a complaint for divorce or a
petition for dissolution of marriage from the other. Not later than 72 hours
after being served with a complaint for divorce or a petition for dissolution
of marriage, the person to whom consent was given shall lawfully uninstall or
discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application. If the person
to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the
tracking device or tracking application, the person to whom consent was given
shall notify the court in which the complaint for divorce or the petition for
dissolution of marriage was filed in writing.
         (b)   The consenting person or the person to whom consent was given
files an Ohio protection order against the other person or an Ohio protection
order is issued against the other person, and the person to be protected under
the order is the consenting person. Not later than 72 hours after being served
with the Ohio protection order, the person to whom consent was given shall
lawfully uninstall or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking
application. If the person to whom consent was given cannot lawfully uninstall
or discontinue use of the tracking device or tracking application, the person
to whom consent was given shall notify the court that issued the Ohio
protection order in writing that the person to whom consent was given has
installed or is using a tracking device or tracking application on the
previously consenting person’s person or the person’s property and cannot
uninstall or discontinue its use without violating the Ohio protection order.
      (2)   Revocation of consent under this division is effective upon the
service of the petition or motion or an Ohio protection order.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer, or any law enforcement agency, that
installs a tracking device or tracking application on another person’s property
or causes a tracking device or tracking application to track the position or
movement of another person or another person’s property as part of a criminal
investigation, or a probation officer, parole officer, or employee of the
department of rehabilitation and correction, a halfway house, or a community-
based correctional facility when engaged in the lawful performance of the
officer’s or employee’s official duties;
      (2)   A parent or legal guardian of a minor child who installs or uses a
tracking device or tracking application to track the minor child if any of the
following applies:
         (a)   The parents or legal guardians of the child are lawfully married
to each other and are not separated or otherwise living apart, and either of
those parents or legal guardians consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application;
         (b)   The parent or legal guardian of the child is the sole surviving
parent or legal guardian of the child;
         (c)   The parent or legal guardian of the child has sole custody of
the child;
         (d)   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart and neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and both consent to the installation of the tracking device or tracking
application;
         (e)   The parents or legal guardians of the child are divorced,
separated, or otherwise living apart, neither parent has sole custody of the
child, and either only one parent consents to the installation of the tracking
device or tracking application or one parent revokes consent, if the consenting
parent only uses the tracking device or tracking application during that
parent’s parenting or custodial time and disables or removes the tracking
device or application during the nonconsenting parent’s parenting or custodial
time.
      (3)   A caregiver of an elderly person or disabled adult, if the elderly
person’s or disabled adult’s treating physician certifies that the installation
of a tracking device or tracking application onto the elderly person’s or
disabled adult’s property is necessary to ensure the safety of the elderly
person or disabled adult;
      (4)   A person acting in good faith on behalf of a business entity for a
legitimate business purpose, provided that this division does not apply to a
private investigator engaged in the business of private investigation on behalf
of another person;
      (5)   (a)   A private investigator or other person licensed under R.C. §
4749.03, who is acting in the normal course of the investigator’s business of
private investigation on behalf of another person and who has the consent of
the owner of the property upon which the tracking device or tracking
application is installed, for the purpose of obtaining information with
reference to any of the following:
            1.   Criminal offenses committed, threatened, or suspected against
the United States, a territory of the United States, a state, or any person or
legal entity;
            2.   Locating an individual known to be a fugitive from justice;
            3.   Locating lost or stolen property or other assets that have
been awarded by the court;
            4.    Investigating claims related to workers’ compensation.
         (b)   This division does not apply if the person on whose behalf the
private investigator is working is the subject of an Ohio protection order or a
protection order issued by a court of another state or if the private
investigator knows or reasonably should know that the person on whose behalf
the private investigator is working seeks the investigator’s services to aid in
the commission of a crime.
      (6)   An owner or lessee of a motor vehicle who installs, or directs the
installation of, a tracking device or tracking application on the vehicle
during the period of ownership or lease, if any of the following applies:
         (a)   The tracking device or tracking application is removed before
the vehicle’s title is transferred or the vehicle’s lease expires;
         (b)   The new owner of the vehicle, in the case of a sale, or the
lessor of the vehicle, in the case of an expired lease, consents in writing to
the non-removal of the tracking device or tracking application;
         (c)   The owner of the vehicle at the time of the installation of the
tracking device or tracking application was the original manufacturer of the
vehicle.
      (7)   A person who installs a tracking device or application on property
in which the person has an ownership or contractual interest, unless the person
is the subject of a protective order and the property is likely to be used by
the person who obtained the protective order;
      (8)   A person or business entity that installs a tracking device or
tracking application on any fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft operated or
managed by the person or business entity pursuant to 14 C.F.R. part 91 or part
135 to track the position or movement of the fixed wing aircraft or rotorcraft;
      (9)   A surety bail bond agent, or any employee or contractor of a surety
bail bond agent, that installs a tracking device or tracking application on
another person’s property or causes a tracking device or tracking application
to track the position or movement of another person or another person’s
property as part of the surety bail bond agent’s, employee’s, or contractor’s
official responsibilities or duties.
   (E)   For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section, a probation officer,
parole officer, or employee of the department of rehabilitation and correction,
a halfway house, or a community- based correctional facility is engaged in the
lawful performance of the officer’s or employee’s duties if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The court or the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction
imposes electronic monitoring on a person.
      (2)   The officer or employee installs or uses an electronic monitoring
device on that person in accordance with the court’s or department’s imposition
of electronic monitoring of that person.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal use of a tracking
device or application.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(2) of this section,
illegal use of a tracking device or application is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Illegal use of a tracking device or application is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law if any of the following applies:
         (a)   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2903.216, or R.C. § 2903.211 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or 2903.214,
regardless of whether the person to be protected under the order is the victim
of the offense or another person.
         (c)   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious physical harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
         (d)   The offender has a history of violence toward the victim or a
history of other violent acts towards the victim.
(R.C. § 2903.216)
§ 135.12 MISREPRESENTATION RELATING TO PROVISION OF CHILD CARE.
   (A)   No child care provider shall knowingly misrepresent any factor or
condition that relates to the provision of child care and that substantially
affects the health or safety of any child or children in that provider’s
facility or receiving child care from that provider to any of the following:
      (1)   A parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the
care of a child in the provider’s facility or receiving child care from the
provider;
      (2)   A parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the
care of a child who is considering the provider as a child care provider for
the child;
      (3)   A public official responsible for issuing the provider a license or
certificate to provide child care;
      (4)   A public official investigating or inquiring about the provision of
child care by the provider;
      (5)   A peace officer.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, “any factor or condition that
relates to the provision of child care” includes, but is not limited to, the
following:
      (1)   The person or persons who will provide child care to the child of
the parent, guardian, custodian, or other person responsible for the care of
the child, or to the children in general;
      (2)   The qualifications to provide child care of the child care
provider, of a person employed by the provider, or of a person who provides
child care as a volunteer;
      (3)   The number of children to whom child care is provided at one time
or the number of children receiving child care in the child care facility at
one time;
      (4)   The conditions or safety features of the child care facility;
      (5)   The area of the child care facility in which child care is
provided.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
misrepresentation by a child care provider, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.224)
§ 135.13 NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   The person’s spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   The person’s child who is under age 18, or the persons’s child with
a mental or physical disability who is under age 21;
      (3)   The person’s aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from
lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for the parent’s own
support.
   (B)    (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         (a)   Is legally obligated to support; or
         (b)   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (B)(1)(b) of this section shall begin to run on the date the person’s
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (C)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to
a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined
in R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (A) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (B) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or had a mental or
physical disability and was under age 21.
   (F)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the
offender has failed to provide support under division (A)(2) or (B) of this
section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or
(B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. §§ 2151.23, 2151.231,
2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401, or
former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney's fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of division (C) of this section is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21)
§ 135.14 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (B)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child's mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use, or
allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is nudity-oriented matter;
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of
the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the violation
of this division.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01,
within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division. For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 to 4511.197 and
all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   As used in division (C)(1) of this section:
         CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
         VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (B)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (B)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation, or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   As used in this division and division (B)(5) of this section:
         MATERIAL, PERFORMANCE, OBSCENE, and SEXUAL ACTIVITY have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance that shows a
minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance that shows
a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation, or
bestiality.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (A) or (B)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(1)(b),(c) or (d), a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense
under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to
the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided
in division (E)(1)(c) or (d) of this section, endangering children is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation is a violation of division (A) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (B)(2), (3), (4), (5) or (6)of
this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (C) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in (E)(3)(b) or (c), endangering children in
violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
or if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any
offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the delinquency of
or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (E)(3)
(c) of this section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, R.C. §§ 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. § 2903.07 as it
existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
divisions (E)(3)(a), (b) or (c) of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law, and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under R.C. Chapter 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511, or any other provision
of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
         (e)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division
(E)(3)(a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section or pursuant to any other provision
of law for the violation of division (C) of this section, if as a part of the
same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or pleads guilty to
a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (C) of this section, the offender also shall be
sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (F)   (1)   If a person violates division (C) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (C) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of division (C) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and
does not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, both the following
apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (C) of this section shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (F)(2)(a)1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to
the violation of division (C) of this section shall constitute a conviction or
plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (C) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (C) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty
to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute, for the
purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 135.15 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY; INTERFERENCE WITH SUPPORT ORDERS.
   (A)   Interference with custody.
      (1)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a person
identified in division (A)(1)(a), (b) or (c) of this section from the parent,
guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division (A)(1)(a), (b) or
(c) of this section:
         (a)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or
physical disability under the age of 21;
         (b)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent,
unruly, neglected, abused, or dependent children;
         (c)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with
mental illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
      (2)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department, or institution without legal consent.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking
under division (A)(1)(a) of this section that the actor reasonably believed
that his or her conduct was necessary to preserve the child's health or safety.
It is an affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division
(A)(1) of this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law
enforcement or judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or
committed person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
      (4)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with
custody.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who
is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1)(a) is removed from the state
or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a
violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
         (b)   A violation of division (A)(1)(b) or (c) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (c)   A violation of division (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Each day of a violation of division (A)(2) is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23)
   (B)   Interference with support orders.
      (1)   No person, by using physical harassment or threats of violence
against another person, shall interfere with the other person's initiation or
continuance of, or attempt to prevent the other person from initiating or
continuing, an action to issue or modify a support order under R.C. Chapter
3115, or under R.C. §§ 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 2151.36, 2151.361,
2151.49, 3105.18, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3109.19, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.07, or
3113.31.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of interfering with an
action to issue or modify a support order, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this division (B) or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or R.C. § 3111.19, interfering with an action to issue or
modify a support order is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2919.231)
§ 135.16 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to a
family or household member.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family or
household member.
   (C)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (D)(2) to
(D)(5) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3), (D)(4), or (D)(5)
of this section, a violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree and a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(4) of this section, if
the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of domestic
violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent
to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. §§ 2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07,
2911.12, 2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a family or
household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United
States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the victim
of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the commission
of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the offense was a
family or household member at the time of the commission of the offense, a
violation of division (A) or (B) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law, and a violation of division (C) is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
      (4)   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or
offenses of the type described in division (D)(3) of this section involving a
person who was a family or household member at the time of the violations or
offenses, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (C) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more offenses of domestic
violence or two or more violations or offenses of the type described in
division (D)(3) of this section involving a person who was a family or
household member at the time of the violations or offenses, and the offender
knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at the time of the
violation, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) or (D)(4) of this
section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at
the time of the violation, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of
division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or unit
of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or money in
connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the person
violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to this
section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or a
former spouse of the offender;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting
with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender within five
years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question.
(R.C. § 2919.25)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
Statutory reference:
   Temporary protection orders, see R.C. § 2919.26
   Violation of protection order or consent agreement, factors to consider,
bail, see R.C. § 2919.251
§ 135.17 HAZING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      HAZING. Means doing any act or coercing another, including the victim, to
do any act of  initiation into any student or other organization or any act to
continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student or other
organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental or
physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume alcohol or a
drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      ORGANIZATION. Includes a national or international organization with
which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post- secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post- secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs
of abuse resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (D)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (E)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
      (1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post- secondary school or any other public or private educational institution,
who is acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
      (2)   A violation of division (E)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 135.18 CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (B)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24)
Statutory reference:
   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
§ 135.19 FAILURE TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (A)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (B)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (D)   As used in this section:
      CARETAKER. A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care and
protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The term
does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT. Any person who has a physical or
mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the person’s own
care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from
providing for the person’s own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
§ 135.20 PATIENT ABUSE OR NEGLECT; PATIENT ENDANGERMENT; EXCEPTIONS; FALSE
STATEMENTS; RETALIATION.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ABUSE. Knowingly causing physical harm or recklessly causing serious
physical harm to a person by physical contact with the person or by the
inappropriate use of a physical or chemical restraint, medication or isolation
on the person.
      CARE FACILITY. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any “home” as defined in R.C. § 3721.10.
         (b)   Any “residential facility” as defined in R.C. § 5119.34 or
5123.19.
         (c)   Any institution or facility operated or provided by the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or by the Department of
Developmental Disabilities pursuant to R.C. §§ 5119.14 and 5123.03.
         (d)   Any unit of any hospital, as defined in R.C. § 3701.01, that
provided the same services as a nursing home, as defined in R.C. § 3721.01.
         (e)   Any institution, residence or facility that provides, for a
period of more than 24 hours, whether for consideration or not, accommodations
to one individual or two unrelated individuals who are dependent upon the
services of others.
      GROSS NEGLECT. Knowingly failing to provide a person with any treatment,
care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of
the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the person.
      INAPPROPRIATE USE OF A PHYSICAL OR CHEMICAL RESTRAINT, MEDICATION OR
ISOLATION. The use of physical or chemical restraint, medication or isolation
as punishment, for staff convenience, excessively, as a substitute for
treatment, or in quantities that preclude habilitation and treatment.
      NEGLECT. Recklessly failing to provide a person with any treatment, care,
goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the person.
(R.C. § 2903.33)
   (B)   Patient abuse or neglect; spiritual treatment; defense.
      (1)   No person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an agent or
employee of a care facility shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Commit abuse against a resident or patient of the facility.
         (b)   Commit gross neglect against a resident or patient of the
facility.
         (c)   Commit neglect against a resident or patient of the facility.
      (2)   (a)   A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through
prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious
denomination, shall not be considered neglectful under division (B)(1)(c) of
this section for that reason alone.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of gross neglect or
neglect under this section that the actor's conduct was committed in good faith
solely because the actor was ordered to commit the conduct by a person with
supervisory authority over the actor.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) is guilty of patient
abuse, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(b) is guilty of gross patient
neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient
neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(c) is guilty of patient
neglect, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient
neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.34)
   (C)   Patient endangerment; spiritual treatment; defense.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES CARETAKER. Means any developmental
disabilities employee or any person who assumes the duty to provide for the
care and protection of a person with a developmental disability on a voluntary
basis, by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a
result of a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. The phrase includes a person who is an employee of a care
facility and a person who is an employee of an entity under contract with a
provider. The phrase does not include a person who owns, operates, or
administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility unless that
person also personally provides care to a person with a developmental
disability.
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5123.50.
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5123.01.
      (2)   No developmental disabilities caretaker shall create a substantial
risk to the health or safety of a person with a developmental disability. A
developmental disabilities caretaker does not create a substantial risk to the
health or safety of a person with a developmental disability under this
division when the developmental disabilities caretaker treats a physical or
mental illness or disability of the person with a developmental disability by
spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a
recognized religious body.
      (3)   No person who owns, operates, or administers a care facility or who
is an agent of a care facility shall condone, or knowingly permit, any conduct
by a developmental disabilities caretaker who is employed by or under the
control of the owner, operator, administrator, or agent that is in violation of
division (C)(2) of this section and that involves a person with a developmental
disability who is under the care of the owner, operator, administrator, or
agent. A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious denomination,
shall not be considered endangered under this division for that reason alone.
      (4)   (a)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section that the actor’s conduct was
committed in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to commit the
conduct by a person to whom one of the following applies:
            1.   The person has supervisory authority over the actor.
            2.   The person has authority over the actor’s conduct pursuant to
a contract for the provision of services.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(3) of this section that the person who owns, operates, or
administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility and who is
charged with the violation is following the individual service plan for the
involved person with a developmental disability or that the admission,
discharge, and transfer rule set forth in the Ohio Administrative Code is being
followed.
         (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(3) of this section that the actor did not have readily available a
means to prevent either the harm to the person with a developmental disability
or the death of such a person and the actor took reasonable steps to summon
aid.
      (5)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(5)(b) or (C)(5)(c) of this
section, whoever violates division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section is guilty
of patient endangerment, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded
guilty to, a violation of this section, patient endangerment is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the person
with a developmental disability, patient endangerment is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.341)
   (D)   False statements.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly
swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, alleging a
violation of division (B) of this section when the statement is made with
purpose to incriminate another.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of filing a false
patient abuse or neglect complaint, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.35)
   (E)   Retaliation against person reporting patient abuse or neglect. No care
facility shall discharge or in any manner discriminate or retaliate against any
person solely because such person, in good faith, filed a complaint, affidavit,
or other document alleging a violation of division (B) of this section or a
violation of R.C. § 2903.34.
(R.C. § 2903.36)
Statutory reference:
   License revocation for felony violations, see R.C. § 2903.37
§ 135.21 INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PERSON TO ENGAGE IN HOUSING TRANSACTIONS
BECAUSE OF RACE, RELIGION, OR THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section;
         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03)
§ 135.22 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (A)   No person shall violate R.C. §§ 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, or 2909.07,
or R.C. § 2917.21(A)(3), (4), or (5), by reason of the race, color, religion,
or national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12)
§ 135.23 VIOLATING A PROTECTION ORDER, CONSENT AGREEMENT, ANTI-STALKING
PROTECTION ORDER OR ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the following:
      (1)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to
R.C. § 2919.26 or R.C. § 3113.31;
      (2)   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2903.213 or R.C. §
2903.214;
      (3)   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating a
protection order.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) or (4) of this
section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
         (b)   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, or
2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
         (c)   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
      (4)   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does not
comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a protection
order that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of this state or
that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. § 2265(c).
   (D)    In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not necessary
for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent agreement was
served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the defendant was shown
the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of either or a judge,
magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the defendant that a protection
order or consent agreement had been issued, and proves that the defendant
recklessly violated the terms of the order or agreement.
   (E)   As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER
STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court of
another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in on behalf of
a person seeking protection. The term does not include an order for support or
for custody of a child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of
another state, except to the extent that the order for support or for custody
of a child is entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United
States.
(R.C. § 2919.27)
§ 135.24 ADULTERATION OF FOOD.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (A)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Adulteration of food generally, see R.C. § 3715.59
§ 135.25 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (A)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         AGE VERIFICATION. A service provided by an independent third party
(other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         DISTRIBUTE. Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Means any device that can be used to
deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately,
and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the
use of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license,
a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 21 years of age or
older.
         TOBACCO PRODUCT. Means any product that is made or derived from
tobacco or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component
or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic
smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not
include any product that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those
terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         VAPOR PRODUCT. Means a product, other than a cigarette or other
tobacco product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or
derived from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         (a)    Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes:
            1.   To any person under 21 years of age; or
            2.   Without first verifying proof of age.
         (b)   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         (c)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         (d)   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         (e)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         (f)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification.
         (g)   Allow an employee under 18 years of age to sell any tobacco
product;
         (h)   Give away or otherwise distribute free samples of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or coupons redeemable
for cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alterative tobacco products.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         (a)   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         (b)   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         (c)   Any other place not identified in division (A)(3)(a) or (A)(3)
(b) of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products.”
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(A)(2)(a) of this section:
         (a)   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         (b)   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (A)(2)(a) of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   (a)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of
this section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21
years of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products,
or papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
            1.   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under
21 years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
            2.   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
            3.   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section for an employer to permit an employee 18, 19, or 20 years of age to
sell a tobacco product.
      (6)   (a)   No delivery service shall accept from, transport or deliver
to, or allow pick-up by, a person under 21 years of age with respect to any of
the following:
            1.   Alternative nicotine products;
            2.   Papers used to roll cigarettes;
            3.   Tobacco products other than cigarettes.
         (b)   A delivery service shall require proof of age as a condition of
accepting, transporting, delivering, or allowing pickup of the items described
in divisions (A)(6)(a)1. to 3. of this section.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d), (A)(2)
(e), (A)(2)(f), (A)(2)(g), (A)(2)(h), (A)(3) or (A)(6) of this section is
guilty of illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to illegal distribution of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (8)   (a)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2), if an offender is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A)(2)(a) of this
section, the court shall impose a fine in the following amount:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(8)(a)2., (A)(8)
(a)3., (A)(8)(a)4., and (A)(8)(a)5. of this section, not more than $250;
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(8)(a)3., (A)(8)
(a)4., and (A)(8)(a)5. of this section, if an offender has previously been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(2)(a) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, not
more than $500;
            3.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(8)(a)4. and (A)
(8)(a)5. of this section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (A)(2)(a) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $500;
            4.   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(8)(a)5. of this
section, if an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
three or more violations of division (A)(2)(a) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,000;
            5.   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to four or more violations of division (A)(2)(a) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, $1,500.
         (b)   The financial sanctions required by division (A)(8)(a) of this
section are in lieu of the financial sanctions described in R.C. § 2929.28(A)
(2), but are in addition to any other sanctions or penalties that may apply to
the offender, including other financial sanctions under that section or a jail
term under R.C. § 2929.24.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(c) of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (A)(2)(c) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (10)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (B)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (C) of this section:
         CARD HOLDER means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent, or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD means an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 to 4507.52.
         SELLER. Means a seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (A) of this section.
         TRANSACTION SCAN means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE means any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (B)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (B) and division (C) of this section.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (B)(4)(a) of this section, except for
purposes of division (C) of this section.
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (C) of this section
or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (B) or division (C) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(b) or (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (C)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (A) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away, or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (A) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (A) of this
section. For purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (C)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (D)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (D):
         AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS. Means:
            1.   In the case of cigarettes, a person who is:
               a.    Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. §
5743.15;
               b.    Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person
purchases cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
               c.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Internal
Revenue Code § 5702;
               d.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               e.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               f.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
               g.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by
the Ohio Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
            2.   In the case of electronic smoking devices or vapor products, a
person who is:
               a.    Licensed as a distributor of tobacco or vapor products
under R.C. § 5743.61;
               b.   A retail dealer of vapor products, as defined in R.C. §
5741.01(C)(3), that is not licensed as a vapor distributor, as long as the tax
levied by R.C. § 5743.51, 5743.62, or 5743.63, as applicable, has been paid;
               c.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
               d.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or
of this state acting in the person's official capacity;
               e.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state.
         MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this section is to prevent the sale of cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to minors and to ensure
compliance with the Master Settlement Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   (a)   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes,
electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in this
municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
         (b)   No motor carrier, or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality that the carrier or other person reasonably believes is not
an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If cigarettes, electronic smoking
devices, and vapor products are transported to a home or residence, it shall be
presumed that the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom
the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products were delivered
was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes, electronic
smoking devices, and vapor products who ships or causes to be shipped
cigarettes, electronic smoking devices, and vapor products to any person in
this municipality in any container or wrapping other than the original
container or wrapping shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of
the container or wrapping in which the cigarettes, electronic smoking devices,
and vapor products are shipped with the words “cigarettes”, “electronic smoking
devices”, or “vapor products”, as applicable.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (D)(3)(a), (D)(3)(b) or (D)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
   (E)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
§ 135.26 NONSMOKING AREAS IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in such
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for persons with mental illnesses and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency, or a
political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (A)(1) or (2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias, or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (B)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (A)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In
places included in division (A)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its legislative
authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places
included in division (A)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.
In places included in division (A)(2) of this section which are also included
in division (A)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (A)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly
visible and that state “no smoking.” No person shall remove signs from areas
designated as no smoking areas.
   (C)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
R.C. § 3313.751(B).
   (D)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031)
§ 135.27 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (A)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (B)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (C)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Contagion and quarantine, see R.C. §§ 3707.04 et seq.
   Power to prevent contagious diseases, see R.C. § 715.37
§ 135.28 ABUSE OF A CORPSE.
   (A)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that he or she knows would outrage reasonable family sensibilities.
   (B)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that would outrage reasonable community sensibilities.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of abuse of a
corpse, a misdemeanor of the second degree. Whoever violates division (B) of
this section is guilty of gross abuse of a corpse, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.01)
§ 135.29 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         (b)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person's alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b) of this section do
not have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as
described in those divisions or as limiting the definition of "privilege" set
forth in R.C. § 2901.01.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15)
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Falsification
   
136.03   Compounding a crime
   
136.04   Failure to report a crime
   
136.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
   
136.06   Obstructing official business
   
136.07   Obstructing justice
   
136.08   Resisting arrest
   
136.09   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
   
136.10   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
   
136.11   Dereliction of duty
   
136.12   Interfering with civil rights
   
136.13   Illegal conveyance of prohibited items onto grounds of a detention
facility or other specified governmental facility
   
136.14   False report of child abuse or neglect
   
136.15   Assaulting police dog, horse, or handicapped assistance dog
   
136.16   Disclosure of confidential peace officer information
   
136.17   Intimidation of crime victim or witness
   
136.18   Using sham legal process
   
136.19   Making false allegation of peace officer misconduct
   
136.20   Misuse of 9-1-1 system
   
136.21   Failure to disclose personal information
Cross-reference:
   Failure to comply with order or signal of a police officer, see §
70.02
Statutory reference:
   Escape from detention, see R.C. § 2921.34
   Harassment by inmates by causing or attempting to cause contact with blood,
semen, urine, feces or other bodily substance; knowledge of AIDS, hepatitis or
tuberculosis infection; felony offenses, see R.C. § 2921.38
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, CONTRIBUTION, LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND, POLITICAL
ACTION COMMITTEE, POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY, and POLITICAL PARTY. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. §§ 2945.37,
2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement in any
vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures;
detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this division,
supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures that is
incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in the
facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of
the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state into this
state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under
R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail
who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30,
DETENTION includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from
the work site.
   DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the confinement of
a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or another state
or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent
child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States.
   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.
   PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a
political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he or
she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party affairs
at any level of responsibility.
   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or agent of the
state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or permanent
capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges, and law
enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   PUBLIC SERVANT. 
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   Any public official.
         (b)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor, or consultant.
         (c)   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general, or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general, or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes, but is not limited to, a
contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was
not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(R.C. § 2921.01)
§ 136.02 FALSIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser's identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver's or commercial driver's license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser's identity.
   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7),
(8), (10), (11), (13), (14) or (15) of this section is guilty of falsification.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, falsification is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
   (G)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications
device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a
peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial
responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
§ 136.03 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. §§
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (B) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21)
§ 136.04 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (E) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (C)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (C) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the following:
         (a)   Second or third degree burns;
         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         (c)   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of a
hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is attended
or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent,
malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately
to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in
which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(E)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (E) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (E) of this section.
   (F)   (1)   No person who knows that a licensed medical professional has
committed an offense under R.C. Chapter 2907, a violation of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to such offense, or a substantially
equivalent criminal offense in another jurisdiction, against a patient of the
licensed medical professional shall fail to report such knowledge to law
enforcement authorities within 30 days of obtaining the knowledge.
      (2)   Except for a self-report or participation in the offense or
violation being reported, any person who makes a report within the 30-day
period provided in division (F)(1) of this section or any person who
participates in a judicial proceeding that results from such report is immune
from civil or criminal liability that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as
a result of making that report or participating in that proceeding so long as
the person is acting in good faith without fraud or malice.
      (3)   The physician-patient relationship or physician assistant-patient
relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding the person’s
knowledge of a licensed medical professional’s commission of an offense or
violation reported under division (F)(1) of this section, against that licensed
medical professional in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report made
under that division.
      (4)   As used in division (F) of this section, LICENSED MEDICAL
PROFESSIONAL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
   (G)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (G)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (H)   Division (A) or (D) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor's
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. §§ 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member’s capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. §
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or R.C. § 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, “counseling services” include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
   (I)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), or (F)(1) of this section is
guilty of failure to report a crime. Violation of division (A)(1) or (F)(1) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (A)
(2) or (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (K)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (L)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (E) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (E) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (M)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(R.C. § 2921.22) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.05 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.06 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official's official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official's lawful
duties.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.07 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (A) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (C) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      ACT OF TERRORISM has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      ADULT and CHILD have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      DELINQUENT CHILD has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.08 RESISTING ARREST.
   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from a law enforcement officer, felony
offense, see R.C. § 2911.01
§ 136.09 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any
brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family, or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official's becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (D)   Division (A)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public monies if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in
a public contract in violation of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of division (A)(1) or (2) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division (A)
(3), (4), or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director
appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
   PUBLIC CONTRACT. Any of the following:
      (1)   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
      (2)   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair, or
maintenance of any public property.
(R.C. § 2921.42)
Statutory reference:
   Assistants and employees of Prosecutors, Law Directors, and Solicitors, see
R.C. § 2921.421
§ 136.10 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H),
(I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant's official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant's public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant's
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant's
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant's official duties.
   (B)   No public servant for the public servant's own personal or business
use and no person for the person's own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (F)   Divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.11 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (D)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Legislative
Authority for the use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution
with which the public official is connected.
   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (H)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under
R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-preparatory boarding school
established under R.C. Chapter 3328.
(R.C. § 2921.44) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.12 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (A)   No public servant, under color of the public servant’s office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 136.13 ILLEGAL CONVEYANCE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS ONTO GROUNDS OF A DETENTION
FACILITY OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building, or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services, or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. §
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in such deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01, except for
small amounts of wine for sacramental purposes when the person engaging in the
specified conduct is a cleric, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building, or other place under the control of the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services, or the Department
of Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place and in accordance with the written rules of the detention facility or the
institution, office building, or other place.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (A).
   (D)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio, or other
electronic communications device.
   (F)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor's person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)    It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (C) of
this section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering
the item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner, or the patient and
that either of the following applies:
         (a)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building, or other place to deliver the
item to the confined person or the patient.
         (b)   The actor was given written authorization by the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place to deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any item listed in division
(A)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.36)
   (H)   The person in charge of a detention facility shall, on the grounds of
the detention facility, have the same power as a peace officer, as defined in
R.C. § 2935.01, to arrest a person who violates this section.
(R.C. § 2921.37) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 136.14 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act
or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in R.C. §
2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 136.15 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police
dog or horse;
         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without
the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer’s duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the
Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of
this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;
         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog
or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as
a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog
that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of
the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on
either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or
horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new
assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind,
deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or
served by the assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because
of the death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the
subject of the violation.
   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ASSISTANCE DOG, BLIND and MOBILITY IMPAIRED PERSON. Have the same meaning
as in R.C. § 955.011.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
955.011.
      PHYSICAL HARM. Any injury, illness, or other psychological impairment,
regardless of its gravity or duration.
      POLICE DOG OR HORSE. A dog or horse that has been trained and may be used
to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321)
§ 136.16 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL PEACE OFFICER INFORMATION.
   (A)   No officer or employee of a law enforcement agency or court, or of the
clerk’s office of any court, shall disclose during the pendency of any criminal
case the home address of any peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting
attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth
services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not prohibit a peace officer, parole
officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional
employee, or youth services employee from disclosing the peace officer’s,
parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s,
correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s own home address, and
does not apply to any person who discloses the home address of a peace officer,
parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney,
correctional employee, or youth services employee pursuant to a court-ordered
disclosure under division (C) of this section.
   (C)   The court in which any criminal case is pending may order the
disclosure of the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case, if
the court determines after a written request for the disclosure that good cause
exists for disclosing the home address of the peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of disclosure
of confidential information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2921.24)
   (E)   No judge of a court of record, or Mayor presiding over a Mayor’s
Court, shall order a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney,
assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth services
employee who is a witness in a criminal case, to disclose the peace officer’s,
parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s,
correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s home address during the
peace officer’s, parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant
prosecuting attorney’s, correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s
examination in the case unless the judge or Mayor determines that the defendant
has a right to the disclosure.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      CORRECTIONAL EMPLOYEE and YOUTH SERVICES EMPLOYEE have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 149.43.
(R.C. § 2921.25)
§ 136.17 INTIMIDATION OF CRIME VICTIM OR WITNESS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly attempt to intimidate or hinder the victim
of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or prosecution of criminal charges
or a delinquent child action or proceeding, and no person shall knowingly
attempt to intimidate a witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of
the person being a witness to that act.
   (B)   No person, knowingly and by force or by unlawful threat of harm to any
person or property or by unlawful threat to commit any offense or calumny
against any person, shall attempt to influence, intimidate, or hinder any of
the following persons:
      (1)   The victim of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or
prosecution of criminal charges or a delinquent child action or proceeding;
      (2)   A witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of the person
being a witness to that act;
      (3)   An attorney by reason of the attorney’s involvement in any criminal
or delinquent child action or proceeding.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who is
attempting to resolve a dispute pertaining to the alleged commission of a
criminal offense, either prior to or subsequent to the filing of a complaint,
indictment, or information by participating in the arbitration, mediation,
compromise, settlement or conciliation of that dispute pursuant to an
authorization for arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement, or
conciliation of a dispute of that nature that is conferred by any of the
following:
      (1)   A section of the Revised Code.
      (2)   The Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Rules of Superintendence for
Municipal Courts and County Courts, the Rules of Superintendence for Courts of
Common Pleas, or another rule adopted by the Ohio Supreme Court in accordance
with Ohio Constitution, Article IV, Section 5.
      (3)   A local rule of court, including but not limited to a local rule of
court that relates to alternative dispute resolution or other case management
programs and that authorizes the referral of disputes pertaining to the alleged
commission of certain types of criminal offenses to appropriate and available
arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement or other conciliation programs.
      (4)   The order of a judge of a municipal court, county court, or court
of common pleas.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of intimidation of an
attorney, victim or witness in a criminal case. A violation of division (A) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of division (B)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, WITNESS means any person who has or claims to
have knowledge concerning a fact or facts concerning a criminal or delinquent
act, whether or not criminal or delinquent child charges are actually filed.
(R.C. § 2921.04) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Retaliation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2921.05
§ 136.18 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      LAWFULLY ISSUED. Adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance with the
United States Constitution, the Constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state, and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Municipal corporations, townships, counties,
school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that are organized
under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only in
geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. An instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         (a)   It is not lawfully issued.
         (b)   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order of a court, a
law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.
         (c)   It is designed to make another person believe that it is
lawfully issued.
      STATE. A state of the United States, including without limitation the
state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the state. STATE does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (B)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or otherwise use
sham legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1) or (2)
of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful purpose.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (B)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (B)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D))
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability, see R.C. § 2921.52(E)
§ 136.19 MAKING FALSE ALLEGATION OF PEACE OFFICER MISCONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace officer
that alleges that the peace officer engaged in misconduct in the performance of
the officer’s duties if the person knows that the allegation is false.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of making a
false allegation of peace officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2921.15)
§ 136.20 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, 9-1-1 SYSTEM means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the access number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Chapter 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of
such information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.96(F) - (H))
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
§ 136.21 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offenses identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section;
         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this section has been, is being,
or is about to be committed.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’
   (D)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
   (E)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (F)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (E) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS CONTROL
Section
   
137.01   Definitions
   
137.02   Carrying concealed weapons
   
137.03   Using weapons while intoxicated
   
137.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
   
137.05   Possessing criminal tools
   
137.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance
   
137.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons
   
137.08   Underage purchase of firearm or handgun
   
137.09   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
   
137.10   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance
   
137.11   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone
   
137.12   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention
   
137.13   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession
   
137.14   Defaced firearms
Cross-reference:
   Conveyance into certain facilities, see §
136.13
   Injury to persons by hunters, see §
135.05
   Injury to property by hunters, see §
131.24
   Using weapons to endanger or damage aircraft or airport operations, see §
131.05
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 137.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a
spring-operated mechanism.
   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife.
         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite,
TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol,
pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic
explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium
nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting
agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power
to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in
mining, quarrying, excavating, or demolitions.
         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         (f)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use
in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         (b)   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         (d)   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)(c) of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition.
         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot
readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy,
souvenir, curio, or museum piece.
         (f)    Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.
         (g)   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting death,
and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried,
or used as a weapon.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion. EXPLOSIVE includes all materials
that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3, or
division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes, but is not limited to, dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. EXPLOSIVES does not include “fireworks,”
as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any activity described in R.C.
§ 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws, rules, and regulations, including, but not limited to, the provisions of
R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. §
3737.82.
   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical
harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an
explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. EXPLOSIVE DEVICE
includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any
blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure
vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. FIREARM
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including,
but not limited to, the representations and actions of the individual
exercising control over the firearm.
   HANDGUN. Means any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR. The
phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a
rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than
26 inches long overall. SAWED-OFF FIREARM does not include any firearm with an
overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the Federal
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and  Explosives under the “Gun Control
Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found by the
Bureau not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725
(1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to
fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under
a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a
suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the license
was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1), under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this
state in which the license was issued.
   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter's pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signalling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11)
§ 137.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person's
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to
and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (C)(1)(b) does not apply
to the person;
         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor's lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor's family, or the actor's home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor's own home.
   (E)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2), (F)
(6) and (F)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2), (F)(6) and (F)(7) of
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance
or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is
either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the
weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation
of division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (F)(2), (F)(6) and (F)(7)
of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with
purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the
weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (A)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within 10 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (b)   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (c)   If divisions (F)(2)(a) and (F)(2)(b) and (F)(6) of this section
do not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (F)(1) or (F)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(2) or (B)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         (a)   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         (b)   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, “deadly weapon” or “weapon” does not
include any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used
as a weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see R.C. §§
2923.124 et seq.
   Concealed carry by a qualifying adult, see R.C. § 2923.111
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see R.C. §
2923.121
§ 137.03 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.04 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)    If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)    The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division is
the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (E)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer.
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (F)   (1)   Divisions (A), (B), (C), and (E) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         (b)   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm
is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(2)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including, but not
limited to, a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         (b)   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(4)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         (d)   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (F)(4)(b) of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (G)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (B) or (C) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) or (C)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor's own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor's own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway,
or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (H)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (B), (C),
or (D) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (E) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) or
(E)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (B) or
(C) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, due to the application of
division (F)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (D) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person’s person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (E)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (E)(3) or (E)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (J)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (K)   As used in this section:
      AGRICULTURE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25(A).
      MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT means the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the same meaning as in R.C. §
4511.01.
      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      TENANT has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      UNLOADED.
         (a)   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division (d) of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (a)2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         (c)   For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         (d)   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (L)   Divisions (a) and (b) of the definition of “unloaded” in division (K)
of this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 137.05 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (A)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (B)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24)
§ 137.06 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19)
§ 137.07 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (A)    No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. §§ 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C.
§§ 2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (A)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (A)(3) or (A)(4) of this section;
      (6)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license, or
permit showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of
the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the sheriff of
the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (7)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person's
possession and under his or her control.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer’s duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (A)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.
      FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
      MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Means information regarding the transfer of
a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as legal or a
legal transaction as illegal.
      PRIVATE SELLER. Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or transfers a
firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms dealer.
(R.C. § 2923.20)
§ 137.08 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (B)    No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever
violates division (B) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.211)
Statutory reference:
   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor, felony, see R.C. § 2923.21
§ 137.09 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (A)   Discharge of firearms on or near prohibited premises. No person shall
do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (B)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person's own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person's
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of discharge
of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of division (A)(1) or
(A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (A)(3) shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(A)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.162)
   (D)   Hunting near township park.
      (1)   No person shall hunt, shoot, or kill game within ½ mile of a
township park unless the Board of Township Park Commissioners has granted
permission to kill game not desired within the limits prohibited by this
division.
(R.C. § 3773.06)
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 3773.99(A))
   (E)   No person shall discharge any BB gun, air gun, or firearm, or make use
of any sling, bow and arrow, or crossbow, within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
   (F)   No person shall, intentionally and without malice, point or aim any BB
gun, air gun, or firearm, or any sling, bow and arrow, or crossbow at or toward
another.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (E) or (F) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (H)   Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit the firing of a military
salute or the firing of weapons by persons of the nation's armed forces acting
under military authority, and shall not apply to law enforcement officials or
other government officials in the proper enforcement of the law, or to any
person in the proper exercise of the right of self defense, or to any person
otherwise lawfully permitted by proper federal, state or local authorities to
discharge a BB gun, air gun, or firearm, or to use a sling, bow and arrow, or
crossbow in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section. Division (E)
of this section does not extend to cases in which BB guns, air guns, or
firearms, or slings, bows and arrows, or crossbows are used in the confines of
structures or used within the confines of a person’s own property, provided
such use is under adult supervision and is approved by the municipality.
Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Improperly discharging firearm at or into habitation or school safety zone,
felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.161
§ 137.10 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)    Upon application to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (B) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of such business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (B)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit. The fees
shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the county or municipality. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address, and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (C)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (D)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage, or
use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority
considers advisable to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
   (E)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non-consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (F)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.18(F),
the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance anywhere in the state.
The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous ordnance only within
the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (G)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(6) and (A)(7) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18)
§ 137.11 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   A law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance;
         (c)   A security officer employed by a board of education or governing
body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment;
         (d)   1.   Any person not described in divisions (B)(1)(a) to (B)(1)
(c) of this section who has written authorization from the board of education
or governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
into a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance
in a school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance in accordance with that authorization, provided both of the
following apply:
               a.    Either the person has successfully completed the
curriculum, instruction, and training established under R.C. § 5502.703, or the
person has received a certificate of having satisfactorily completed an
approved basic peace officer training program or is a law enforcement officer;
               b.   The board or governing body has notified the public, by
whatever means the affected school regularly communicates with the public, that
the board or governing body has authorized one or more persons to go armed
within a school operated by the board or governing authority.
            2.   A district board or school governing body that authorizes a
person under division (B)(1)(d) of this section shall require that person to
submit to an annual criminal records check conducted in the same manner as R.C.
§ 3319.39 or R.C. § 3319.391.
         (e)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
division (B)(1)(e) of this section does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         (b)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (c)   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).
         (d)   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) through (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         (c)   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         (d)   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the
motor vehicle.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   (1)    In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the Director of Education and
Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s probationary
driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary commercial driver’s
license that then is in effect from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4)
and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type
during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this
state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (D)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (D)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (D)(1) of this section, but the court, in its discretion,
instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of
hours determined by the court.
   (E)   As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A
FIREARM means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A), (B)
§ 137.12 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (A)   DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2921.01.
   (B)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 137.13 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (A)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (B)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
      (1)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125
shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee's license expires during which the licensee's license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the license is valid when the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed
handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the licensee's
residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after
that change.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B)
or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license does not
authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the following
places:
         (a)   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         (b)   A school safety zone if the licensee carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;
         (c)   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         (d)   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun
is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
         (e)   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university, or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in
a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing
the handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         (f)   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         (g)   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (B)(2)(c) of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building;
         (h)   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer's premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (B) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer's premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         (b)   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises or property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by
the private employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose.
A private employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to
the private employer's decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744,
for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2744.01.
            3.    An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
            4.    A nonprofit corporation shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises of the nonprofit corporation, including any motor vehicle owned by the
nonprofit corporation, or to any event organized by the nonprofit corporation,
unless the nonprofit corporation acted with malicious purpose. A nonprofit
corporation is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death,
or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
nonprofit corporation’s decision to permit a licensee to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the nonprofit corporation or to any event organized by the
nonprofit corporation. The immunities described in this division apply to an
entity that leases its property to the nonprofit corporation or permits its
property to be used by the nonprofit corporation for any purpose.
         (c)   1.   a.    Except as provided in division (B)(3)(c)2. of this
section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land or
premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or
onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a
posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was
a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
care center, type A family child care home, or type B family child care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family child care home
or type B family child care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass
in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (B)(3)(c) of this section:
               LANDLORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
               RENTAL AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
               RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01,
except RESIDENTIAL PREMISES does not include a dwelling unit that is owned or
operated by a college or university.
               TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who has been
issued a license under that section that is valid at the time in question.
      (5)   (a)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (B).
         (c)   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
         (d)   A fire investigator who is qualified to carry firearms while on
duty under R.C. § 109.774 has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. §
2923.125.
      (6)   (a)   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (B)(6)(c) of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who has been
issued a license issued under that section that is valid at the time in
question. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a qualified retired
peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer identification card issued
pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a valid firearms
requalification certification issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(c) of this
section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.    Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.    Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)
(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(B)1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (B)(6)(c) of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(B)(6)(b)1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED”.
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section.
         (c)   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)
(b)1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. §
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (B)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)
(6)(b)1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (B)(6)(b) of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   As used in division (B) of this section:
         FIRE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71.
         GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THIS
STATE. Means any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         NONPROFIT CORPORATION. Means any private organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation pursuant to subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER means a person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)
(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification
card that is issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section to a person
who is a retired peace officer.
         TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.71.
         VALIDATING IDENTIFICATION. Means photographic identification issued by
the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that identifies
the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
   (C)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. § 2923.126(B) as
a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a
concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall post
in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign that
contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”
(R.C. § 2923.1212)
§ 137.14 DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number, or
other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer’s serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(R.C. § 2923.201)
CHAPTER 138: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
   
138.01   Definitions
   
138.02   Adult use cannabis control; limitations on conduct by individuals
   
138.03   Drug possession offenses
   
138.04   Possessing drug abuse instruments
   
138.05   Permitting drug abuse
   
138.06   Illegal cultivation of marihuana
   
138.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants
   
138.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples
   
138.09   Federal prosecution bar to municipal prosecution
   
138.10   Nitrous oxide: improper dispensing or distribution; possession in a
motor vehicle
   
138.11   Laboratory report required
   
138.12   Counterfeit controlled substances
   
138.13   Use, possession, or sale of drug paraphernalia
   
138.14   Controlled substance or prescription labels
   
138.15   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics
   
138.16   Controlled substance schedules
   
138.17   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates
   
138.18   Pseudoephedrine sales
   
138.19   Sale of pure caffeine product
   
138.20   Sale of dextromethorphan
Statutory reference:
   Controlled substances, regulation of pharmacists and other professionals,
see R.C. Chapters 3719 and 4729
   Conviction of professionally licensed persons to be reported to licensing
board, see R.C. § 2925.38
   Criminal and civil forfeiture of property for felony drug abuse offenses,
see R.C. §§ 2925.41 et seq.
   Destruction of chemicals used to produce methamphetamine; preservation of
samples, see R.C. § 2925.52
   Driver’s license suspension after certain drug convictions, see R.C. §
4510.07
   Tampering with drugs, felony offense, see R.C. § 2925.24
§ 138.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl- related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum
opium;
         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of
a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of phencyclidine;
         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in
a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal
drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or contains any
amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic
substance;
         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse
control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized committee of
the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of the
state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V, Section 6 of the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of
a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender
knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the
juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A
RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is “committed in the vicinity of a substance
addiction services provider or a recovering addict” if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider’s facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider’s
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider’s
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of
Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to
any section listed in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating,
harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping,
transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing,
dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using,
or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3)
of this definition.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States.
   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N- [1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N- propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N- [1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
N- phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3- methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3-methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3- methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N- [3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-– phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4- fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N- [1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha- methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N-phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         (a)   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         (b)   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         (c)   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         (d)   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means
any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         (b)   Any aerosol propellant.
         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         (a)   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         (b)   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it does
not include hashish.
   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing
methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may not
be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership
or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found.
   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER'S FACILITY. Means the
parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL BE
IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C.  § 2929.13(D) that a prison term is
a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)
(1) through (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a barber’s license, barber
instructor’s license, assistant barber instructor’s license, or independent
contractor’s license under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced license to practice cosmetology, advanced license
to practice hair design, advanced license to practice manicuring, advanced
license to practice esthetics, advanced license to practice natural hair
styling, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair design instructor’s license,
manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics instructor’s license, natural hair
style instructor’s license, independent contractor’s license, or tanning
facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license, or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs,
outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider, repackager of dangerous
drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 3776;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
      (38)   A person who has been issued a license to practice as a certified
mental health assistant under R.C. Chapter 4772.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other
place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to
health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at
one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
   SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V. Have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the
Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the Director of Education and Workforce prescribes minimum
standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or
not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the
school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or  program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C. § 2925.01)
§ 138.02 ADULT USE CANNABIS CONTROL; LIMITATIONS ON CONDUCT BY INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780 and notwithstanding
any conflicting provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, an adult use
consumer, may do the following:
      (1)   Use adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Possess, transfer without remuneration to another adult consumer,
or transport adult use cannabis, subject to division (B) of this section; and
      (3)   Purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary per day in
amounts that do not exceed the possession limits set forth in division (B)(1)
of this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796:
      (1)   The amount of cannabis that may be possessed by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (2)   The amount of cannabis that may be transferred by an adult use
consumer without remuneration and not advertised or promoted to the public
shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
      (3)   The amount of cannabis that may be transported by an adult use
consumer shall not exceed:
         (a)   Two and one-half ounces of adult use cannabis in any form except
adult use extract; and
         (b)   Fifteen grams of adult use cannabis in the form of adult use
extract.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer shall not be subject to arrest, criminal prosecution, or civil penalty
for engaging in any of the activities authorized under R.C. Chapter 3780,
including:
      (1)   Obtaining, using, possessing, or transporting adult use cannabis;
      (2)   Performing conduct authorized under R.C. § 3780.29;
      (3)   Acquiring, possessing, using, purchasing, manufacturing, selling,
or transporting paraphernalia; and
      (4)   Assisting another adult use consumer, or allowing property to be
used, in any of the acts authorized by R.C. Chapter 3780.
   (D)   (1)   An individual is prohibited from operating a vehicle, motor
vehicle, streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft while
using adult use cannabis or while under the influence of adult use cannabis and
is subject to R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance
for any violation of this division.
      (2)   An individual is prohibited from smoking, vaporizing, or using any
other combustible adult use cannabis product while in a vehicle, motor vehicle,
streetcar, trackless trolley, bike, watercraft, or aircraft and is subject to
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for any
violation of this division.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, no individual under
21 years of age shall knowingly show or give false information concerning the
individual’s name, age, or other identification for the purpose of purchasing
adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter
3780.
   (F)   Nothing in R.C. Chapter 3780 is intended to permit the transfer or
sale of adult use cannabis, with or without remuneration, to an individual
under 21 years of age, or to allow an individual under 21 years of age to
purchase, possess, use, process, transport, or cultivate cannabis except where
authorized by R.C. Chapter 3796.
   (G)   It is unlawful for any parent or guardian to knowingly permit their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used by an invitee of the
parent’s child or the guardian’s ward, if the invitee is under 21 years of age,
in a manner that constitutes a violation of R.C. Chapter 3780.
      (1)   A parent or guardian is deemed to have knowingly permitted their
residence, any other private property under their control, or any vehicle,
conveyance, or watercraft under their control to be used in violation of R.C.
Chapter 3780 if they knowingly authorize or permit consumption of cannabis by
underage invitees.
      (2)   Where the residence or other property has an owner and a tenant or
lessee, the trier of fact may infer that the residence or other property is
occupied only by the tenant or lessee.
(R.C. § 3780.36)
   (H)   Penalties.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3796, R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall apply when an adult use
consumer possesses an amount of cannabis greater than the limits set forth in
division (B)(1) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapter 3780, an adult use
consumer who uses adult use cannabis in public areas, or who violates division
(D)(2) of this section as a passenger, is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   (a)   An individual under 21 years of age who knowingly shows or
gives false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining adult use
cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780 is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first
violation, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under
R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
         (b)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the
offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C. Chapter 3780
a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued
by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000,
and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months. The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from
the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). The court, in lieu of suspending
the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or
driver’s license, instead may order the offender to perform a determinate
number of hours of community service, with the court determining the actual
number of hours and the nature of the community service the offender shall
perform.
         (c)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a
false or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver’s license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also
may impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the suspension
or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years. The
court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the
offender to perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with
the court determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the
community service the offender shall perform.
      (4)   An individual who is under 21 years of age and who solicits another
individual to purchase adult use cannabis from an adult use dispensary licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3780 is guilty of:
         (a)   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree; and
         (b)   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (5)   An employee or agent of an adult use dispensary licensed under R.C.
Chapter 3780 who knowingly sells cannabis to an individual under 21 years of
age is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.10(A), or R.C. § 3780.29
(F), is guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03 and the
illegal manufacture of drugs under R.C. § 2925.04.
      (7)   Any individual who violates division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this
section guilty of the illegal trafficking in drugs under R.C. § 2925.03.
      (8)   Any individual who violates R.C. § 3780.20(B) is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples under R.C. § 2925.36 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (9)   (a)   An individual who violates division (G) of this section is
guilty of:
            1.   For a first violation, a misdemeanor of the third degree; and
            2.   For a second or subsequent violation, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         (b)   If a violation of division (G) of this section directly or
indirectly results in great bodily harm or death to any individual, the
individual violating division (G) is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 3780.99)
§ 138.03 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
and 4741.
      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
      (4)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4),
and (C)(5), if the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or II of R.C. § 3719.41, or is
cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, a controlled substance analog, or a compound, mixture
or preparation containing such drugs, possession of drugs is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved is a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance included in Schedule III, IV, or V of R.C. § 3719.41, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs. The
penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)    Except as otherwise provided in the following division,
possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)    Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions,
possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance containing hashish, whoever violates division
(A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty for the
offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)    Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions,
possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams
of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a
liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of
hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (E)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or required by
division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24,
and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in
addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court that sentences an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of
this section shall do the following if applicable regarding the offender:
      (1)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the Clerk
of Court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
      (2)   The court shall suspend for not less than six months nor more than
five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit.
      (3)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
(R.C. § 2925.11)  (Am. Ord. 08-1536, passed 11-4-08) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)
§ 138.04 POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for
the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 138.05 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)    Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (A) or (B) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (D)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
   (F)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (B) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 138.06 ILLEGAL CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. § 2925.03(B)
(1), (2) or (3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to the
extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (C)   Whoever commits a violation of division (A) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person's criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person's
appearance as a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Illegal manufacturing of controlled substances, felony, see R.C. § 2925.04
   Sale or use of drugs not approved by Food and Drug Administration, felony,
see R.C. § 2925.09
§ 138.07 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (C)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 138.08 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (B)    Division (A) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772.
   (C)   (1)    Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing
of drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (b)   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (D)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33 applies.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States that
arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. § 3719.21, the clerk of
the court shall pay a fine imposed for a violation of this section pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18(A) in accordance with and subject to the requirements of R.C. §
2925.03(F). The agency that receives the fine shall use the fine as specified
in R.C. § 2925.03(F).
(R.C. § 2925.36(A) -(D), (F)) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 138.09 FEDERAL PROSECUTION BAR TO MUNICIPAL PROSECUTION.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 138.10 NITROUS OXIDE: IMPROPER DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTION; POSSESSION IN A
MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Improper dispensing or distribution.
      (1)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
         (a)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (A)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (A)(4) of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
      (3)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes
nitrous oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or
distribution of the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require
the purchaser to sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The
person dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the
card. The person shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year
from the date of the transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the
person's business address and make them available during normal business hours
for inspection and copying by officers or employees of the State Board of
Pharmacy or of other law enforcement agencies that are authorized to
investigate violations of this code, R.C. Chapters 2925, 3719, or 4729, or
federal drug abuse control laws. The cards used to record each transaction
shall inform the purchaser of the following:
         (a)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes
of preparing food;
         (b)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health
effects; and
         (c)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
      (4)   (a)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in
this municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
         (b)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more
cartridges of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the
cartridges with a label or other device that identifies the person who
dispensed or distributed the nitrous oxide and the person's business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
   (B)   Possession in a motor vehicle.
      (1)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET, and HIGHWAY have
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      (2)   Unless authorized by this code or by state law, no person shall
possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on
a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
         (b)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of possessing nitrous
oxide in a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (4)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(R.C. § 2925.33) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, see R.C. § 2925.32
§ 138.11 LABORATORY REPORT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another law
enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority of an
institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state and that
is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North Central
Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the purpose of
providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed by the
person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the basis of
the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as
to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and that it contains any
amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of unit
dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight or the
existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this chapter,
R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the possession of
chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, a laboratory report from the Bureau
or from any laboratory that is operated or established as described in this
division that is signed by the person performing the analysis, stating that the
substances that are the basis of the alleged offense have been weighed and
analyzed and stating the findings as to the content, weight, and identity of
each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and
weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training, and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (B)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (C)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the
person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney,
within seven days from the accused or the accused’s attorney's receipt of the
report. The time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (D)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (E)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. Such portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused's analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused's analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused's
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial. If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused's analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (F)   In addition to the rights provided under division (E) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapters 2925
or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any multiple
thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor violation, that
involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice, or, if the
accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the court,
present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis of the
alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further written
request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the
measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at
conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number of
unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
   (G)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled
the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was the
basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511)
§ 138.12 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G)) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking and other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 138.13 USE, POSSESSION, OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment,
product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is not limited to, any of the following equipment,
products, or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender
for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (D)(4) of this section;
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or
carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe;
carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or
chiller.
   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product, or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product, or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product, or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product,
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product, or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product, or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product, or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product, or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product, or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product, or
material.
   (C)   (1)   Subject to divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), and (D)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product, or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, and 4772. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (C)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(3) of this section, whoever
violates division (C)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (C)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   (1)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition
to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
      (2)   If the offender has a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit, R.C. § 2929.33.
      (3)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (G)(3) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
   (H)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the same
meaning as in section division (A) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (B) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (H) does not apply to any person identified in
division (D)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the
possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
      (5)   (a)   Division (E) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of division (H) of this
section.
         (b)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this division (H) when a person seeks or obtains medical
assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person
experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or
a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for that overdose.
      (6)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   Arrest or conviction for a violation of division (H)(3) of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s
criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (7)   (a)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender
for a violation of division (H) of this section, the court shall do the
following, if applicable:
            1.   If the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years.
            2.   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         (b)   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (H)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s
license or permit was suspended under division (H) of this section shall not
file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (H)(7)(b) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.141)
§ 138.14 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (A)    Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, “repackager” and “outsourcing
facility” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (B)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or R.C. §§ 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I or II
controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if the offender, as
a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then R.C. § 3719.99(D)
applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
§ 138.15 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (A)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person's profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (B)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (A)
of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to
prevent any hypodermic in the person's possession from theft or acquisition by
any unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (B) of this section, R.C. §§ 3719.05, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C), (D)
§ 138.16 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in R.C.
§ 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
§ 138.17 UNLAWFUL FURNISHING OF PRESCRIPTION TO ENABLE PERSONS TO BE ISSUED
HANDICAPPED PARKING PLACARDS OR LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   No physician or chiropractor shall do either of the following:
      (1)    Furnish a person with a prescription in order to enable the person
to be issued a standard removable windshield placard, temporary removable
windshield placard, permanent removable windshield placard, or license plates
under R.C. § 4503.44, knowing that the person does not meet any of the criteria
contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   Furnish a person with a prescription described in division (A)(1)
of this section and knowingly misstate on the prescription the length of time
the physician or chiropractor expects the person to have the disability that
limits or impairs the person's ability to walk in order to enable the person to
retain a placard issued under R.C. § 4503.44 for a period of time longer than
that which would be estimated by a similar practitioner under the same or
similar circumstances.
(R.C. §§ 4731.481, 4734.161)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. §§ 4731.99(F), 4734.99(B))
Cross-reference:
   Parking privileges for persons with disabilities, see §
76.05
§ 138.18 PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.
   (A)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this section:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product consisting that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   (a)   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772:
               a,   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)
(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (B)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. of
this section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   (a)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
         (b)   Division (A)(3)(a) of this section does not apply to an
individual under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (B)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   (a)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(1)(b) of this
section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee
of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell,
offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual
an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.    Three and six-tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1.a. and
(B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   1.   Division (B)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, 4741, or 4772.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a) of this section
for a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either
to provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         (b)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
4741, or 4772;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per
violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (C)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (D) of this section:
         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent, or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         SELLER. Means a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (C)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (C)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product to or ephedrine product the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (C) and division (D) of this section.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) of this section except for
purposes of division (D) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (D) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (C) or division (D) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away, or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (D)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (B) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a
pseudoephedrine product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away, or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (B) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (B) of this
section. For purposes of division (D)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (D)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (E)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (E) and (F) of this section:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic system for
tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on a national
basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug Diversion
Investigators or a successor organization.
         PHARMACIST. A person licensed under Chapter 4729. of the Revised Code
to engage in the practice of pharmacy.
         PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license, a
military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor log
exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs indicating
that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or federal law.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
         WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         (a)   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         (b)   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i.
and (E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         (d)   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter
4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (F)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers,
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         (a)   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         (b)   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
§ 138.19 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:
      (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         (a)   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         (b)   Any energy product.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (C) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         (a)   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         (b)   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         (c)   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         (d)   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         (e)   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (D)(2)(a) to (D)(2)(d) of
this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34)
§ 138.20 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DEXTROMETHORPHAN. Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Means a document issued by the federal
government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a subdivision or
agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52, a
military identification card, or any other form of identification that bears
the name, date of birth, description, and picture of the person identified.
      RETAILER. Means a place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (B)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser’s
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser’s
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (B) of this section.
   (D)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
         
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
         
151.   ELECTRICAL CODE
         
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
         
153.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
         
154.   COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT
         
155.   ZONING CODE
         
156.   VACANT FORECLOSED PROPERTY REGISTRATION
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Title
   
150.002   Purpose of Building Code
   
150.003   Scope
   
150.004   Existing uses continued
   
150.005   Adoption by reference; application and purpose
   
150.006   Adoption of Ohio Building Code by reference; application and purpose
   
150.007   Other laws; conflicting provisions
   
150.008   Indemnification
   
150.009   Validity
General Regulations
   
150.020   Maintenance
   
150.021   Alternate materials or methods of construction
   
150.022   Regulation of fences
   
150.023   Dish-type receiving stations
   
150.024   Demolition and moving
   
150.025   Sidewalk plans required
Permits
   
150.035   Permits required
   
150.036   Resident home owner exception
   
150.037   Applications
   
150.038   Drawings and specifications
   
150.039   Emergencies
   
150.040   Failure to obtain permit before starting work
   
150.041   Issuance of permit
   
150.042   Time limitation of permit
   
150.043   Previous approvals
   
150.044   Approved papers to become records of the Chief Building Official
   
150.045   Approval in part
   
150.046   Conditions of permit
   
150.047   Posting of permit
   
150.048   Revocation
Inspections
   
150.060   Inspections to be made; records
   
150.061   Notice that work ready for inspection; required inspections
   
150.062   Action on notice
   
150.063   Covering work
   
150.064   Inspection by others
   
150.065   Plant inspection
   
150.066   Inspection of plumbing and electrical systems
   
150.067   Inspection reports
   
150.068   Final inspection and occupancy
Unsafe Buildings
   
150.080   Right of condemnation
   
150.081   Examination of buildings; uncovering defects; record
   
150.082   Unsafe building orders
   
150.083   Discontinuance of utility service
   
150.084   Disregard of unsafe building order; appeals
   
150.085   Emergency measures; vacating
   
150.086   Costs of emergency work
   
150.087   No liability on public utilities or public authorities
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.100   Chief Building Official
   
150.101   Right of entry
   
150.102   Review of building permit applications for flood damage
   
150.103   Fees and costs
   
150.104   Stop-work orders; unlawful continuance
   
150.105   Violations
   
150.106   Court action not precluded
   
150.107   Civil proceedings
   
150.108   Appeals
Hamilton County Storm Water District
   
150.120   Rules and regulation adopted by reference
Swimming Pool Regulations
   
150.130   Definition
   
150.131   Exceptions
   
150.132   Location on lot
   
150.133   Design and construction
   
150.134   Water supply, treatment and drainage systems
   
150.135   Plumbing Code
   
150.136   Electrical Code
   
150.137   Enclosure devices
   
150.138   Minimum standards
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 TITLE.
   (A)   This chapter including its full contents and all referenced materials,
shall be known and may be cited as the Mt. Healthy City Building Code and shall
be hereinafter referred to as “this Building Code.”
   (B)   These regulations are adopted and ordained by the Council of the City
of Mt. Healthy, The State of Ohio.
   (C)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects covered by this
chapter, shall be hereby deemed repealed from and after the effective date of
this chapter.
(‘74 Code, § 150.01)
§ 150.002 PURPOSE OF BUILDING CODE.
   The purpose of this Building Code is to provide a minimum standard, basic
and uniform series of regulations for buildings, structures, their service
equipment and accessory structures which shall establish reasonable safeguards
for the safety, health and welfare of the occupants, users, the general public
and the property within the corporate geographic limits of the City of Mt.
Healthy, State of Ohio.
(‘74 Code, § 150.02)
§ 150.003 SCOPE.
   (A)   New buildings and structures. This Building Code shall apply to one-,
two- and three-family dwelling houses; residential buildings, non-transient;
residential buildings, transient; hospitals, and homes; penal and correctional
buildings; schools and school assembly halls; places of assembly; places of
outdoor assembly; business buildings; mercantile and office buildings;
industrial buildings; storage buildings; and special occupancy and
miscellaneous buildings; to their accessory structures; and to their service
equipment parts which are hereinafter erected.
(‘74 Code, § 150.03)
   (B)   Existing buildings and structures. This Building Code shall also apply
to existing buildings and structures described in division (A) above and to be
occupied or used as so stated, as if hereinafter the following conditions
apply.
      (1)   A building hereinafter occupied for uses or occupancies described
above, which building was not so occupied when this code became applicable.
      (2)   A building moved into, or moved within, the city.
      (3)   A building occupied for uses described above which is altered or
repaired excluding ordinary repair. Where the value of the work including labor
and materials does not exceed $25, the work may be made without application or
notice to the Chief Building Official, provided such work does not interfere
with the vital features of the building.
      (4)   A building or structure whose occupancy is changed from residential
use or from one to another of the following: business, mercantile, industrial,
storage, assembly, institutional, recreational and miscellaneous occupancy and
use; or whose fire hazard classification is changed.
      (5)   Addition or alteration. An addition or alteration, regardless of
cost, made to a building, shall be made in conformity with applicable
regulations of this Building Code.
      (6)   Installation of service equipment. When the installation,
extension, alteration or repair of an elevator, moving stairway, mechanical
equipment, refrigerating, air conditioning or ventilating apparatus, plumbing,
gas piping, electric wiring, heating system or any other equipment is
specifically controlled by the provisions of this Building Code or the approved
rules, it shall be unlawful to use such equipment until an approval has been
issued therefor by the Chief Building Official or other governing agency having
jurisdiction.
      (7)   A building or structure to be partly or wholly destroyed and/or
removed through wrecking or disassembling of its parts.
(‘74 Code, § 150.04)
§ 150.004 EXISTING USES CONTINUED.
   Except as otherwise herein provided, nothing in this Building Code shall
require removal, alteration, or abandonment of, nor prevent continue occupancy
or use of, an existing building unless such building shall:
   (A)   Be or become unsafe, or unsanitary, according to §
150.020 below.
   (B)   Be or is in violation of orders, or conditions of approval, existing
at the time of the adoption of this Building Code.
   (C)   Be changed, through major renovation, repair, alteration, addition
and/or moved into or within the City of Mt. Healthy, as stipulated in §
150.003(B) at such time it shall be necessary, as per the Chief Building
Official’s judgement, to update the entire existing building and/or its parts,
to insure conformity to the regulations herewithin.
(‘74 Code, § 150.05)
§ 150.005 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE; APPLICATION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the City of Mt. Healthy hereby adopts by
reference and incorporates the Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and
Three-Family Dwellings adopted by the Ohio Board of Building Standards pursuant
to its authority under R.C. § 3781.10. This Code shall regulate the erection,
construction, repair, alteration and maintenance of residential dwellings,
specifically all one-, two- and three-family dwellings in the City of Mt.
Healthy. The Residential Code of Ohio shall be enforced by the City of Mt.
Healthy from and after the effective date of the passage of this section.
   (B)   The Residential Code, as well as the Mechanical Code, as published by
the International Code Council (ICC) and as amended by the Ohio Board of
Building Standards, are hereby incorporated fully herein as if set out at
length.
('74 Code, § 150.07) (Ord. 606-A, passed 7-3-79; Am. Ord. 94-1123, passed 11-1-
94)
   (C)   A complete copy of each code adopted in this section is on file with
the Clerk for inspection by the public and also on file in the law library of
the county, and the Clerk has copies available for distribution to the public
at cost.
(Ord. 18-1860, passed 8-21-18)
§ 150.006 ADOPTION OF OHIO BUILDING CODE BY REFERENCE; APPLICATION AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, there is hereby adopted by the City of Mt.
Healthy, the Ohio Building Code (OBC) as the current edition adopted by the
Ohio Board of Building Standards, Department of Industrial Relations, and as
published in division 4101.2 of the Ohio Administrative Code (O.A.C.), for
application to all buildings specified in O.A.C. 4101:2-105.
   (B)   The Building Code, as well as the Mechanical Code, as published by the
International Code Council (ICC) and as amended by the Ohio Board of Building
Standards, are hereby incorporated fully herein as if set out at length.
('74 Code, § 150.08) (Ord. 606-A, passed 7-3-79; Am. Ord. 94-1123, passed 11-1-
94; Am. Ord. 95-1161, passed 10-3-95)
   (C)   A complete copy of each code adopted in this section is on file with
the Clerk for inspection by the public and also on file in the law library of
the county, and the Clerk has copies available for distribution to the public
at cost.
(Ord. 18-1860, passed 8-21-18)
§ 150.007 OTHER LAWS; CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this Building Code shall be deemed to nullify or
repeal, any provision of the zoning laws or any other laws pertaining to the
location, use or type of construction of any structure or other thing to which
this Building Code may apply, except as such nullification or repeal may be
specifically asserted by specific provisions of this Building Code. In the
event that any provisions of this Building Code establish requirements or
conditions, with regard to any such matters of location, use, or type of
construction, with regard to which any such provisions of such zoning or other
laws of the municipality or political subdivision enacting this Building Code,
also establish requirements or prohibitions, the Board of Appeals as defined in
§
150.108 shall, where questions of such parallelism are raised in specific
cases, determine which of such particular parallel provisions best serve and
preserve the public safety, health, and welfare and such provisions shall in
such extent govern and control, in such and all like cases. In the event such
parallelism exists between this Building Code and any federal or state law, to
which this Building Code must yield, such federal or state law shall control,
but only to the extent that its requirements provide for a higher degree of
safety or strength.
(‘74 Code, § 150.68)
   (B)   Any regulations within this Building Code, or any of its references,
which have direct conflict or indicates a difference in requirements, between
or among various regulations, or references, shall be clarified by; having the
regulation or reference causing greater restriction become the governing
regulation or reference for required compliance, for the conditions affected.
(‘74 Code, § 150.72)
§ 150.008 INDEMNIFICATION.
   By the acceptance of a permit, issued under the provisions of the Building
Code, the owner, or his authorized agent, agrees to hold the City of Mt.
Healthy, its Chief Building Official, and all other city employees free from
any claims that may arise from or be caused by any building operation for which
the permit was granted.
(‘74 Code, § 150.69)
§ 150.009 VALIDITY.
   (A)   In the event any part or provisions of this Building Code be held
illegal or void, such shall not have the effect of making illegal or void any
other part or provisions thereof. It shall be presumed in such event that this
Building Code would have been enacted even had such illegal or invalid parts or
provisions not been originally included, and the remainder of this Building
Code shall continue in full force and effect, regardless of any extent to which
such illegal parts or provisions may be integrated in this Building Code with
such remaining portions.
(‘74 Code, § 150.66)
   (B)   The invalidity of any provisions of this Building Code as applied to
existing buildings and structures, shall not be held to affect the validity of
such provisions in its application to buildings and structures hereafter
erected or altered.
(‘74 Code, § 150.67)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 150.020 MAINTENANCE.
   All buildings and structures, all accessory parts thereof, and all building
service equipment shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All
means of egress, devices and safeguards, and equipment required by this
Building Code shall be kept in good working order.
(‘74 Code, § 150.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.021 ALTERNATE MATERIALS OR METHODS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   The provisions of this Building Code are not intended to prevent or restrict
the use of any material, method of construction, fixture or device not
specifically prescribed herein. The Chief Building Official may approve the use
of such alternate material or method of construction on submittal of evidence
satisfactory to him that such use will result in safe construction at least
equivalent to that required by this Building Code; and that the quality,
effectiveness, fire-resistance and durability of the alternate material or
method of construction are substantially equivalent to that required by this
Building Code. The Chief Building Official may require submittal of detailed
drawings, methods of analysis, test data from acceptable and recognized
sources, and/or any other information necessary to reach a decision.
(‘74 Code, § 150.09)
§ 150.022 REGULATION OF FENCES.
   Fences may be placed on property where allowed by the following regulations
but may not be used on the property lines within 30 feet of the intersections
of two streets if the screening would in any way reduce the visibility of
traffic movement.
   (A)   Front yard. There shall be no fence erected within the front yard
limits.
      (1)   Exception. A decorative type fence shall be permitted with the
following limitations. Height shall be four feet from base to the top of
construction. Fences on the top of retaining walls shall be measured from the
grade on the higher side of the wall. Fences must be made from durable
materials permanently and securely anchored into place. There shall be a
maximum run of 15 feet of decorative fence in the same direction or in combined
runs not to exceed 15 feet total.
      (2)   Corner lots. Those lots which are located at intersecting streets
shall have two front yards each being the portions of the lot that front each
street, and will be subject to the above regulations for fences.
   (B)   Side yard lines. Fences within required side yard lines shall be
limited to a six foot height from base to the top of construction. Fences must
be made from durable materials permanently and securely anchored into place.
   (C)   Prohibited materials. Prohibited for use as fences shall be barbed
wire, or any electrified wire materials.
(Ord. 81-681, passed 8-4-81)
   (D)   Variances. Council may grant such variances to the provisions of this
section as it shall deem necessary and proper. (Ord. 87-826, passed 8-4-87)
(‘74 Code, § 97.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.023 DISH-TYPE RECEIVING STATIONS.
   Dish-type signal receiving stations (hereinafter referred to as stations)
shall be subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   No installation or erection of a station shall commence before a
building permit is obtained for same.
   (B)   Stations shall not be located in the “front yard” or “side yard” as
defined in the zoning code.
   (C)   If stations are located in the “rear yard” as defined in the zoning
code, then they shall be considered as an “accessory structure” as defined in
the zoning code and shall be subject to applicable setback requirements.
(‘74 Code, § 97.02) (Ord. 84-771, passed 8-7-84) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.024 DEMOLITION AND MOVING.
   (A)   As a condition precedent to obtaining a permit, the owner, agent or
person in control of a building or structure to be demolished, razed or moved
shall notify in writing the appropriate utility companies or public authorities
serving the building and/or structure of his intention to demolish, raze or
move such building or structure. Such notice shall request the public utility
company or public authority to disconnect such service. Within seven days after
receipt of such notice the public utility company or public authority shall
disconnect and seal off and so report to the Chief Building Official, in
writing, who shall not issue a permit for such demolition, razing, or moving
until he is in receipt of such a report.
(‘74 Code, § 150.46)
   (B)   Whenever a building is demolished or removed, the premises shall be
restored to a state that is free of dangers or hazards and as approved by the
Chief Building Official.
(‘74 Code, § 150.47)
§ 150.025 SIDEWALK PLANS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every application for a building permit for a new structure to be
built on a lot not having sidewalks along the front lot line shall include
plans and specifications for sidewalks along said front lot line.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Chief Building Official to enforce this
regulation.
   (C)   As used in this section, SIDEWALK shall mean a concrete walkway built
in accordance with sidewalk specifications as contained in the subdivision
regulations as adopted by the city. Grades for sidewalks must be established or
approved by the City Engineer.
(‘74 Code, § 50.16) (Ord. 363-A, passed 11-4-69)
Penalty, see §
10.99
PERMITS
§ 150.035 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Unlawful. It shall be unlawful to construct, alter, remove, or
demolish any buildings, or change the occupancy thereof from one use or use
group to another; or to install or alter any equipment for which provision is
made or the installation of which is regulated by this Building Code, without
first filing an application in writing, with the Chief Building Official, and
obtaining the required permit therefor; except that ordinary repairs as defined
in §
150.003(B)(3) which do not involve any violation of this Building Code shall be
exempt from this provision.
   (B)   Plumbing permits. Plumbing and private sewage disposal system permits
must be applied for and secured at the Board of Health of Hamilton County
Health District.
   (C)   Electrical permits. Electrical installation permits must be applied
for and secured through Inspection Bureau, Inc., of Cincinnati, Ohio.
(‘74 Code, § 150.15)
§ 150.036 RESIDENT HOME OWNER EXCEPTION.
   These provisions shall not be interpreted to require that the owner of a
single-family dwelling shall be registered to personally perform work for the
premises occupied or to be occupied by the owner thereof on such owner’s
established residence. All such work shall be done in conformity with the
provisions of this Building Code and rules or regulations promulgated
thereunder and no work shall be done unless all permits, inspections, and
approvals required by this Building Code are secured.
(‘74 Code, § 150.17)
§ 150.037 APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application for a permit shall be made by the owner or lessee of the
property concerned, or agent of either, or by the licensed engineer or
architect employed in connection with the proposed work. The full names and
addresses of the owner, any lessee, and any applicant if other than owner or
lessee and of the responsible officers of owner and lessee, if a corporate body
or incorporated association, shall be stated in the application. All applicants
for permit shall be duly qualified under applicable laws.
(‘74 Code, § 150.16)
   (B)   (1)   Description of work. The application shall contain a general
description of the proposed work, its location, the use and occupancy of all
parts of the building or structure and of all portions of the site or lot not
covered by the building, the estimated costs of the proposed work, and such
additional information as may be required by the Chief Building Official,
including but not restricted to the working drawings and specifications, plot
and location plans, statement, and such other information as may be required
elsewhere in this Building Code, all of which shall be submitted in triplicate.
      (2)   Affirmation and verification of application. All facts in the
application shall be subject to affirmation or oath. If in the judgment of the
Chief Building Official, the reported data is incorrect, he shall have the
right as a condition prior to issuance of the permit to request the applicant
for authority to have said data verified either by the Chief Building Official,
or by others appointed by him, and when so authorized the cost of such
verifications shall be paid by the applicant.
(‘74 Code, § 150.18)
   (C)   All applications dated on receipt by the Chief Building Official are
examined in order of their receipt, and no application shall be acted on out of
its regular order unless the work involved is of a complex character which
requires prolonged examination. Applications which are returned without action
because of being incomplete, or because of violations of some of the provisions
of this Building Code, shall be taken in order as of the date of resubmission.
(‘74 Code, § 150.19)
   (D)   If the application for a permit, or the drawings, specifications,
details, or statement accompanying the same, indicate to the Chief Building
Official that the work to be done is not clearly or specifically defined and/or
dimensioned or is imperfect, or is not complete, or is not in all respects in
accordance with the provisions of this Building Code, he shall refuse to issue
a permit until such application, drawings, specifications, details, and
statement shall have been made to conform in every respect with the
requirements thereof. All drawings which are not completely dimensioned or
which are illegible shall be deemed incomplete.
(‘74 Code, § 150.23)
§ 150.038 DRAWINGS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   General. The drawings and specifications submitted with the
application for a permit shall be lettered, giving the name and address of the
owner of the building, the purposes for which the building or structure is to
be used, its location, and the name and address of the architect, engineer, or
other person by whom the drawings and specifications were prepared. A minimum
of three sets of drawings and specifications shall be submitted. When quality
of materials is essential for conformity to this Building Code, specific
information shall be given to establish such quality; and in no case shall this
Building Code be cited or the term “legal”, or its equivalent, be used as a
substitute for specific information. The Chief Building Official may waive the
requirement for filing drawings when the work involved is of a minor nature.
(‘74 Code, § 150.20)
   (B)   Requirements.  The drawings to be filed for buildings, structures, and
supporting service equipment shall be consistent with those requirements as
stated in the latest adopted edition of the Ohio Basic Building Code or as
required by the Chief Building Official.
   (C)   Alterations and erasures; exception. It shall be unlawful to erase,
alter, or modify any lines, figures, coloring, written or printed matter
contained upon any drawing or in any specification or statement filed with the
Chief Building Official after it has been approved by him except as follows: If
during the process of the execution of the work or prior thereto, it is desired
to deviate in any manner affecting the construction of other essential or vital
feature of the work from the terms of the application, drawings,
specifications, or statement, notice of such intention, to alter or deviate,
shall be given in writing to the Chief Building Official and his written
consent shall be obtained before such alteration or deviation may be made. If
such change or deviation affects the bearing or structural parts of such work
or its class of occupancy, new plans and specifications therefor shall be
submitted for approval. Notices of alterations and approvals thereof shall be
filed with the original application for permit.
   (D)   Plot plan and/or location plan.
      (1)   The plot plan shall consist of a plan of the lot site upon which it
is intended to build, erect, alter or add to such building or structure, which
plan shall be a property survey bearing the seal of an individual authorized by
law to make such surveys in the state and shall show the location and
dimensions of such lot.
      (2)   The location plan shall show the location of all easements and
rights-of-way on such lot and/or all facilities installed thereon; the widths
of the streets, alleys, or courtways upon which the lot or site abuts; the
sidewalk and curb lines thereof; fire hydrant, the amount of space on such
street or alley that will be used when such space is desired for the storage of
building materials and rubbish; the location of any building or structure on
the lot; the plan of the first story in heavy lines and all projections in
their extremes in broken lines; the dimensions of the body of the building, its
extreme projections and the distance thereof from the adjoining street or lot
lines and the distance between the building or structure and any other building
or structure on the same lot or site. The plot plan may be combined with the
location plan, and such plans shall be drawn to a uniform scale, and the scale
and compass points shall be legibly marked on the plan. Where the plot plan
indicates a conflict with an easement, right-of-way, or facility of a public
utility or public authority, the Chief Building Official shall notify the
utility or authority concerned and allow seven days interval before issuing a
permit to allow the utility or authority to contest the applicant’s right to
build as proposed.
      (3)   If existing streets, alleys, sidewalks, public right-of-ways, and/
or public properties are required for use as storage areas, and/or construction
areas, for work approved under a permit issued, it shall be necessary for the
applicant to request, in writing, for the use of the public areas, as
stipulated above, and to include, but not limit his request to his intent,
extent and time span for said use. If approved by the Chief Building Official,
or his authorized representative, it shall be understood herein that said
applicant shall be liable for any and all makes or manner of activities, within
the public area, he has requested to use, as per the time of use stipulated.
      (4)   For the purpose of this section the record plan for a subdivision
or plat may be used as the required plot plan, provided that it bears the
required seal and provided further that the outlines of the building or
structure are shown on the appropriate lot with dimensions to show its exact
location with respect to the lot lines.
   (E)   Grading information. This Building Code shall require grading
information determining existing and proposed grades of the floors of buildings
and outside earth placement in relation to public streets, sewers, storm
drainage lines, and adjoining properties.
   (F)   Specifications of materials to be used. Each set of drawings submitted
for a permit shall be accompanied by a set of specifications describing all the
materials to be used and the work contemplated to be done, except where the
Chief Building Official determines that the proposed project is of a simple
nature and such information shall not be required.
(‘74 Code, § 150.22)
§ 150.039 EMERGENCIES.
   In case of emergency where there is actual and immediate risk of failure or
collapse of a building or structure or the existence of defective equipment or
service facilities such as to endanger life or health or such other condition
as to require immediate action to make repairs necessary to prevent the
occurrence of such failure or collapse or the occurrence of such danger and
time available is not sufficient to allow the securing of a permit from the
Chief Building Official as required by this Building Code, the person, firm or
corporation required to perform such repairs may proceed to do so after having
first notified the Chief Building Official of such fact without obtaining a
permit as required by this Building Code. In case the Chief Building Official
is unavailable, notice shall be given to the Backup Chief Building Official.
(‘74 Code, § 150.24)
§ 150.040 FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT BEFORE STARTING WORK.
   Any person who shall commence any installation or work for which a permit is
required by this Building Code, without first having obtained a permit therefor
shall, if legally authorized and subsequently allowed to obtain a permit, pay
double the permit fees prescribed, however this requirement shall not apply to
emergency work or installations as provided by §
150.039 when it shall be proved to the satisfaction of the Chief Building
Official that such work or installation was urgently necessary and that it
would have been impractical to have waited the normal time consumed in
application for and issuance of the permit. Nevertheless, even in such
emergencies the required permit shall be obtained without unreasonable delay
after installation starts, and in no case more than three days in which the
office of the Chief Building Official is open for business, or the extra fee as
herein provided shall be charged for the permit. Before issuing such permit,
the Chief Building Official shall take necessary steps to determine whether
work performed prior to the date of permit and inspection conform to this
Building Code. Such steps may include but shall not be limited to directing the
tearing out of sections of surface work for access to subsurface sections,
digging for access to foundations, piping and other subterranean work and the
like. The applicant for the permit shall perform all such work as may be
directed at his own expense.
(‘74 Code, § 150.25)
§ 150.041 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Chief Building Official shall examine or cause to be examined all
applications for permits, and amendments thereto, within a reasonable time
after filing. If the application or the drawings do not conform to the
requirements of all pertinent laws, he shall reject such application stating
the reasons therefor. If he is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the
requirements of this Building Code and all laws and ordinances applicable
thereto, he shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable.
(‘74 Code, § 150.26)
   (B)   The Chief Building Official shall attach his signature to every
permit, or he may authorize a subordinant to affix such signature thereto.
(‘74 Code, § 150.29)
§ 150.042 TIME LIMITATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Permit time limit. Each permit shall have stated on its face the
period of time for which it is valid. Notwithstanding such statement, an
application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been
abandoned six months after date of filing, unless such application has been
diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have been issued; except that for
reasonable cause, the Chief Building Official may grant not more than two
extensions of time for additional periods at six months each. Any permit shall
become invalid if authorized work remains uninitiated, or is suspended,
postponed, or abandoned throughout any six-month period.
   (B)   Permit renewal. When a permit has expired by limitation it may be
renewed by the submission of a letter stating reasons for one six-month renewal
period.
   (C)   Second permit renewal. If a second renewal is desired, another letter
stating reasons must be submitted and a fee paid, as required by the permit fee
schedule.
(‘74 Code, § 150.27)
§ 150.043 PREVIOUS APPROVALS.
   Nothing in this Building Code shall require changes in the drawings,
construction, or designated use of a building for which a lawful permit has
been issued or otherwise lawfully authorized before the effective date of this
Building Code, provided that work under such permit or authorization is under
active prosecution upon such date, or is actively prosecuted within 90 days
after such date, and that all work thereunder is completed, as so authorized,
within one year after the date thereof or within an authorized extension of
time; provided however, that if the work has been diligently prosecuted, an
extension of time shall be granted for the completion of such work which shall
permit its completion in accordance with the original permit.
(‘74 Code, § 150.28)
§ 150.044 APPROVED PAPERS TO BECOME RECORDS OF THE CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   All approved drawings, specifications, and other papers filed with the
application for permit shall be so stamped or endorsed by the Chief Building
Official and one set shall be returned to the applicant for a permit, and the
certified copies of the same shall be kept on the building or work until the
same has been completed. True copies of all or as many of the said drawings,
specifications, and statements as may be required in the opinion of the Chief
Building Official to illustrate the features of construction and equipment of
the building referred to in this Building Code shall be retained by him and
shall become records of his office.
(‘74 Code, § 150.30)
§ 150.045 APPROVAL IN PART.
   The Chief Building Official may issue a permit for the construction of
foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the entire
drawings and specifications for the whole building have been submitted,
provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed to
demonstrate that an unjustifiable hardship will be entailed by the applicant if
he is required to delay initiation of said work until completion and approval
of the drawings and specifications together with such other data as may be
necessary to demonstrate that the work will comply with all the pertinent
requirements of this Building Code. The holder of such permit for the
foundations or other part of the building or structure shall proceed at his own
risk with the building operation and without assurance that a permit for the
entire structure will be granted.
(‘74 Code, § 150.33)
§ 150.046 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Payment of fees. No permit shall be issued, and no amendment to a
drawing, application for permit, or other submission, shall be approved or
certified, until the fees prescribed in §
150.103 have been paid.
   (B)   Compliance with code. A permit shall be an authorization to proceed
with the work but shall not be construed as authority to violate, cancel, or
set aside any of the provisions of this Building Code, zoning laws or other
applicable laws except as specifically allowed by lawfully granted modification
or deviation.
   (C)   Compliance with permit. All work shall conform to the approved
application and drawings for which the permit has been issued and any approved
amendments thereto.
   (D)   Compliance with plot plan. All new work shall be located in accordance
with the approved plot and location plan.
   (E)   Change in plot. No lot or plot shall be changed, increased or
diminished in area from that shown in the application for permit without first
amending the application to that effect, except where the change is caused by
reason of an official street opening, street widening or other public
improvement.
   (F)   Lot lines. It shall be illegal to sell, lease or provide an easement
over any land at any time if by virtue of such sale, lease or easement any
clearance, yard or court space prescribed by this Building Code or the zoning
or other applicable laws for fire clearance or for other legal purposes is
reduced to such extent as to constitute a violation of this Building Code or
such other laws, and such sale, lease or easement shall be deemed null and void
until adequate provisions are made to bring the property into conformance with
this Building Code or the applicable law.
(‘74 Code, § 150.35)
§ 150.047 POSTING OF PERMIT.
   A true copy of the building permit or such other instrument serving the
purpose as the Chief Building Official may authorize or approve shall be kept
on the site of operations open to public inspection during the entire time of
prosecution of the work and until the completion of same.
(‘74 Code, § 150.34)
§ 150.048 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Chief Building Official may revoke any permit or approval issued
under the provisions of this Building Code or may stop the work for any of the
following reasons:
      (1)   Whenever the continuance of any work becomes dangerous to life or
property.
      (2)   Whenever there is a violation of any condition on which the
issuance of the permit or approval was based.
      (3)   Whenever any false statement or misrepresentation has been made
upon the application, drawings, or specifications on which the issuance of the
permit or approval was based. The adjudication order shall be issued under the
requirements of the latest adopted edition of the Ohio Basic Building Code. An
appeal may be made to this order through the Ohio Board of Building Appeals, or
for one- two- and three-family, through the Mt. Healthy Planning Commission.
   (B)   The revocation notice of the permit in every instance shall be in
writing and shall be served upon the holder of the permit, the owner, his
agent, or the person having charge of the work. Any revocation notice shall
also be posted upon the building or structure in question by the Chief Building
Official. After the notice is received or posted, it shall be unlawful for any
person to proceed with any operation for which such permit was issued. No part
of the fees for such permit shall be returned. Revocation of a permit shall be
subject to appeal to the Board of Appeals as defined in §
150.108.
(‘74 Code, § 150.31)
   (C)   The Chief Building Official may rescind the revocation of the permit
in which case the applicant shall pay a fee equal to the original permit fee or
as stipulated in the permit fee schedule.
(‘74 Code, § 150.32)
INSPECTIONS
§ 150.060 INSPECTIONS TO BE MADE; RECORDS.
   Before issuing a permit for the construction, enlargement, alteration,
repair, removal, demolition, or change of use of any building, structure, or
site, the Chief Building Official may examine or cause to be examined any or
all such buildings, structures and sites in connection with which an
application has been filed for such a permit. He shall conduct or cause to be
conducted such inspections from time to time during, and upon completion of,
the work for which he issues such permits as he may deem necessary to determine
that the work is in accordance with the requirements of this Building Code and
the approved drawings and specifications; and he shall maintain a record of all
such examinations and inspections and of all violations of this Building Code.
(‘74 Code, § 150.36)
§ 150.061 NOTICE THAT WORK READY FOR INSPECTION; REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Notification by permit holder. It shall be the responsibility of the
holder of a permit to notify the Chief Building Official when work is ready for
the various inspections required by the terms of the permit or the approved
rules. Such notice shall be given within a reasonable time within which such
inspection is desired but in no event shall be less than 24 hours. Notice given
on a Friday or on a day prior to a legal holiday shall not constitute notice
for inspection on a Saturday, Sunday or holiday. Before giving such notice, the
holder of the permit shall first test the work and satisfy himself that it
conforms to the approved plans and specifications and the requirements of this
Building Code.
   (B)   Required inspections.  
      (1)   After the excavation has been completed and before any footings
have been poured, or any sub- grade work is again covered.
      (2)   (a)   After the roof and all rough framing are in place and before
such work and materials are concealed, before any structural members are
concealed, and after all reinforcing steel in concrete work is in place, and
before concrete is placed.
         (b)   In the case of prefabricated buildings, the Chief Building
Official shall be notified of the day on which the major part of the erection
shall take place.
      (3)   After the building is complete and is ready for occupancy or use.
(‘74 Code, § 150.37)
§ 150.062 ACTION ON NOTICE.
   Upon receipt of notice that work is ready for inspection the Chief Building
Official shall inspect, or cause such work to be inspected, as soon as
reasonably practicable; however, failure of the Chief Building Official to make
a prompt inspection shall not be deemed justification for covering work without
inspection when such work is required under the terms of the permit to be
inspected before being covered.
(‘74 Code, § 150.38)
§ 150.063 COVERING WORK.
   It shall be a violation of this Building Code to cover prior to inspection
any work required to be inspected under the provisions of a permit, the
approved rules, or this Building Code, irrespective of any penalties for such
violation. The Chief Building Official may require the holder of the permit to
uncover any such work for inspection and the cost of uncovering such work and
of replacing the cover after the work has been found satisfactory shall be
borne by the holder of the permit.
(‘74 Code, § 150.39)
§ 150.064 INSPECTION BY OTHERS.
   The Chief Building Official, at his discretion, may accept, in lieu of
inspection by himself or his inspectors, a certificate or report of inspection
for any part or parts of the work made by any architect, engineer, board or
bureau recognized by him as an authority in such part or parts of the work,
providing such certificate or report shall show that the said part or parts of
the work conform to the requirements of this Building Code and all other laws
and ordinances relating to the same subject matter.
(‘74 Code, § 150.40)
§ 150.065 PLANT INSPECTION.
   The Chief Building Official may inspect or cause to be inspected at the
point of the manufacture or fabrication, all materials and assemblies which
this Building Code, or rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, requires
to be inspected at such points. Plant inspection will not be requested:
   (A)   Where materials, assemblies, service equipment, and accessories are
accessible for inspection at the job site.
   (B)   Where licensed professional engineers, architects (registered in
Ohio), or others as approved, inspect and furnish a report of inspection to the
Chief Building Official that the material, assembly, service equipment, and
accessories are in compliance with this Building Code.
   (C)    Where materials, assemblies, service equipment and accessories are
designed and manufactured under the supervision of the licensed professional
engineer or architect (registered in Ohio) and are in conformance with this
Building Code, the licensed professional engineer or architect shall furnish in
writing a certification that the assembly in question has been inspected and
meets all the requirements of this Building Code if so requested by the Chief
Building Official.
(‘74 Code, § 150.41)
§ 150.066 INSPECTION OF PLUMBING AND ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   The Board of Health of the Hamilton County Health District will make
inspections of the installation, construction, alterations or additions to, or
the repair of any plumbing, drainage or sewage disposal system. Such inspection
will be in accordance with all of the provisions for such inspections required
by the Board of Health of the Hamilton County Health District. No such plumbing
work shall be used until inspected and approved.
(‘74 Code, § 150.42)
   (B)   The Inspection Bureau, Inc., will make inspections of the
installation, construction, alterations to and additions to, or the repair of
any electrical system. Such inspections will be in accordance with the
applicable code requirements.
(‘74 Code, § 150.43)
§ 150.067 INSPECTION REPORTS.
   All inspection reports shall be in writing and certified by the public
inspector, or by the person or a responsible member of the service, making the
inspection. A label or recognized mark of approval permanently fixed to a
product indicating that the factory inspection has been made shall be accepted
in lieu of any written report required above.
(‘74 Code, § 150.44)
§ 150.068 FINAL INSPECTION AND OCCUPANCY.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief Building Official to make, or cause to be
made, a final inspection and examination of all buildings or structures
included under the various classifications of this Building Code, hereafter
erected, constructed, altered, repaired or added to, before any such building
or structure is occupied, and if such a building has been found to have been
constructed in conformity to the provisions of this Building Code, to issue a
written certificate thereof to the owner as set forth below.
   (A)   Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained
by the owner or his agent before which time it shall be unlawful to occupy a
building. The owner or agent will be subject to penalties provided in this
Building Code if he allows the building to be occupied before final inspection
has been made and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. Temporary
occupancy may be authorized as provided hereunder.
   (B)   Compliance with other codes. A certificate of occupancy shall be
issued only when the owner or builder has complied with all provisions of this
Building Code, and any other regulations controlling all or any portion of work
requiring approval for safe and legal occupancy.
   (C)   Work in public right-of-way. Where work in the public right-of-way is
necessary to bring the improvements located therein up to the standards of the
city as established by the office of City Engineer, such work shall be
completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. This work shall
include sidewalks, curb and gutter, storm sewers and appurtenances, and street
paving. All work in the public right-of-way shall be done in conformance with
the specifications and standards established by the City Engineer and on file
in the office of City Engineer. The work required to be done in the public
right-of-way may be deferred for good reason such as when general street
improvements are acceptable to the City Engineer to assure the completion of
such work at a later date are provided.
   (D)   Cost of engineering services. Where engineering services are furnished
in connection with any improvement other than inspection and approval, the cost
of such services shall be paid to the city. Such cost shall be the City
Engineer’s estimate as based on published fees by the Ohio Society of
Professional Engineers.
   (E)   Temporary certificate of occupancy. The Chief Building Official may
issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for a specific time when a building
or structure has been substantially completed so that its occupancy would not
be hazardous or detrimental to the general welfare, and when full compliance
with all applicable codes and permits has not been achieved, and when there are
valid reasons for allowing such occupancy on a temporary basis. Delay of
outside concrete work because of cold weather is an example of a valid reason.
Where a temporary certificate of occupancy is requested by an owner or his
agent, the Chief Building Official shall require that the owner, and other
interested party such as a tenant, sign a statement guaranteeing full
completion of all Building Code regulated items before expiration of the
specified time and an agreement to the cut-off of any or all utility services
without recourse from the date of expiration of the temporary certificate of
occupancy until all work is satisfactorily completed.
(‘74 Code, § 150.45)
   (F)   Change of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for
each building or structure whenever its use is changed from one occupancy class
to another, or for a part of a building or structure, where its use is changed.
Inspections shall be made in every case. The Chief Building Official shall
direct all interested agencies to make inspections within their several
jurisdictions and attest to full compliance before a certificate of occupancy
is issued. The owner shall be obligated to make application for all certificate
of occupancy inspections and pay all charges for same. The owner shall make his
premises comply to this Building Code before allowing this change of occupancy.
See Fees §
150.103.
(‘74 Code, § 150.65)
UNSAFE BUILDINGS
§ 150.080 RIGHT OF CONDEMNATION.
   All buildings or structures that are or hereafter shall become unsafe,
unsanitary, deficient in adequate exit facilities, or which are or shall
constitute a fire hazard, or are or shall become in any way dangerous to human
life or the public welfare, or which, by reason of illegal or improper use,
occupancy, or maintenance, are or shall become unsafe, shall be taken down and
removed or shall be made safe and secure as the Chief Building Official shall
deem necessary, and as provided in this Building Code or any other applicable
laws, ordinances, or resolutions. A vacant building which is open to vandalism
at door, window, or other openings shall conclusively be deemed a fire hazard
and unsafe unless it is guarded in an approved manner.
(‘74 Code, § 150.51)
§ 150.081 EXAMINATION OF BUILDINGS; UNCOVERING DEFECTS; RECORD.
   (A)   The Chief Building Official shall examine every building or structure
reported or observed as damaged, dangerous, structurally unsafe, or
constituting a health or fire hazard; and he shall cause a report of the
examination to be prepared and filed in a docket of unsafe or damaged
structures and premises, stating the use of the building or structure and the
nature and estimated amount of any such damage.
(‘74 Code, § 150.52)
   (B)   Whenever it is established by inspection that definite and serious
hazard to safety or health may exist, the Chief Building Official shall have
the right to require the removal, or may remove, lath, plaster, boarding,
earth, or other cover or obstruction concealing the suspected unsafe condition
to permit adequate inspection thereof, but the extent of the removal shall be
that reasonably necessary for the inspection.
(‘74 Code, § 150.53)
§ 150.082 UNSAFE BUILDING ORDERS.
   (A)   If an unsafe or unsanitary condition is found in any building or
structure, the Chief Building Official shall serve on the owner or his agent a
written order hereinafter referred to as an “unsafe building order.” The unsafe
building order shall identify the building or structure in question and shall
order that particular repairs or improvements be made in order to render the
building or structure safe, secure, and sanitary, or that the building or
structure, or unsafe portion thereof, be demolished, within a specified period
not less than 30 days. The time specified may be extended by the Chief Building
Official for good cause shown. The unsafe building order shall state that if
there is not full compliance with the order within the time specified, or as
extended, the city will repair, alter, or demolish the building or structure,
as called for in the order, or institute legal proceedings to enforce
compliance with the order, unless the owner appeals the order as provided in §
150.084.
(‘74 Code, § 150.54) (Am. Ord. 590-A, passed 3-6-79)
   (B)   If neither the owner, agent, or person in control of such unsafe
building or structure can be found within the county after reasonable diligent
search, the unsafe building order shall be sent to one of them by registered or
certified mail directed to his last known address; and a copy thereof shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on such building or structure; and such procedure
shall be deemed the equivalent of personal notice or service.
(‘74 Code, § 150.55)
§ 150.083 DISCONTINUANCE OF UTILITY SERVICE.
   The Chief Building Official shall furnish a copy of all unsafe building
orders to the public utilities serving that building or structure which may be
affected by the condition responsible for said order, and shall mark thereon a
request that service being furnished the building or structure by said utility
be discontinued when in his opinion the continuance of said service will
constitute a hazard to the public. On receipt of said copy of notice and the
request thereof, any person, firm, association, and the like supplying such
service shall promptly discontinue its supply at the meter in the designated
portion of the building or structure. It shall be unlawful for such person,
firm, association, and the like thereafter to continue such service or to
restore that same until furnished with a copy of the certificate of approval
from the Chief Building Official certifying that an inspection has been made,
that the hazardous conditions have been corrected, and that the affected
service installation has been brought into substantial compliance with the
requirements of this Building Code.
(‘74 Code, § 150.56)
§ 150.084 DISREGARD OF UNSAFE BUILDING ORDER; APPEALS.
   (A)   The owner of any building or structure with regard to which an unsafe
building order has been issued under this Building Code shall have the right to
appeal such order to the Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be filed with the
Chief Building Official, in writing, within 20 days after service of the unsafe
building order. No appeal shall be heard unless it alleges that such order is
unnecessary, improper, or unreasonable, and states specific reasons in support
of the allegations. An appeal shall stay any action by the Chief Building
Official or the city to enforce the order. There shall be no stay of any
emergency action taken pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   On the owner’s or his agent’s failure or neglect to comply with, or on
his use of the unsafe building or structure in violation of, the unsafe
building order issued under §
150.082, the Chief Building Official may make any or all of the repairs or
improvements, or demolish the building or structure, or unsafe portion thereof,
as specified in the unsafe building order. The Chief Building Official may
advise the Director of Law to institute such proceedings as may be appropriate
to compel compliance.
(‘74 Code, § 150.58) (Am. Ord. 590-A, passed 3-6-79)
§ 150.085 EMERGENCY MEASURES; VACATING.
   (A)   When, in the opinion of the Chief Building Official, there is actual
and immediate risk of failure or collapse of a building or structure or any
part thereof, or the existence of defective equipment or service facilities
such as to endanger life or health, or when any structure or part of a
structure has fallen or failed, and the use or occupancy of the structure,
equipment, service facility, or equipment or part thereof would, in his
opinion, endanger life or health, he is authorized and empowered to order and
require the occupants and inmates to vacate the same, or to cease, desist, and
refrain from the use or operation of the building, structure, equipment,
service facility, or part thereof which is deemed dangerous. If such order is
made, he shall cause to be posted a notice reading:
   “This (building) (and) (equipment) is unsafe and its use or occupancy or
operation is prohibited by law.”
   It shall be unlawful for any person thereafter to enter, use, or operate
such structure, equipment, service facility, or part thereof, except to repair
or demolish.
   (B)   The Chief Building Official shall also cause such work to be done as
may be necessary to render such structure, equipment, service facility, or part
temporarily safe with regard to passersby and adjacent properties, as well as
occupants, pending vacation and repair or demolition, whether or not he has
previously issued any order of vacation thereof. In lieu of attempting to make
such structure or part temporarily safe for passersby and adjacent properties,
he may, when necessary for the public safety, temporarily close such adjacent
properties and any affected sidewalks, streets, and other public ways and
areas, and prohibit the use thereof. In causing any such work to be performed,
he shall employ or engage such labor and use or purchase materials as may be
necessary to accomplish the same as expeditiously as possible.
(‘74 Code, § 150.59)
§ 150.086 COSTS OF EMERGENCY WORK.
   Costs incurred by the Chief Building Official in causing emergency work to
be performed under the provisions of this Building Code shall be paid from the
public monies on his certificate. The Director of Law shall institute such
action as may be appropriate to recover such costs from the owner of such
structure or part, and such owner shall be liable for such costs and the cost
of their recovery.
(‘74 Code, § 150.60)
§ 150.087 NO LIABILITY ON PUBLIC UTILITIES OR PUBLIC AUTHORITIES
   No liability shall be imposed on any public service company or public
authority for failure to render service, or for disconnecting service to any
person or place where such failure or disconnection is based on the nonissuance
of a permit or certificate of approval by the Chief Building Official, or on an
order hereunder by the Chief Building Official to disconnect such service,
including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Failure or refusal to render service to any person or place which does
not present a certificate of occupancy as required by this Building Code, or a
certificate of approval as required by this Building Code.
   (B)   Disconnection of service to a person or place on receipt of an unsafe
building order under the provisions of this Building Code.
(‘74 Code, § 150.57)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.100 CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   Duties and powers. The Chief Building Official charged with the
administration and enforcement of this Building Code shall, in the enforcement
and administration of this Building Code, act on any question relative to the
make or manner of construction and the materials to be used in the erection,
repair, removal, demolition, location, use, occupancy and the maintenance of,
addition to, and installation of service equipment in, all buildings and
structures, except as may otherwise be specifically provided for by
requirements of other laws or by other provisions of this Building Code.
Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, the Chief Building
Official shall, whether as included within, or as additional to the foregoing,
perform the following specific duties:
      (1)   Application and permits. He shall receive applications and issue
permits required by this Building Code and examine the premises for which such
permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this
Building Code.
      (2)   Building notices and orders. He shall issue all notices and orders
and do all things necessary to remove illegal, unsafe, and unsanitary
conditions including inadequate exit facilities in buildings or structures
either now existing or hereafter constructed.
      (3)   Inspections. He shall make, or cause to be made, inspections to
insure compliance with this Building Code. All reports of inspections shall be
in writing and signed by the person making same or responsible for making same.
The Chief Building Official may, when so authorized by the Mayor, engage the
services of such experts as he may deem necessary to report to him their
opinion upon unusual technical questions that may arise.
      (4)   Reports. The Chief Building Official shall keep a complete set of
records indicating all permits and certificates issued; all orders or notices
issued; all fees collected; and his activities in general, and shall
specifically, and/or as requested, promptly report to the city and/or City
Council, in writing, with regard to any particular matter of interest or
concern relative to his official duties. In addition to such specifically
requested reports, the Chief Building Official shall submit a minimum of one
report each month and one summary report each year including all relative data
with regard to permits issued, fees collected and legal notices issued.
      (5)   Department records. He shall keep official records of all business
and activities of the Department he has been appointed to administer,
including, but not limited to applications, drawings and specifications
received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of
inspections, and notices and orders issued. File copies of all papers in
connection with building operations shall be retained in the official records
for a period of seven years from date of issue of permit.
      (6)   Periodic review. The Chief Building Official shall periodically,
and at least once a year, review the standards listed in this Building Code.
Whenever a new standard is issued, or when a standard is amended or revised,
the date of which is different from that shown in said appendices, he shall so
advise the city solicitor and bring it up to current standards.
(‘74 Code, § 150.10)
   (B)   Chief Building Official Qualifications. The Chief Building Official to
be eligible to appointment, shall be certified by the State of Ohio as a “Chief
Building Official.” Any services employed by the acting Chief Building Official
such as building inspections, plans examination, permit issuance etc. shall be
performed by persons certified by the State of Ohio to perform such services.
   (C)   Appointment of Chief Building Official and Backup Building Official.
      (1)   Office of Chief Building Official. There is hereby established the
office of Chief Building Official who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to the approval of Council, for a period not to exceed two years, renewable as
approved by the Mayor and Council.
      (2)   Backup Chief Building Official. The Backup Chief Building Official
may employ qualified assistants, when the occasion requires, subject to the
approval of Council, and these services to be paid for by the city in
accordance with a pre-determined hourly or other scale.
(‘74 Code, § 150.12)
   (D)   Chief Building Official; liability. The Chief Building Official, and
any person appointed by him and charged with the enforcement of this code,
acting for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not hereby render
himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage that may occur to persons and/or property as a result
of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit
brought against the Chief Building Official, and/or his authorized
representative, because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any
provision of this Building Code shall be defended by the City Solicitor until
the final termination of the proceeding therewith.
(‘74 Code, § 150.13)
§ 150.101 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Authority. In the discharge of his duties, the Chief Building
Official, or his authorized representative, shall have the authority to enter
at any reasonable time, or anytime demanded by circumstances, any building,
structure, or premises in the interest of enforcing the provisions of this
Building Code.
   (B)   Official identification. The Chief Building Official, or his
authorized representative, shall display his official identification whenever
requested.
(‘74 Code, § 150.14)
§ 150.102 REVIEW OF BUILDING PERMIT APPLICATIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE.
   (A)   The Chief Building Official shall review all building permit
applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine
whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a
proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed
new construction or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and mobile
homes) must:
      (1)   Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure;
      (2)   Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant
to flood damage; and
      (3)   Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood
damage.
   (B)   The Chief Building Official shall review subdivision proposals and
other proposed new developments to assure that:
      (1)   All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
      (2)   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems are located, elevated, and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
      (3)   Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
   (C)   The Chief Building Official shall require new or replacement water
supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or
eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the
systems into flood waters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be
located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(‘74 Code, § 150.145) (Res. 580, passed 6-3-75)
Cross-reference:
   Flood Damage Prevention, see
Chapter 152
§ 150.103 FEES AND COSTS.
   (A)   General procedures. The City of Mt. Healthy hereby establishes the
following schedule of fees and costs for zoning certificates, building permits,
appeals, reviews, and other matters pertaining to this chapter.
      (1)   Payment of fees and costs. The established fees and costs shall
accompany each application for a zoning certificate, building permit, appeal,
review, and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The city will accept
payment of the aforementioned fees and costs via cash, check, money order, and
credit card.
      (2)   Additional fees and costs. In the event the fees and costs
established herein for a particular certificate, application, permit, appeal,
review, engineering or investigation services, legal, including credit card
fees or any other matter pertaining to this chapter is insufficient to pay all
costs incurred by the city, the additional fees and costs shall be chargeable
to the applicant or owner and payable on demand.
      (3)   Fees and costs not returnable. Fees and costs required in any of
these regulations or in any parts of this chapter shall not be returnable for
any cause, regardless of the outcome or decision on any application.
      (4)   Deposit of fees and costs. Fees for all approvals, permits,
inspections, certificates shall be paid to the City of Mt. Healthy as set forth
herein. All fees and costs shall be deposited with the Director of Finance and
credited to the General Revenue Fund of the City of Mt. Healthy.
      (5)   Fees exempted. The city shall be exempt from payment of all fees
established by this chapter.
      (6)   Adjustment of fees and costs. From time to time, and as deemed
necessary by Council, this fee and cost schedule shall be adjusted by Council
and by ordinance. The most recent schedule shall be posted for public
inspection in the office of the Building and Planning Department.
      (7)   Violation. Approvals and permits shall be obtained for all work
subject to approval as set forth in this Schedule of Fees. Any project started
without an approved building or zoning certificate shall be charged double fee.
      (8)   Permit expiration. Work needs to begin on issued permits within six
months from the issued date. If work is not completed within one year from the
date of issuance, a new permit shall be obtained. Permit renewals where no
additional plan review is required may be provided for a one-time renewal for
12 months for a fee equal to half the original permit fee, up to a maximum
$100.
Building Permits
   (B)   Fee schedule for building permits. All applications for a permit shall
include a processing fee equal to one half the permit fee. The processing fee
is not refundable. The processing fee is deducted from the total cost of the
permit.
   Approval of construction documents are subject to a plan review charge as
follows:
      1/2 hr. = $40
      1 hr. = $75
      Each additional 1/2 hr. billed at $30 per 1/2 hr. review time.
   All projects that require engineering review or other professional
consultant services shall have the consultant's incurred costs and full
compensation added to the total cost of the permit.
   Incurring cost for commercial and multi-family subject to review by the Mt.
Healthy Fire Department shall be added to the final cost of the permit.
   The following sections ((1) & (2)) pertain to all plan approvals as
authorized by and regulated by the Residential Code of Ohio and the Ohio
Building Code:
      (1)   Residential work subject to approvals in accordance with the
Residential Code of Ohio (RCO) to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, or
change the occupancy of a building or structure or portion thereof, to include
mechanical systems and other equipment and/or systems regulated by the RCO and
fee schedule set forth in division (G) of this section unless otherwise listed
herein. (1% residential State of Ohio surcharge added to all approval fees):
 
Minimum Approval Fee                $85.00
Revisions (major)                   50% of original permit fee plus
                                    additional plan review as applicable.
Certificate of Occupancy per §     $75.00 (When not part of plan approval)
150.068(A)
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy  $50.00
(each)
 
      (2)   Commercial work subject to approvals in accordance with the Ohio
Building Code (OBC) to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, or change the
occupancy of a building or structure or portion thereof, to include mechanical
systems, fire suppression systems, alarms, and other equipment and/or systems
regulated by the OBC and fee schedule set forth in division (G) of this section
unless otherwise listed herein (3% commercial State of Ohio surcharge added to
all permit fees):
 
Minimum Approval Fee                           $115.00
                                               50% of original permit fee plus
Revisions (major)                              additional plan review as
                                               applicable.
Certificate of Occupancy/Change of Use per §  $125.00 (When not part of plan
150.068(A)                                     approval)
Temporary Certificate of Occupancy (each)      $75.00
 
   (C)   Other fees and costs.
      (1)   Building permits. The estimated cost of construction is to be based
on the total cost of all improvements and construction including labor and
materials. Where the applicant's provided estimated cost on the permit
application differs in a noticeable amount from standard published costs of
construction, the CBO shall charge the permit fee based on an estimated cost
from a standard estimating source. For a project where a fee is not
specifically listed, the CBO shall determine an appropriate fee from a similar
project and in consideration of the time expended to review and inspect the
project.
         (a)   Residential mechanical replacements: The permit fee shall be
$100 for heating or air conditioning and $145 for combined heating and air
conditioning.
         (b)   Commercial mechanical replacements: The permit fee shall be
based on the fee schedule for each unit.
         (c)   Residential re-roofing fee shall be $100; gutters/storm drains
$50: Roofing with structural work shall be based on estimate cost listed in
this fee schedule. Commercial re-roofing fees shall be based on the estimated
cost listed in this fee schedule.
         (d)   For work, not covered by the Ohio Building Code or Residential
Code of Ohio, a separate zoning permit may be required as listed in this fee
schedule.
         (e)   A zoning permit is not included in the issuance of the building
permit. For projects that aren't exempted, a separate zoning permit shall be
obtained.
         (f)   Inspections are required for separately issued zoning/
construction permits. The absence of inspections does not relieve the applicant
of complying with all applicable requirements and as indicated on the zoning/
construction permit or installing all work in accordance with city ordinances
and standard practices.
      (2)   Re-inspection fee. For work found during field inspections to be in
non-compliance with the approved plans or if the work is not ready for
inspection after such inspection was scheduled a re-inspection fee of $75 and
$75 for each trip thereafter must be paid to the City Building Department prior
to any subsequent inspection being made.
      (3)   Copies. Building or zoning ordinance: $25.
      (4)   Moving. A permit shall be required for moving/relocating any
building. The fee shall be $10 for each $1,000 of cost over the first $5,000
with a minimum fee of $115.
Zoning Permits
   (D)   Fee schedule for zoning certificates. The following sections pertain
to all zoning and/or administrative approvals in accordance with the Codified
Ordinances of Mt. Healthy, Ohio.
      (1)   A building permit is not included in the issuance of the zoning
permit. For projects that are not exempted, a separate building permit shall be
obtained.
      (2)   Detached accessory structures: Residential in excess of 200 square
feet and commercial in excess of 120 square feet require a building permit in
addition to a zoning permit.
      (3)   Swimming pools exceeding 24 inches in depth, 150 square feet are
required to be fenced to prevent uncontrolled access by any person from the
street or from adjacent properties. The fence or wall shall not be less than
four feet in height, shall be separate from the wall of the pool, and
maintained in good condition with a self-closing gate and lock.
      (4)   Residential buildings designated by the Residential Code of Ohio.
         (a)   One, two and three family dwellings: $75/unit.
         (b)   Addition: $50.
      (5)   Nonresidential buildings designated by the Ohio Building Code. Any
building or addition thereto up to and including:
         (a)   5,000 sq. ft.: $125.
         (b)   5,001 to 10,000 sq. ft.: $150.
         (c)   10,001 to 15,000 sq. ft.: $200.
         (d)   15,001 to 20,000 sq. ft.: $250.
         (e)   20,001 sq. ft. or more: $275.
         (f)   Hotel or motel:
            for the first two units: $50
            each unit in excess of two: $25
            maximum fee of: $500
      (6)   Calculation of square feet.
         (a)   The square feet of each floor of a proposed nonresidential
building shall be used to calculate the total square feet for zoning
certificate fee.
         (b)   The square feet of a proposed addition to an existing
nonresidential building shall be used for zoning certificate fee.
      (7)   Certificate of use and occupancy (CO). All commercial uses,
structures or change of ownership require a certificate of occupancy before any
structure, in whole or in part shall be used or occupied: $75.
   (E)   Accessory uses, buildings and structures subject to zoning approvals:
(Plan review fees may apply as applicable).
      (1)   (a)   Detached accessory structures: residential (200 square feet
or less in floor area): $50.
         (b)   Detached accessory structures: commercial (120 square feet or
less in floor area): $75.
         (c)   Fences not over six feet high: $50 (res.)/$75 (comm.).
         (d)   Retaining walls not over four feet tall: $50 (res.)/$75 (comm.).
Over four feet, division (G) of this section fee table.
         (e)   Signs, residential (greater than six square feet): $50.
         (f)   Signs, temporary (max 30 days): $50.
         (g)   Signs (face change, painted on structure): $75 ea.
         (h)   Signs, new (building permit also required): $50 ea.
         (i)   Portable storage units (max. seven days on site): $40 per unit.
         (j)   Swimming pools 24 inches in depth 150 sq. ft.: $50 (res.)/$150
(comm.).
         (k)   Driveways (residential): $50.
         (l)   Driveway/parking lot (less than one acre): $75.
         (m)   Parking lot (one acre or more): $150.
         (n)   Tent (max 30 days): $50 (res.)/$100 (comm.).
         (o)   Demolition (res. & comm.): $50 + $10 per 1,000 sq. ft. of total
floor area or fraction thereof.
         (p)   Awnings, canopy, porch, pergolas/gazebos (also requiring
building permit-deck, carport): $50 (res.)/$150 (comm.).
         (q)   Tennis courts: $50 (res.)/$150 (comm.).
         (r)   Home occupation: $75.
         (s)   Fuel oil storage tanks, waste oil storage and gasoline storage
tanks (new installation or replacement above or below ground):
            A.   First tank: $100
            B.   Each additional tank: $50
         (t)   Antennas tower: $50 (res.)/$100 (comm.).
      (2)   Exemptions. No zoning certificate shall be required for the
following accessory/uses: Flower and/or vegetable garden, child's playhouse/
equipment, barbecue ovens/fireplaces, ornamental gates, arbors, home workshops
not conducted for gain, trellises. Also, no zoning certificate shall be
required for:
         (a)   Moderate earth moving and planting as part of landscaping.
         (b)   Outdoor residential landscape lighting along drives, walks, or
patios.
Administrative
   (F)   Administrative fees.
      (1)   (a)   Variance application: $300 (res.)/$450 (comm.).
         (b)   Conditional use, land use application: $300 (res.)/$450 (comm.).
         (c)   Zone change/amendment & PUD application one lot only: $450
(res.)/$600 (comm.).
            Additional fee for each additional lot or part thereof over one
lot: $150.
         (d)   Zoning appeals: $300 (res)/$450 (comm.).
         (e)   Property maintenance appeals: $150 (res.)/$250 (comm.).
         (f)   SFHA Flood Plain Permit: $150.
         (g)   SFHA Flood Plain Variance application: $150.
         (h)   Plat approval (minor—five lots or less): $250.
         (i)   Plat approval (major—more than five lots): $350.
         (j)   Zoning certificates: $75.
         (k)   Zoning verification letters: $40.
         (l)   Zoning code copies: $25.
      (2)   Comprehensive development site plan review. All new developments
shall be reviewed by Planning Commission (underground sprinkler lines not
included). Total costs incurred by city; nonrefundable.
         (a)   Comprehensive development site plan review (one acre or less):
$150.
         (b)   Comprehensive development site plan review (over one acre up to
three acres): $200.
         (c)   Comprehensive development site plan review (over three acres up
to five acres): $300.
         (d)   Comprehensive development site plan review (over five acres):
$500.
   (G)   Table 150.103.6 Building Fees.
28A
                 RESIDENTIAL                    COMMERCIAL
Value Est. Cost  Application Fee Total plus 1%  Application Fee Total plus
                                 Surcharge                      3% Surcharge
              RESIDENTIAL                COMMERCIAL
Value Est.    Application Total plus 1%  Application Total plus
Cost          Fee         Surcharge      Fee         3% Surcharge
to $5,000                                $57.00      $115.00
                                                     $3.45
$6,000                                   $65.00      $130.00
                                                     $3.90
$7,000        $42.00      $85.00         $72.00      $145.00
                          $0.85                      $4.35
$8,000        $50.00      $100.00        $80.00      $160.00
                          $1.00                      $4.80
$9,000        $57.00      $115.00        $87.00      $175.00
                          $1.15                      $5.25
$10,000       $65.00      $130.00        $95.00      $190.00
                          $1.30                      $5.70
$11,000       $72.00      $145.00        $102.00     $205.00
                          $1.45                      $6.15
$12,000       $80.00      $160.00        $110.00     $220.00
                          $1.60                      $6.50
$13,000       $87.00      $175.00        $117.00     $235.00
                          $1.75                      $7.05
$14,000       $95.00      $190.00        $125.00     $250.00
                          $1.90                      $7.50
$15,000       $102.00     $205.00        $132.00     $265.00
                          $2.05                      $7.95
$16,000       $110.00     $220.00        $140.00     $280.00
                                                     $8.40 SurchargeApplication
                          $2.20                      FeeTotal plus
                                                     3% Surcharge
$17,000       $117.00     $235.00        $147.00     $295.00
                          $2.50                      $8.85
$18,000       $125.00     $250.00        $155.00     $310.00
                          $2.50                      $9.30
$19,000       $132.00     $265.00        $162.00     $325.00
                          $2.65                      $9.75
$20,000       $140.00     $280.00        $170.00     $340.00
                          $2.80                      $10.20
$21,000       $147.00     $295.00        $177.00     $355.00
                          $2.95                      $10.65
$22,000       $155.00     $310.00        $185.00     $370.00
                          $3.10                      $11.10
$23,000       $162.00     $325.00        $192.00     $385.00
                          $3.25                      $11.55
$24,000       $170.00     $340.00        $200.00     $400.00
                          $3.40                      $12.00
$25,000       $177.00     $355.00        $205.00     $410.00
                          $3.55                      $12.30
$26,000       $185.00     $370.00        $210.00     $420.00
                          $3.70                      $12.60
$27,000       $192.00     $385.00        $215.00     $430.00
                          $3.85                      $12.90
$28,000       $200.00     $400.00        $220.00     $440.00
                          $4.00                      $13.20
$29,000       $207.00     $415.00        $225.00     $450.00
                                                     $13.50SurchargeApplication
                          $4.15                      FeeTotal plus
                                                     3% Surcharge
$30,000       $215.00     $430.00        $230.00     $460.00
                          $4.30                      $13.80
$31,000       $220.00     $440.00        $235.00     $470.00
                          $4.40                      $14.10
$32,000       $225.00     $450.00        $240.00     $480.00
                          $4.50                      $14.40
$33,000       $230.00     $460.00        $245.00     $490.00
                          $4.60                      $14.70
$34,000       $235.00     $470.00        $250.00     $500.00
                          $4.70                      $15.00
$35,000       $240.00     $480.00        $255.00     $510.00
                          $4.80                      $15.30
$36,000       $244.00     $488.00        $260.00     $520.00
                          $4.88                      $15.60
$37,000       $248.00     $496.00        $265.00     $530.00
                          $4.96                      $15.90
$38,000       $252.00     $504.00        $270.00     $540.00
                          $5.04                      $16.20
$39,000       $256.00     $512.00        $275.00     $550.00
                          $5.12                      $16.50
$40,000       $260.00     $520.00        $280.00     $560.00
                          $5.20                      $16.80
$41,000       $264.00     $528.00        $285.00     $570.00
                          $5.28                      $17.10
$42,000       $268.00     $544.00        $290.00     $580.00
                                                     $17.40SurchargeApplication
                          $5.44                      FeeTotal plus
                                                     3% Surcharge
$43,000       $272.00     $544.00        $295.00     $590.00
                          $5.44                      $17.70
$44,000       $276.00     $552.00        $300.00     $600.00
                          $5.52                      $18.00
$45,000       $280.00     $560.00        $305.00     $610.00
                          $5.60                      $18.30
$46,000       $284.00     $568.00        $310.00     $620.00
                          $5.68                      $18.60
$47,000       $288.00     $576.00        $315.00     $630.00
                          $5.76                      $18.90
$48,000       $292.00     $584.00        $320.00     $640.00
                          $5.84                      $19.20
$49,000       $296.00     $592.00        $325.00     $650.00
                          $5.92                      $19.50
$50,000       $300.00     $600.00        $330.00     $660.00
                          $6.00                      $19.80
$50,000 to                $3.65 per/                 $7.00 per/$1,000 +3%
$100,000      $425.00 +   $1,000 +1%     $595.00 +   surcharge
                          surcharge
$100,000 to               $2.95 per/                 $6.00 per/$1,000 +3%
$500,000      $525.00 +   $1,000 +1%     $995.00 +   surcharge
                          surcharge
$500,000 and              $1.95 per/                 $5.00 per/$1,000 over
greater       $1,200.00 + $1,000 +1%     $3,995.00 + 500,000 +3% surcharge
                          surcharge
(‘74 Code, § 150.48) (Ord. 91-1001, passed 1-21-92; Am. Ord. 02-1394, passed 5-
21-02; Am. Ord. 08-1537, passed 11-4-08; Am. Ord. 09-1547, passed 2-3-09; Am.
Ord. 09-1548, passed 2-17-09; Am. Ord. 21-1956, passed 9-7-21)
§ 150.104 STOP-WORK ORDERS; UNLAWFUL CONTINUANCE.
   (A)   Whenever it shall come to the attention of the Chief Building Official
that work of any kind is being prosecuted contrary to the provisions of this
Building Code, or in an unsafe or dangerous manner, he shall promptly issue a
stop-work order to the owner of the premises involved, or to the agent of the
owner, or to the person doing the work, and shall post at the site of the work
a distinctive placard conforming to the approved rules informing the public and
all concerned that work at the site has been stopped by official order. On
receiving the order, the recipient thereof shall immediately cease the work and
cause the work to be ceased by all other persons engaged thereon. The order may
be oral or written, and shall in all cases state the conditions under which
work may be resumed. The order shall also direct the performance of the work as
may be necessary to remove any violations of this Building Code and any
conditions which the Chief Building Official deems unsafe, and shall describe
what corrective work is necessary.
(‘74 Code, § 150.49)
   (B)   No person shall violate any such order or continue any such prohibited
work after notice, oral or written, that any such order has been issued.
(‘74 Code, § 150.50) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.105 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The owner of a building or other structure or premises in or on which
buildings, structures, service equipment, or machines are installed, altered,
replaced, repaired, or maintained shall be responsible for every violation of
any provision of this Building Code. Any person, firm, or corporation which
performs work for which a permit is required by this Building Code without
first having secured a permit therefor; and every person, firm, or corporation
who shall violate or assist in the violation of any provisions of this Building
Code shall also be responsible and liable for such violation and subject to the
penalty provided by this Building Code, as stipulated in §
10.99. Any person who misrepresents a material fact in securing a permit under
the provisions of this Building Code shall be in violation thereof and subject
to the penalties provided therefor, as stipulated in §
10.99.
(‘74 Code, § 150.61)
   (B)   The Chief Building Official shall serve written notice of violation of
the provisions of this Building Code, or of violation of a detailed statement
or a plan approved thereunder, or a violation of a permit or certificate issued
under this Building Code, on the person(s) responsible for such violation or
for its remedy; and the Chief Building Official shall order the discontinuance
of illegal action or condition or the abatement or correction of any such
violation or the taking of such action as may be necessary to achieve
compliance with this Building Code, and he shall serve written notice of such
order on such responsible person(s).
(‘74 Code, § 150.62)
   (C)   If such violation is not corrected, or such order is not complied with
promptly after service of such notice, the Chief Building Official shall
request the City Solicitor to institute appropriate proceedings at law or in
equity to restrain, correct, abate, or punish such violation of this Building
Code or such order.
(‘74 Code, § 150.63)
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this Building Code, or fails to
comply with any of its requirements, or who shall erect, construct, alter or
repair, or do any work upon, or in connection with any buildings or structures
in violation of a plan therefor, or directive relating thereto approved or made
by the Chief Building Official, or of a permit or certificate issued under this
Building Code, shall be subject to the penalty as set forth in §
10.99. Each day’s violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(‘74 Code, § 150.64(A))
§ 150.106 COURT ACTION NOT PRECLUDED.
   The imposition of any penalty shall not preclude the Chief Building Official
from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of proper
jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation or to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business or use, in or
about any premises, or to require compliance with provisions of this Building
Code or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or resolutions, or orders, or
determination of the Chief Building Official.
(‘74 Code, § 150.64(B))
§ 150.107 CIVIL PROCEEDINGS.
   Whenever the Chief Building Official, or any other officer, charged with the
enforcement of this Building Code, is satisfied that any provision he is
charged to enforce, or any law in the incorporated City of Mt. Healthy
applicable to the subject matter herein, has been violated, or that any order
or direction made, in pursuance of the enforcement of this Building Code, has
not been complied with, or is being disregarded, and whenever civil proceedings
are necessary, in the enforcement of said Building Code or laws, to restrain or
correct the violations thereof, or to prevent the occupancy or use of any
building that is being constructed, altered, or maintained in violation of this
Building Code, he shall apply to the City Law Director, who is hereby
authorized to institute civil proceedings. Such civil proceedings shall be
brought in the name of the City of Mt. Healthy, provided, however, that nothing
in this Building Code and no action taken thereunder, shall be held to exclude
such criminal proceedings as may be authorized by this Building Code, or any
laws, or resolutions, in force in the City of Mt. Healthy, or to exempt anyone
violating this Building Code, or any part of the said laws, from any penalty
which may be incurred.
(‘74 Code, § 150.70)
§ 150.108 APPEALS.
   The Chief Building Official shall determine all questions arising under this
Building Code, and the laws and ordinances in force in the city, relating to
the same subject matter. In case of dissatisfaction with any decision, except
in respect to unsafe buildings beyond repair, and situations about premises
requiring immediate action, the question in dispute may be referred to the
State Board of Building Appeals, except that questions regarding one-, two-,
and three-family residences may be referred to the City Council, who shall act
as a Board of Appeals.
(‘74 Code, § 150.71) (Ord. 82-702, passed 1-19-82)
HAMILTON COUNTY STORM WATER DISTRICT
§ 150.120 RULES AND REGULATION ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   (A)   Council hereby approves and adopts the “Determinations and Background
Pertinent to Storm Water Management in Hamilton County” which are attached to
Resolution 10-1003 as Exhibit A and hereby fully incorporated herein.
   (B)   Council hereby adopts, establishes and implements within the City of
Mt. Healthy, the Rules and Regulations of the Hamilton County Storm Water
District, Article II - Illicit Discharge Regulations, Article III - Earthworks
Regulations, Article IV - Stream Corridor Regulations, and Article V - Post-
Construction Storm Water Quality Regulations (“Post-Construction Regulations”),
as the same are set forth in Exhibit B which are attached to Resolution 10-1003
incorporated into this Resolution as if fully re-written herein.
   (C)   These Rules and Regulations of the HCSWD may be duly amended or
modified by the Board of County Commissioners of Hamilton County, Ohio from
time to time, and Council must adopt said amendments or modifications to these
Rules and Regulations of the HCSWD unless Council enacts alternative rules and
regulations that are mutually agreed to be as stringent or more stringent than
the Rules and Regulations of the HCSWD.
   (D)   Council and the appropriate administrative officials of the city will
cooperate with the HCSWD in the enforcement of the Rules and Regulations, and
shall exercise such legal authority as it may possess which may be reasonably
required to assist the HCSWD in carrying out the intent of the Rules and
Regulations within the municipal corporate boundaries in order to achieve and
maintain compliance with the requirements of state and federal law regarding
the Phase II Program.
   (E)   Council hereby:
      (1)   Authorizes and designates the HCSWD and its authorized designated
agent(s) to act as the Enforcing Official for Article II - Illicit Discharge
Regulations, Article III - Earthworks Regulations, Article IV-Stream Corridor
Regulations, and Article V - Post-Construction Storm Water Quality Regulations
(“Post-Construction Regulations”) within the boundaries of the City of Mt.
Healthy; and
      (2)   Consents to and hereby authorizes the proper administrative
officials of the city to enter into such agreements with the Board as may be
necessary and appropriate for the District to provide such Phase II services;
and
      (3)   Consents to collection of an equitable fee by the District for the
performance of such services from property owners located within the municipal
corporate boundary of the city through property assessments or related charges
and/or from developers within the city for the provision of such services,
which fee shall be reasonably determined by the District in consultation with
the city; and
   (F)   It is the intent of the Council that the remedies provided in this
Resolution and in the Rules and Regulations are intended to be in addition to
and not exclusive of any other remedies as may be available under applicable
federal, state or local law.
(Res. 10-1003, passed 3-16-10)
SWIMMING POOL REGULATIONS
§ 150.130 DEFINITION.
   Any constructed pool which is used or intended to be used as a swimming pool
in connection with a one-, two-, or three-family residence and available to the
families of the household(s) and their private guests shall be classified a
FAMILY SWIMMING POOL. Such family swimming pools shall be in conformity with
the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 150.131 EXCEPTIONS.
   These regulations shall not be applicable for any pools less than 18 inches
deep or having a surface area of less than 150 square feet.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 150.132 LOCATION ON LOT.
   Family swimming pools shall be classified as accessory structures and shall
conform to the Zoning Code of Mt. Healthy except that no wall of a pool shall
be located less than three feet from any rear or side property line.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 150.133 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Structural design. The pool structure shall be engineered and designed
to withstand the expected forces to which it will be subjected and be in
conformity with Chapters BB-5, BB-29, BB-31 OBC.
   (B)   Wall slopes. To a depth up to five feet from the top, the wall slope
not to be more than two feet horizontal and five feet vertical.
   (C)   Floor slopes. The slope of the floor on the shallow side of transition
shall not exceed one foot vertical to seven feet horizontal.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 150.134 WATER SUPPLY, TREATMENT AND DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Water supply. Every family swimming pool shall be provided with a
potable water supply, free of cross-connections with the pool or its equipment.
   (B)   Water treatment. Every family swimming pool shall be equipped with a
recirculating system capable of filtering the entire contents of the pool in 18
hours.
   (C)   Owner instructions. The pool owner shall be instructed in proper care
and maintenance of the family swimming pool, by the supplier or contractor,
including the use of high test Calcium hypochlorite (dry chlorine) or sodium
hypochlorite (liquid chlorine) or equally effective germicide and algicide and
the importance of proper pH (alkalinity and acidity) control.
   (D)   Drainage. Every family swimming pool designed to be emptied of water
shall be equipped to discharge water to a storm water discharge point, a storm
sewer if one is available, to a road-way drainage ditch or street curb if no
storm sewer is available or to a natural drainage ditch on the owner's property
if neither is available.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 150.135 PLUMBING CODE.
   All work shall conform to the applicable provisions of the Ohio Residential
Building Code, Chapter 25.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 150.136 ELECTRICAL CODE.
   All work shall conform to Ohio Residential Building Code, Chapter 34 and the
National Electric Code.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 150.137 ENCLOSURE DEVICES.
   Every person owning land on which there is situated a family swimming pool,
which constitutes an obvious hazard and contains 18 inches in depth at any
point, shall erect and maintain thereon an adequate enclosure surrounding the
family swimming pool area, sufficient to make such a body of water inaccessible
to small children. Such enclosure, including, but not limited to, gates
therein, must be not less than four feet above the adjacent grade; all gates
must be self-latching with latches placed four feet above the grade or
otherwise made inaccessible from the outside to small children.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
§ 150.138 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   When items not required by this section are used in construction or
operation of family swimming pools, or when performance is required by this
section, the standards to be used in determining compliance to this section
shall be those which are established as generally accepted construction and
maintenance principles and/or practices for above-ground and in-ground
residential pools.
(Ord. 21-1950, passed 5-18-21)
CHAPTER 151: ELECTRICAL CODE
Section
   
151.01   Electrical code adopted by reference
§ 151.01 ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The latest edition of the National Electrical Code as adopted by the Ohio
Basic Building Code, and its subsequent amendments is hereby incorporated by
reference, and shall have the same force and effect as if fully set out herein.
A complete copy of this code is on file with the Clerk for inspection by the
public and also on file in the law library of the county, and the Clerk has
copies available for distribution to the public at cost.
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authorization; findings of fact; purpose and objectives
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Lands to which regulations apply
   
152.04   Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
   
152.05   Compliance
   
152.06   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.07   Interpretation
   
152.08   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
152.20   Establishment of development permit
   
152.21   Exemption from filing a development permit
   
152.22   Designation of the flood damage prevention administrator
   
152.23   Duties and responsibilities of building official
   
152.24   Variance procedure
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.35   General standards
   
152.36   Specific standards
   
152.37   Floodways
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION; FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Statutory authorization. Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio
Constitution, grants municipalities the legal authority to adopt land use and
control measures for promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizens. Therefore, City Council ordains this chapter.
   (B)   Findings of fact.
      (1)   The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
      (2)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and
velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood
damage also contribute to the flood loss.
   (C)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the
public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private
losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
      (1)   Protect human life and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water
and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood
blight areas;
      (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in an area
of special flood hazard; and
      (8)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
   (D)   Methods of reducing flood losses. In order to accomplish its purposes,
this chapter includes the methods and provisions for:
      (1)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health,
safety, and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging
increases in flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood waters;
      (4)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
      (5)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
(‘74 Code, § 153.01) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Building Official’s interpretation of
any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in the flood plain within a community
subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a one percent or greater chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year. The base flood may also be referred to
as the 100-year flood.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The usual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report in which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries, and the
water surface elevations of the base flood.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or a preliminary
determination by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in the
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable design requirements for
enclosures below base flood elevation specified in this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. It includes park
trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for
greater than 180 consecutive days.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. This
definition shall exclude any manufactured home park as defined in R.C. §
3733.01, over which the Public Health Council has exclusive rule making power.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
on or after the initial effective date of the city’s Flood Insurance Rate Map,
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimension of a building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial
damage”, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of the state or local Health, Sanitary or Safety Code specifications
which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are
the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions;
      (2)   Any alterations of a “historic structure”, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”; or
      (3)   Any improvement to a structure which is considered new
construction.
   VARIANCE A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this chapter
which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by
this chapter.
(‘74 Code, § 153.02) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
§ 152.03 LANDS TO WHICH REGULATIONS APPLY.
   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the city as directed by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency, including any additional flood hazard areas annexed by the city that
are not identified on the effective flood insurance rate map.
(‘74 Code, § 153.03) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
§ 152.04 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard have been identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report titled
“Flood Insurance Study for the City of Mt. Healthy”. This study, with
accompanying Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps and/or Flood Insurance Rate Maps
dated May 17, 2004 and any revisions thereto is hereby adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter. The flood insurance study is on file at
the City of Mt. Healthy, 7700 Perry Street, Mt. Healthy, Ohio 45231.
(‘74 Code, § 153.04) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93; Am. Ord. 04-1447, passed 5-
4-04)
§ 152.05 COMPLIANCE.
   Unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated
in §
152.21, no structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full compliance with
the terms of this chapter and all other applicable regulations which apply to
uses within the jurisdiction of this chapter.
(‘74 Code, § 153.05) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
§ 152.06 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(‘74 Code, § 153.06) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
§ 152.07 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of this chapter may be in conflict with a
state law, such state law shall take precedence over the chapter.
(‘74 Code, § 153.07) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
§ 152.08 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that the land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or
employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.
(‘74 Code, § 153.08) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in §
152.04. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the Building Official and may include, but not be limited to: plans in
duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and
elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill,
storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location of the foregoing;
and a description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development. If base flood elevation data are
available, the following information is also required:
   (A)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including
basement, of all proposed structures;
   (B)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
structure will be floodproofed; and
   (C)   Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in §
152.36.
   (D)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development and certification by a
registered professional engineer that the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse will not be diminished.
(‘74 Code, § 153.20) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
§ 152.21 EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   An application for a development permit shall not be required for
maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing, or for small
development activities (except for filling and grading) valued at less than
$1,000.
(‘74 Code, § 153.21) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
§ 152.22 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Chief Building Official is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in
accordance with its provisions.
(‘74 Code, § 153.22) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
§ 152.23 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   Permit review.
      (1)   Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
      (2)   Review all development permits to assure that all necessary permits
have been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies
from which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for
obtaining such permits as required including permits issued by the Department
of the Army under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, 33 USC 1 et seq.
and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
      (3)   Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located within a designated floodway. Floodways are delineated
in the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map of the
Flood Insurance Study. Floodways may be delineated in other sources of flood
information. If the proposed development is located within a designated
floodway, assure that the encroachment provision of §
152.37 is met.
   (B)   Use of other base flood elevation and floodway data. Areas of special
flood hazard where base flood elevation data have not been provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency in accordance with §
152.04 are designated as Zone A on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map.
Within these areas, the Building Official shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state, or other sources, including data obtained under §
152.36(F), in order to administer §
152.36(A) and (B); and §
152.37.
   (C)   Information to be obtained and maintained.  Where base flood elevation
data are utilized within areas of special flood hazard on a community’s Flood
Insurance Rate Map, regardless of the source of such data, the following
provisions apply:
      (1)   Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially
improved structures, and whether or not such structures contain a basement.
      (2)   For all new or substantially-improved floodproofed structures:
         (a)   Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) to which the structure was floodproofed; and
         (b)   Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in §
152.20.
      (3)   Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   Alteration of watercourses.
      (1)   Notify adjacent communities and the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources, Division of Water, prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. A watercourse is considered to be altered if any change
occurs within its banks.
      (2)   Maintain engineering documentation required in §
152.20 that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of
said watercourse will not be diminished.
      (3)   Require that the necessary maintenance will be provided for the
altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that the flood carrying
capacity will not be diminished.
   (E)   Interpretation of flood boundaries. Make interpretation, where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of
the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the
interpretation as provided in §
152.24.
(‘74 Code, § 153.23) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
§ 152.24 VARIANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Appeal Board.
      (1)   The Planning Commission as established by the city shall hear and
decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this
chapter.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Building Official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.
      (3)   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Commission or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Hamilton County Court of Common
Pleas, as provided in R.C. Chapter 2506.
      (4)   In passing upon such applications, the Planning Commission shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified
in other sections of this chapter, and:
         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (e)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         (f)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and flood plain management program for that area;
         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         (k)   The cost of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (5)   Upon consideration of the factors of subdivision (4) of this
division and the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Commission may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further
the purposes of this chapter.
      (6)   The Building Official shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
upon request.
   (B)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items (a) through (k) in division (A)(4)
have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre,
the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (2)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of
Historic Structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
      (3)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in this chapter,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create
nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public as identified in
division (A), or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (6)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance
will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest
floor elevation.
(‘74 Code, § 153.24) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.35 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
   (A)   Anchoring.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored
to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
      (2)   All manufactured homes not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised
Code pertaining to manufactured home parks shall be anchored to prevent
flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Methods
of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors.
   (B)   Construction materials and methods.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
   (C)   Utilities.
      (1)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
      (2)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
      (3)   Individual waste water treatment systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (D)   Subdivision proposals.
      (1)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
      (2)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (3)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
      (4)   All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home
subdivisions, shall meet the specific standards of §
152.36(F).
(‘74 Code, § 153.35) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.36 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
provided as set forth in §
152.04 or §
152.23, or division (F) of this section, the following provisions are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement,
elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level
of the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall:
      (1)   Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted
standards of practice for meeting the standards of this subdivision. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in §
152.20(C).
   (C)   Accessory structures. An exemption to the elevation or dry
floodproofing standards may be granted for accessory structures (that is,
sheds, detached garages) containing 576 square feet or less in gross floor
area. Such structures must meet the encroachment provisions of §
152.37 and the following additional standards:
      (1)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
      (2)   They shall be designed to have low flood damage potential;
      (3)   They shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to
offer the minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;
      (4)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation; and
      (5)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall
be elevated or floodproofed.
   (D)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. The following standards
shall apply to all new and substantially improved manufactured homes not
subject to the manufactured home requirements of R.C. § 3733.01 et seq.:
      (1)   Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with §
152.35.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such
that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at the base flood elevation.
   These standards also apply to recreational vehicles that are either located
on sites for 180 days or more, or are not fully licensed and ready for highway
use.
   (E)   Enclosures below the lowest floor. The following standards apply to
all new and substantially improved residential and nonresidential structures
which are elevated to the base flood elevation using pilings, columns, or
posts. Fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry
and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must:
      (1)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect; or
      (2)   Must meet or exceed the following criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided;
         (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
openings provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of flood
waters.
   (F)   Subdivisions and large developments. In all areas of special flood
hazards where base flood elevation data have not been provided in accordance
with §
152.04 or §
152.23, the following standards apply to all subdivision proposals, including
manufactured home subdivisions, and other proposed developments containing at
least 50 lots or five acres (whichever is less):
      (1)   The applicant shall provide base flood elevation data performed in
accordance with standard engineering practices;
      (2)   If subdivision (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §
152.35 and §
152.36.
(‘74 Code, § 153.36) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.37 FLOODWAYS.
   (A)   Areas with floodways. The Flood Insurance Study referenced in §
152.04 identifies a segment within areas of special flood hazard known as
floodways. Floodways may also be delineated in other sources of flood
information as specified in §
152.23. The floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of
flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential.
The following provisions apply within all delineated floodway areas:
      (1)   Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements, and other development unless hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis performed in accordance with standard engineering practices
demonstrates that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   If subdivision (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of §
152.36.
      (3)   Any encroachment within the floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations can only be granted upon the prior approval
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Such requests must be submitted by
the Building Official to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and must meet
the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program.
   (B)   Areas without floodways. In all areas of special flood hazards where
FEMA has provided base flood elevation data as set forth in §
152.04, but FEMA has not delineated a floodway, the following provisions apply:
      (1)   New construction, substantial improvements, or other development
(including fill) shall only be permitted if it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
      (2)   If subdivision (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard
reduction provisions of this subchapter.
(‘74 Code, § 153.37) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Any
person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its
requirements (including violations of conditions of and safeguards established
in connection with conditions) shall upon conviction thereof be fined or
imprisoned as provided by the laws of the city. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violations.
(‘74 Code, § 153.99) (Ord. 93-1055, passed 2-23-93)
CHAPTER 153: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
153.01   Adoption of 2003 edition
   
153.02   Revisions and amendments
Administration
   
153.10   General
   
153.11   Applicability
   
153.12   Department of Property Maintenance Inspection
   
153.13   Duties and powers of the Code Official
   
153.14   Approval
   
153.15   Violations
   
153.16   Notices and orders
   
153.17   Unsafe structures and equipment
   
153.18   Emergency measures
   
153.19   Demolition
   
153.20   Means of appeal
Definitions
   
153.25   General
   
153.26   General definitions
General Requirements
   
153.30   General
   
153.31   Exterior property areas
   
153.32   Swimming pools, spas and hot tubs
   
153.33   Exterior structure
   
153.34   Interior structure
   
153.35   Handrails and guardrails
   
153.36   Rubbish and garbage
   
153.37   Extermination
Light, Ventilation and Occupancy Limitations
   
153.40   General
   
153.41   Light
   
153.42   Ventilation
   
153.43   Occupancy limitations
Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements
   
153.50   General
   
153.51   [P] Required facilities
   
153.52   [P] Toilet rooms
   
153.53   [P] Plumbing systems and fixtures
   
153.54   Water system
   
153.55   [P] Sanitary drainage system
   
153.56   [P] Storm drainage
Mechanical and Electrical Requirements
   
153.60   General
   
153.61   Heating facilities
   
153.62   Mechanical equipment
   
153.63   Electrical facilities
   
153.64   Electrical equipment
   
153.65   Elevators, escalators and dumbwaiters
   
153.66   Duct systems
Fire Safety Requirements
   
153.70   General
   
153.71   [F] Means of egress
   
153.72   [F] Fire-resistance ratings
   
153.73   [F] Fire protection systems
Appendix:Referenced standards
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.01 ADOPTION OF 2003 EDITION.
   That a certain document, a copy of which is on file in the office of the
Building Department of the City of Mt. Healthy, being marked and designated as
the 2003 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, as published
by The International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as amended as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Mt. Healthy, in the State of Ohio, for
regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property,
buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and
facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the
condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and
the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for
the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property
Maintenance Code on file in the office of the City of Mt. Healthy are hereby
referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this
chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes provided in this
chapter.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.02 REVISIONS AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The following sections of the 2003 International Property Maintenance
Code are hereby revised by modifying wording as shown in this chapter.
   Section   101.1, 101.3
   Section   102.3, 102.4
   Section   103.5
   Section   106.4, 106.5
   Section   111.2
   Section   201.3
   Section   401.3
   Section   602.2, 602.3, 602.4
   Section   604.2
   Section   702.1, 702.2
   Section   704.1, 704.2
   (B)   The following sections of the 2003 International Property Maintenance
Code are hereby amended by insertion of additional wording as shown in this
chapter.
   Section   104.2 Rule-Making: Wording
   Section   106.4 Violation Penalties
   Section   202   General definitions: Structure; yard waste or green waste.
   Section   302.8 Motor Vehicle or Vehicle
   Section   302.10 Household: Composting
   Section   303.2 Enclosures
   Section   304.2 Protective Treatment
   Section   304.14 Insect screens
   Section   307.2 Disposal of rubbish
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03; Am. Ord. 07-1507, passed 6-19-07)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 153.10 GENERAL.
   101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance
Code of The City of Mt. Healthy, hereinafter referred to as “this code”.
   101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing
residential and nonresidential structures and all existing premises and
constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises, structures,
equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation,
protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards,
and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of owners, operators
and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for
administration, enforcement and penalties.
   101.3 Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent,
which is to ensure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are
affected by the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises.
Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall
be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as
required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of occupancy in
existing buildings shall comply with the Ohio Building Code.
   101.4 Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of
this code is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.11 APPLICABILITY,
   102.1 General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures and premises, as set forth in §
153.10. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify
different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
   102.2 Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structures or
premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good
working order. No owner, operator or occupancy shall cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except
for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are
in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to provide the
basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and
devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner
or the owner’s designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of
buildings, structures and premises.
   102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a
structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the Ohio Building Code. Nothing in this code shall
be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the City of Mt.
Healthy Zoning Code.
   102.4 Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed
to abolish or impair existing remedies of the City of Mt. Healthy or its
officers or agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any structure,
which is dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
   102.5 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall
be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
   102.6 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory
for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such
buildings or structures are judged by the Code Official to be safe and in the
public interest of health, safety and welfare.
   102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in
this code shall be those that are listed in the Appendix and considered part of
the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced
standards, the provisions of this code shall apply.
   102.8 Requirements not covered by code.  Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or
equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the Code Official.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.12 DEPARTMENT OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION.
   103.1 General. The Department of Property Maintenance Inspection is hereby
created and the executive official in charge thereof shall be known as the Code
Official.
   103.2 Appointment. The Code Official shall be appointed by the chief
appointing authority of the jurisdiction; and the Code Official shall not be
removed from office except for cause and after full opportunity to be heard on
specific and relevant charges by and before the appointing authority.
   103.3 Deputies. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this
jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, the Code
Official shall have the authority to appoint a Deputy Code Official, other
related technical officers, inspectors and other employees.
   103.4 Liability. The Code Official, officer or employee charged with the
enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby
be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
   Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act
performed by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and
under the provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative
of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The Code
Official or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit or
proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this code; and
any officer of the Department of Property Maintenance Inspection, acting in
good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed
under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the
performance of official duties in connection therewith.
   103.5 Fees. No fees shall be charged.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.13 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL.
   104.1 General. The Code Official shall enforce the provisions of this code.
   104.2 Rule-making authority. The Code Official shall have authority as
necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to
adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the
provisions of this code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate
requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such
rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance
requirements specifically provided for in this code, or of violating accepted
engineering methods involving public safety. The following subsections shall be
used as the enforcement policy for this code.
   104.2.1 Identifying violations.
      (a)   Complaints: The following method shall be utilized in prioritizing
registered complaints: (Note: all complaints shall be logged into the current
filing method)
Highest priority: Life Safety issues (Identity of complainant is not required)
Next: Identified complainant who is willing to testify in legal proceedings.
Next: Identified complainant who is not willing to testify in legal
proceedings.
Next: Unidentified complainant.
   (b)   Field survey: Surveys of the city shall be performed as outlined in
the code official’s city-wide schedule. This schedule shall originate from the
Property Maintenance Inspector and approved by the Chief Building Official. The
Inspector shall classify the violations and pursue compliance as outlined in
this section in the following manner:
 
Condition Rating Criteria
Condition Rating  Criteria
1. Sound          The structure, yard, walks and steps are well maintained and
                  no exterior code violations are apparent.
                  Minor maintenance task(s) need to be preformed; spot painting
2. Minor repair   of exterior siding, trim, doors, gutters and/or downspouts;
                  the replacement of rusted gutters and downspouts; minor
                  repair to steps, yard, walks, driveways and/or fences.
                  More extensive repairs need to be made, such as painting the
                  complete building, re-roofing, installing all new gutters
3. Major repair   and/or downspouts, replace or repair structure at egress
                  locations, replace concrete flat work, extensive rubbish in
                  yard area and general conditions of the site must be attended
                  to.
                  The repairs are more costly than the major repair category
                  but reinvestment still feasible. Replacing such items as
4. Rehabilitation windows, doors, roof sheathing, or replacing exterior egress
                  elements, rebuilding sections of foundation and chimney may
                  be necessary.
                  Rehabilitation of these structures is generally more
5. Dilapidated    expensive due to interior deterioration; exterior repairs
                  similar to those cited in condition #4 structures are
                  typically required.
 
   (c)   Data and code enforcement activities: Data from the surveys is
aggregated for each inspection area. The inspector then targets the structure
and premises that rated a 3, 4, or 5 for legal orders and prosecution efforts.
The inspector should issue orders for exterior renovations in spring or early
summer to give the owner the bulk of construction season to make the necessary
repairs. Those properties that receive a 2 rating should be encouraged by the
Property Maintenance Inspector to make the necessary repairs before they fall
into a higher rating.
   104.3 Inspections. The Code Official shall make all of the required
inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be
certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The Code Official is authorized to engage such expert
opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise,
subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
   104.4 Right of entry. The Code Official is authorized to enter the structure
or premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not
obtained, the Code Official is authorized to pursue recourse as provided by
law.
   104.5 Identification. The Code Official shall carry proper identification
when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this
code.
   104.6 Notices and orders. The Code Official shall issue all necessary
notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.
   104.7 Department records. The code official shall keep official records of
all business and activities of the department specified in the provisions of
this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records as long as
the building or structure to which such records relate remains in existence,
unless otherwise provided for by other regulations.
   104.8 Coordination of inspections. Whenever in the enforcement of this code
or another code or ordinance, the responsibility of more than one code official
of the jurisdiction is involved, it shall be the duty of the code officials
involved to coordinate their inspections and administrative orders as fully as
practicable so that the owners and occupants of the structure shall not be
subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders.
Whenever an inspector from any agency or department observes an apparent or
actual violation of some provision of some law, ordinance or code not within
the inspector’s authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings
to the code official having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.14 APPROVAL.
   105.1 Modifications. Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this code, the Code Official shall have the
authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the Code
Official shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict
letter of this code impractical and the modification is in compliance with the
intent and purpose of this code, and that such modification does not lessen
health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting
modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.
   105.2 Alternative materials, methods and equipment. The provisions of this
code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code,
provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material
or method of construction shall be approved where the Code Official finds that
the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the
provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is, for
the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code
in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
   105.3 Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or
method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the Code Official
shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance
at no expense to the City of Mt. Healthy.
      105.3.1 Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code or
by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted
test methods, the Code Official shall be permitted to approve appropriate
testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
      105.3.2 Test reports. Reports of tests shall be retained by the Code
Official for the period required for retention of public records.
   105.4 Material and equipment reuse. Materials, equipment and devices shall
not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been
reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working
condition and approved.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.15 VIOLATIONS.
   106.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation
to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
   106.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official shall serve a notice of
violation or order in accordance with §
153.16.
   106.3 Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice
of violation or order served in accordance with §
153.16 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and the violation shall be
deemed a strict liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied
with, the Code Official shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in
equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal
or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any
action taken by the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be
charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall
be a lien upon such real estate.
   106.4 Violation penalties. Any person, who shall violate a provision of this
code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof,
shall be prosecuted within the limits as provided herein. Each day that a
violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate
offense. Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty to a Property Maintenance Code
violation shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor. However:
   (a)   Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty of a second offense not sooner
than 20 days and not later than one year of the same section of the Property
Maintenance Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (b)   Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty of a third offense not sooner
than 20 days and not later than one year of the same section of the Property
Maintenance Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (c)   Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty of a fourth offense not sooner
than 20 days and not later than one year of the same section of the Property
Maintenance Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (d)   Whoever is convicted or pleads guilty of a fifth offense not sooner
than 20 days and not later than one year of the same section of the Property
Maintenance Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   106.5 Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the City of Mt. Healthy from
instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an
illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or
premises.
   106.6 Notice of violation; time allotted for abatement.
   (a)   In addition to the penalties provided for the violation of this
subchapter, the Code Official may cause written notice of the section violation
of this subchapter to be served personally upon the owner, occupant or the
person having charge of the property involved, by sending said notice to that
person by certified or priority mail, or by posting a copy thereof in a
conspicuous place on the premises or property involved. This notice shall state
the nature of the violation and the time within which it shall be abated (not
less than seven days). No person so notified shall fail or refuse to comply
with this notice.
   (b)   Subsequent violations within one calendar year of the initial notice
as specified in 106.6(a) may be subject to immediate abatement by the city as
per 106.5 without further notification.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03; Am. Ord. 07-1507, passed 6-19-07; Am. Ord. 16-
1772, passed 2-16-16) Penalty see §
10.99
§ 153.16 NOTICES AND ORDERS.
   107.1 Notice to person responsible.  Whenever the Code Official determines
that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a
violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in
Sections 107.2 and 107.3 to the person responsible for the violation as
specified in this code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply
with Section 108.3.
   107.2 Form. Such notice prescribed in Section 107.1 shall be in accordance
with all of the following:
      1.   Be in writing.
      2.   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.
      3.   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being issued.
      4.   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this code.
      5.   Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
      6.   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
Section 106.3.
   107.3 Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
if a copy thereof is:
      1.   Delivered personally;
      2.   Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the last known
address; or
      3.   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered,
a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice.
   107.4 Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall
be as set forth in Section 106.4.
   107.5 Transfer of ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a
notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied
with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the Code Official and shall furnish to the Code Official a signed and
notarized statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee,
acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and
fully accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections
or repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.17 UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT.
   108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the Code Official
to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is
found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of
this code.
      108.1.1 Unsafe structures. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete
collapse is possible.
      108.1.2 Unsafe equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable
liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to
life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or
structure.
      108.1.3 Structure unfit for human occupancy.  A structure is unfit for
human occupancy whenever the Code Official finds that such structure is unsafe,
unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or
lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating
facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or because the
location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the
structure or to the public.
      108.1.4 Unlawful structure. An unlawful structure is one found in whole
or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or
was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
   108.2 Closing of vacant structures. If the structure is vacant and unfit for
human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse,
the Code Official is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the
premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive
nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the Code Official shall cause the premises to be closed
and secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement
by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real
estate upon which the structure is located, and shall be a lien upon such real
estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
   108.3 Notice. Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served
on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with Section 107.3. If the notice pertains to
equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment. The notice shall
be in the form prescribed in Section 107.2.
   108.4 Placarding. Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply
with the notice provisions within the time given, the Code Official shall post
on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word
“Condemned” and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
      108.4.1 Placard removal. The Code Official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and
placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces or
removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the Code Official shall
be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
   108.5 Prohibited occupancy. Any occupied structure condemned and placarded
by the Code Official shall be vacated as ordered by the Code Official. Any
person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded
equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall
let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be
liable for the penalties provided by this code.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.18 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   109.1 Imminent danger. When, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is
imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which
endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and
life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual
or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any
structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of
toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous
equipment, the Code Official is hereby authorized and empowered to order and
require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The Code Official shall
cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a notice reading as
follows: “This Structure is Unsafe and Its Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the
Code Official.” It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure
except for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs,
removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
   109.2 Temporary safeguards. Notwithstanding other provisions of this code,
whenever, in the opinion of the Code Official, there is imminent danger due to
an unsafe condition, the Code Official shall order the necessary work to be
done, including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure
temporarily safe, whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been
instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as the Code Official
deems necessary to meet such emergency.
   109.3 Closing streets.  When necessary for public safety, the Code Official
shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the authority having
jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and places adjacent to
unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being utilized.
   109.4 Emergency repairs. For the purposes of this section, the Code Official
shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as
expeditiously as possible.
   109.5 Costs of emergency repairs. Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the
jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such
costs.
   109.6 Hearing. Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition
directed to the Appeals Board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.19 DEMOLITION.
   110.1 General. The Code Official shall order the owner of any premises upon
which is located any structure, which in the Code Official’s judgment is so
old, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that
it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such
structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to
repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner’s
option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than two years, to demolish and remove such
structure.
   110.2 Notices and orders. All notices and orders shall comply with §
153.16.
   110.3 Failure to comply. If the owner of a premises, fails to comply with a
demolition order within the time prescribed, the Code Official shall cause the
structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available public
agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such
demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   110.4 Salvage materials. When any structure has been ordered demolished and
removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or
arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable
materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after
deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly
remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of
expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto,
subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned
over, the report shall so state.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.20 MEANS OF APPEAL.
   111.1 Application for appeal. Any person directly affected by a decision of
the Code Official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the
right to appeal to the Board of Appeals, provided that a written application
for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order
was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true
intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under have been
incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.
   111.2 Membership of Board. The Board of Appeals shall consist of the members
of the City of Mt. Healthy Planning Commission who are qualified by experience
and training to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance. The Code
Official or deputy shall be an ex officio member but shall have no vote on any
matter before the Board. The Board shall be appointed by the Mayor, and shall
serve staggered and overlapping terms.
      111.2.1 Alternate members. The chief appointing authority may appoint two
or more alternate members, who may be called by the Board Chairman to hear
appeals during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members
shall possess the qualifications required for Board membership.
       111.2.2 Chairman. See Planning Commission requirements in the Mt.
Healthy Zoning Code.
      111.2.3 Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in
which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest.
      111.2.4 Secretary. The chief administrative officer shall designate a
qualified person to serve as Secretary to the Board. The Secretary shall file a
detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the Chief Administrative
Officer.
      111.2.5 Compensation of members. Compensation of members shall be
determined by law.
   111.3 Notice of meeting. The Board shall meet upon notice from the Chairman,
within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.
   111.4 Open hearing. All hearings before the Board shall be open to the
public. The appellant, the appellant’s representative, the Code Official and
any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be
heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds of the Board
membership.
      111.4.1 Procedure. The Board shall adopt and make available to the public
through the Secretary procedures under which a hearing will be conducted. The
procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of evidence, but
shall mandate that only relevant information be received.
   111.5 Postponed hearing. When the full Board is not present to hear an
appeal, either the appellant or the appellant’s representative shall have the
right to request a postponement of the hearing.
   111.6 Board decision. The Board shall modify or reverse the decision of the
Code Official only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of
appointed Board members.
      111.6.1 Records and copies. The decision of the Board shall be recorded.
Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Code Official.
      111.6.2 Administration. The Code Official shall take immediate action in
accordance with the decision of the Board.
   111.7 Court review. Any person, whether or not a previous party of the
appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of
certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in
the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision in the
office of the chief administrative officer.
   111.8 Stays of enforcement. Appeals of notice and orders (other than
Imminent Danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order
until the appeal is heard by the Appeals Board.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
  DEFINITIONS
§ 153.25 GENERAL.
   201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall,
for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
   201.2 Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
   201.3 Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are not defined in this code
and are defined in the Ohio Building Code, the Ohio Fire Code, the Mt. Healthy
Zoning Code, the Ohio Plumbing Code, the Ohio Mechanical Code, or the current
State of Ohio referenced Electrical Code, such terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them as in those codes.
   201.4 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
   201.5 Parts. Whenever the words “dwelling unit,” “dwelling,” “premises,”
“building,” “rooming house,” “rooming unit,” “housekeeping unit” or “story” are
stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by
the words “or any part thereof.”
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.26 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. Approved by the Code Official.
   BASEMENT.  That portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
   BATHROOM. A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
   BEDROOM. Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping
purposes.
   CODE OFFICIAL.  The official who is charged with the administration and
enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
   COMPOST. The product of the composting process. COMPOST is characterized as
chemically and biologically altered organic material, which has become
chemically stable, decomposes slowly, is free of offensive odors, and contains
less than 10% water by weight.
   COMPOST PILE. The place in which composting occurs.
   COMPOSTING. The controlled decomposition of organic wastes under aerobic
conditions to produce a relatively stable, inert material that may be
incorporated into the soil without producing an adverse impact to the soil or
the public health.
   CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   EASEMENT. That portion of land or property reserved for present or future
use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property.
The EASEMENT shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or
lots.
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property
under the control of owners or operators or such premises.
   EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or
near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility
of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
   HABITABLE SPACE. Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
   HOUSEKEEPING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space
equipped and intended to be used for living and sleeping.
   IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening
injury or death at any time.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises,
of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public
streets for reason including but not limited to being unlicensed, wrecked,
abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own
power.
   LABELED. Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been
affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above-labeled items, and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
   LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premise or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to
a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or potion thereof is utilized or
occupied.
   OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
   OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as
a unit.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including
any structures thereon.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   ROOMING HOUSE. A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two- family dwelling.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof, and is
self supporting, or free standing, the use of which requires permanent location
on the ground, or partial support from another free-standing object having a
permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, back stops for
tennis courts, fences, hand and guard rails, sidewalks, drives, stairways,
garages, sheds, decks and pergolas. Flexible covers, such as blankets and
tarpaulins are not considered “structures” under this code.
   TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
   TOILET ROOM. A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or
shower.
   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle in, upon or by which
any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway,
except motorized wheelchairs and devices other than bicycles moved by human
power.
   VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
   WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g. generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
   YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
   YARD WASTE or GREEN WASTE. The residue generated from lawns, shrubs, gardens
and other such vegetation. YARD WASTE may include grass clippings, shrub
trimmings, brush, garden waste, and tree waste. YARD WASTE does not include
vegetable trimmings, or other such materials as have been cooked or altered for
human consumption.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03; Am. Ord. 07-1507, passed 6-19-07)
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.30 GENERAL.
   301.1 Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment and exterior property.
   301.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except
as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-
occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of
this subchapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping
unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that
part of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which
they occupy and control.
   301.3 Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof
or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary
condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.31 EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS.
   302.1 Sanitation. No person shall occupy as an owner-occupant or let to
another for occupancy any structure which does not comply with the following
requirements (a) All exterior property areas and premises shall be maintained
in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, free from any accumulation of rubbish,
garbage or junk. Interior furniture or upholstered furniture shall not be left
outside unless at curbside for disposal no earlier than 3:00 p.m. prior to a
scheduled pickup of such items.
   302.2 Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any structure located thereon.
      Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
   302.3 Sidewalks and driveways. All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces and similar areas shall be keep in a proper state of repair, and
maintained free from hazardous conditions.
   302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from weeds or plant growth in excess of seven inches. All noxious weeds shall
be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs, provided, however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   302.4 (A) Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from weeds or plant growth in excess of seven inches. All noxious weeds shall
be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs, provided, however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
   302.4 (B) Shrubbery or other vegetation shall not be permitted to grow in a
manner that is a danger to the occupants and the public health, safety, and
welfare, or in a manner that creates, extends, or intensifies blighting or
deteriorating conditions. Such manner shall include, but not limited to:
      (1)   Shrubbery or vegetation that is overgrown to the point that it
impedes the delivery of governmental services, such as police, fire and rescue
services; or
      (2)   Shrubbery or vegetation, except trees, that is overgrown to the
point that it infringes on any neighboring property owner's right of quiet
enjoyment of his or her property; or
      (3)   Shrubbery or vegetation that has grown in a manner such that it has
infiltrated the siding or other building material of a dwelling.
   Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and
destroy weeds after service of a notice violation, they shall be subject to
prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority
having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any
duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the
jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and
cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall
be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
   302.5 Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.
   302.6 Exhaust vents. Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous
or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
   302.7 Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
   302.8 Motor vehicles or vehicles. Except as provided for in other
regulations, no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle or vehicle shall be
parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in
a state of major disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an
approved spray booth and in the proper zoned district.
   Parking of motor vehicles or vehicles must be on well maintained hard paved
surfaces. Surfaces other than hard paved surfaces used for parking prior to the
adoption of these and other governing regulations shall be kept in a neat and
orderly manner and free from any vegetation. No rutting of the existing unpaved
surface shall be permitted. Should mud, dirt or other debris be dragged onto
the public way due to lack of maintenance the Code Official shall order the
owner to pave the parking space. In no case shall lawn area be considered a
parking space.
      Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul,
including bodywork, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or
similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purpose and as regulated
by both Building and Zoning Codes.
   302.9 Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any
private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.
   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an
approved state of maintenance and repair.
   302.10 Household composting. 
      (a)   Material that may be composted:
         (1)   Household compost may consist of ground, shredded or chopped
yard waste, including but not limited to, grass clippings, shrub trimmings,
wood chips, leaves, herbaceous garden waste, brush and other such material.
         (2)   Fresh animal manures shall not be used in household compost
piles
         (3)   The use of any type of solid waste in a household compost pile
shall be prohibited.
      (b)   Prohibited against creating a public health nuisance. No person
shall create or maintain a household compost pile in such a manner that it
becomes a rodent or insect harborage, it produces offensive and noxious odors,
it causes any form of surface or ground water pollution, or attracts wild
animals.
      (c)   Location of household compost piles. Household compost piles shall
be located:
         (1)   Twenty-five feet from any occupied structure.
         (2)   Five feet from any auxiliary structure.
         (3)   Fifty feet from any private water supply system.
         (4)   Ten feet from any private sewage disposal system.
         (5)   Five feet from any lot line.
         (6)   Ten feet from any roadway, alley, or other public right-of-way.
         (7)   Fifteen feet from any creek.
         (8)   A household compost pile shall not be constructed in a natural
wetland or floodway.
         (9)   No compost pile shall be constructed in a front or side yard.
      (d)   Exemptions: Except for location, compost regulations shall not
apply to:
         (1)   Any person who is disposing of yard waste by soil incorporation.
         (2)   Any person who is converting yard waste into mulch.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03; Am. Ord. 07-1507, passed 6-19-07; Am. Ord. 14-
1725, passed 10-21-14; Am. Ord. 22-1989, passed 8-16-22)
§ 153.32 SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS.
   303.1 Swimming pools. Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, and in good repair.
   303.2 Enclosures. Per the requirements of the building code used at the time
of installation.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.33 EXTERIOR STRUCTURE.
   304.1 General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
   304.2 Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited
to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks
and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other
than decay- resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by
painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and
chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All painting shall be
per industry standards for both under coatings and finish coatings. No painting
shall be left partially done unless approved by the inspector for special
circumstances such as inclement weather. All siding and masonry joints, as well
as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and
skylights, shall be maintained weather resistant and water-tight. All metal
surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and
corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces
designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement. Any
dwelling structure or secondary or appurtenant structure whose exterior surface
is deteriorated, decaying, disintegrating, or whose exterior surface has
weathered with dirt and grime or has been impaired through peeling or flaking
of the paint or other protective coating, shall be repaired, repainted, or
resurfaced.
   [F] 304.3 Premises identification.  Buildings shall have approved address
numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street
or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their
background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters.
   304.4 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads.
   304.5 Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
   304.6 Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly
surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
   304.7 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free
from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates
a public nuisance.
   304.8 Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta
trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
   304.9 Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including, but not
limited to canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored
so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
   304.10 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies.  Every exterior stairway,
deck porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   304.11 Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in
good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   304.12 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   304.13 Window, skylight and door frames. Every window, skylight, door and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
      303.13.1 Glazing. All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
cracks and holes.
      303.13.2 Openable windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall
be easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
   304.14 Insect screens. During the period when insects are active, every
door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable
rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products
to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly
fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every
swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition.
      Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such
as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
   304.15 Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming
units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress
shall be in accordance with Section 702.3
   304.16 Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
   304.17 Guards for basement windows. Every basement window that is openable
shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved
protection against the entry of rodents.
   304.18 Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units,
room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to
provide security for the occupants and property within.
      304.18.1 Doors. Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit
or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a
deadbolt lock mg specifications set forth herein. Such deadbolt locks shall be
operated only by the turning of a knob or a key and shall have a lock throw of
not less than one inch. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall
not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt locks shall be
installed according to manufacturer’s specifications and maintained in good
working order. All deadbolt locks required by this section shall be designed
and installed in such a manner so as to be operable inside of the dwelling
unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the use of a key, tool,
combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort.
      304.18.2 Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within 6
feet (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide
access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented,
leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking devices.
      304.18.3 Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let
shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03; Am. Ord. 07-1507, passed 6-19-07; Am. Ord. 16-
1776, passed 3-1-16)
§ 153.34 INTERIOR STRUCTURE.
   305.1 General. The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
Occupants shall keep that part of the structure, which they occupy or control
in a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a
rooming house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two or more dwelling
units or two or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and
sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior
property.
   305.2 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   305.3 Interior surfaces. All interior surfaces, including windows and doors,
shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping,
flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or
loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected.
   305.4 Stairs and walking surfaces. Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony,
porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and
good repair.
   305.5 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   305.6 Interior doors. Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within
its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and
securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer
of the attachment hardware.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.35 HANDRAILS AND GUARDRAILS.
   306.1 General. Shall be maintained per the code requirements at the time of
installation, but in no case shall they be allowed to devolve into a state of
disrepair.
      Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the adopting
building code.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.36 RUBBISH AND GARBAGE.
   307.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and
premises, and interior of every structure, shall be free from any accumulation
of rubbish or garbage.
   307.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers. No container shall be stored in a front yard. However, the
container may be placed in a front yard after 6:00 p.m. the day before garbage
collection is scheduled for that specific area.
      307.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities. The owner of every occupied premises
shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the removal or rubbish.
      307.2.2 Refrigerators. Refrigerators and similar equipment not in
operation shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on a premises without
first removing the doors.
   307.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
      307.3.1 Garbage facilities. The owner of every dwelling shall supply one
of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling
unit; an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants
in each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof, covered, outside garage
container.
      307.3.2 Containers. The operator of every establishment producing garbage
shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak-proof
containers provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials
until removed from the premises for disposal.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03; Am. Ord. 07-1507, passed 6-19-07)
§ 153.37 EXTERMINATION.
   308.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
   308.2 Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
   308.3 Single occupant. The occupant of a one- family dwelling or of a
single-tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination
on the premises.
   308.4 Multiple occupancy. The owner of a structure containing two or more
dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas
of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of
an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant
shall be responsible for extermination.
   308.5 Occupant. The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent and pest- free condition of the structure.
      Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the structure,
the owner shall be responsible for extermination.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS
§ 153.40 GENERAL.
   401.1 Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a
structure.
   401.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these requirements.
A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant, or permit another person to
occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
subchapter.
   401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and
ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with the Ohio Building Code or the applicable code at the time of
installation shall be permitted.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.41 LIGHT.
   402.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one window
of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The minimum
total glazed area for every habitable space shall be 8% of the floor area of
such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure face a window of any
room and such obstructions are located less than three feet (914 mm) from the
window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such window
shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors nor to a court and shall
not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area for
the room.
      Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without exterior
glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening
to the adjoining room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior
room or space, but not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m²). The exterior glazing
area shall be based on the total floor area being served.
   402.2 Common halls and stairways. Every common hall and stairway in
residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be
lighted at all times with at least a 60-watt standard incandescent light bulb
for each 200 square feet (19 m²) of floor area or equivalent illumination,
provided that the spacing between lights shall not be greater than 30 feet
(9144 mm). In other than residential occupancies, means of egress, including
exterior means of egress stairways, shall be illuminated at all times the
building space served by the means of egress is occupied with a minimum of one
footcandle (11 lux) at floors, landings and treads.
   402.3 Other spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions,
and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances,
equipment and fixtures.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.42 VENTILATION.
   403.1 Habitable spaces. Every habitable space shall have at least one
openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be
equal to at least 45% of the minimum glazed area required in Section 402.1.
      Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the outdoors are
ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to the adjoining
room shall be at least 8% of the floor area of the interior room or space, but
not less than 25 square feet (2.33 m²). The ventilation openings to the
outdoors shall be based on a total floor area being ventilated.
   403.2 Bathrooms and toilet rooms. Every bathroom and toilet room shall
comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by
Section 403.1, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces
equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the
outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
   403.3 Cooking facilities. Unless approved through the certificate of
occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory
unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present
in a rooming unit or dormitory unit.
      Exception: Where specifically approved in writing by the Code Official.
   403.4 Process ventilation. Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious
fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system
shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be
exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
   403.5 Clothes dryer exhaust. Clothes dryer exhaust system shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.43 OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS.
   404.1 Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming
units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate
from other adjoining spaces.
   404.2 Minimum room widths. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not
be less than seven feet (2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens shall have a
clear passageway of not less than three feet (914 mm) between counter fronts
and appliances or counter fronts and walls.
   404.3 Minimum ceiling lights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry
areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear
ceiling height of not less than seven feet (2134 mm).
      Exceptions:
         1.   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not
less than four feet (1219 mm) on center and projecting not more than six inches
(152 mm) below the required ceiling height.
         2.   Basement rooms in one- and two- family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height
of not less than six feet eight inches (2033 mm) with not less than six feet
four inches (1932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar
obstructions.
         3.   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar
purposes and having a sloped ceiling height of at least seven feet (2134 mm)
over not less than one-third of the required minimum floor area. In calculating
the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a
clear ceiling height of five feet (1524 mm) or more shall be included.
   404.4 Bedroom requirements. Every bedroom shall comply with the requirements
of Sections 404.4.1 through 404.4.5.
      404.4.1 Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one person
shall contain at least 70 square feet (6.5 m²) of floor area, and every bedroom
occupied by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet (4.6 m²)
of floor area for each occupant thereof.
      404.4.2 Access from bedroom. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means
of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only
means of egress from other habitable spaces.
      Exception: Units that contain fewer than two bedrooms.
      404.4.3 Water closet accessibility. Every bedroom shall have access to at
least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one
water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an
adjacent story.
      404.4.4 Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not
be used for sleeping purposes.
      404.4.5 Other requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this
code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation, room area, ceiling
height and room width requirements of this chapter; the plumbing facilities and
water-heating facilities requirements of §§
153.50 through
153.56; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle requirements of §§
153.60 through
153.66; and the smoke detector and emergency escape requirements of §§
153.70 through 153.74.
   404.5 Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants
than permitted by the minimum area requirements of Table 404.5.
TABLE 404.5
MINIMUM AREA REQUIREMENTS
 
              MINIMUM AREA
              IN SQUARE FEET
SPACE         1-2 occupants   3-5 occupants 6 or more occupants
Living roomab No requirements 120           150
Dining roomab No requirements 80            100
Bedrooms      Shall comply with Section 404.4
 
         For SI:   1 square foot = 0.093 m².
         (3)   See Section 404.5.2 for combined living room/dining room spaces.
         (4)   See Section 404.5.1 for limitations on determining the minimum
occupancy area for sleeping purposes.
      404.5.1 Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by Table 404.5
shall not be included as a sleeping area in determining the minimum occupancy
area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with Section 404.4.
      404.5.2 Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces
shall comply with the requirements of Table 404.5 if the total area is equal to
that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function
as a combination living room/dining room.
   404.6 Efficiency unit. Nothing in this section shall prohibit an efficiency
living unit from meeting the following requirements:
         1.   A unit occupied by not more than two occupants shall have a clear
floor area of not less than 220 square feet (20.4 m²). A unit occupied by three
occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 320 square feet (29.7
m²). These required areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by Items 2
and 3 below.
         2.   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance
and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less
than 30 inches (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code
shall be provided.
         3.   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
         4.   The maximum number of occupants shall be three.
   404.7 Food preparation. All spaces to be occupied for food preparation
purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve
foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for
the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for
temporary storage.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.50 GENERAL.
   501.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures to be provided.
   501.2 Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
such plumbing facilities and plumbing fixtures in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any structure or premises, which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.51 [P] REQUIRED FACILITIES.
   502.1 Dwelling units. Every dwelling unit shall contain its own bathtub or
shower, lavatory, water closet and kitchen sink which shall be maintained in a
sanitary, safe working condition. The lavatory shall be placed in the same room
as the water closet or located in close proximity to the door leading directly
into the room in which such water closet is located. A kitchen sink shall not
be used as a substitute for the required lavatory.
   502.2 Rooming houses. At least one water closet, lavatory and bathtub or
shower shall be supplied for each four rooming units.
   502.3 Hotels. Where private water closets, lavatories and baths are not
provided, one water closet, one lavatory and one bathtub or shower having
access from a public hallway shall be provided for each ten occupants.
   502.4 Employees’ facilities. A minimum of one water closet, one lavatory and
one drinking facility shall be available to employees.
      502.4.1 Drinking facilities. Drinking facilities shall be a drinking
fountain, water cooler, bottled water cooler or disposable cups next to a sink
or water dispenser. Drinking facilities shall not be located in toilet rooms or
bathrooms.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
  § 153.52 [P] TOILET ROOMS.
   503.1 Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall provide privacy and shall
not constitute the only passageway to a hall or other space, or to the
exterior. A door and interior locking device shall be provided for all common
or shared bathrooms and toilet rooms in a multiple dwelling.
   503.2 Location. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel units, rooming
units or dormitory units or housekeeping units shall have access by traversing
not more than one flight of stairs and shall have access from a common hall or
passageway.
   503.3 Location of employee toilet facilities. Toilet facilities shall have
access from within the employees’ working area. The required toilet facilities
shall be located not more than one story above or below the employees’ working
area and the path of travel to such facilities shall not exceed a distance of
500 feet (152 m). Employee facilities shall either be separate facilities or
combined employee and public facilities.
      Exception: Facilities that are required for employees in storage
structures or kiosks, which are located in adjacent structures under the same
ownership, lease or control, shall not exceed a travel distance of 500 feet
(152 m) from the employees’ regular working area to the facilities.
   503.4 Floor surface. In other than dwelling units, every toilet room floor
shall be maintained to be a smooth, hard, nonabsorbent surface to permit such
floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.53 [P] PLUMBING SYSTEMS AND FIXTURES.
   504.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly installed and
maintained in working order, and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks
and defects and be capable of performing the function for which such plumbing
fixtures are designed. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe,
sanitary and functional condition.
   504.2 Fixture clearances. Plumbing fixtures shall have adequate clearances
for usage and cleaning.
   504.3 Plumbing system hazards. Where it is found that a plumbing system in a
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by reason of
inadequate service, inadequate venting, cross- connection, backsiphonage,
improper installation, deterioration or damage or for similar reasons, the Code
Official shall require the defects to be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.54 WATER SYSTEM.
   505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other plumbing fixture shall be properly connected to either a
public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks,
lavatories, laundry facilities, bathtubs and showers shall be supplied with hot
or tempered and cold running water in accordance with the Ohio Plumbing Code.
   [P] 505.2 Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination, and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be located
above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin faucets, janitor sink
faucets and other hose bibs or faucets to which hoses are attached and left in
place, shall be protected by an approved atmospheric- type vacuum breaker or an
approved permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
   505.3 Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained to
provide a supply of water to plumbing fixtures, devices and appurtenances in
sufficient volume and at pressures adequate to enable the fixtures to function
properly, safely, and free from defects and leaks.
   505.4 Water heating facilities. Water heating facilities shall be property
installed, maintained, and capable for providing an adequate amount of water to
be drawn at every required sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower and laundry facility
at a temperature of not less than 110°F (43°C). A gas-burning water heater
shall not be located in any bathroom, toilet room, bedroom or other occupied
room normally kept closed, unless adequate combustion air is provided. An
approved combination temperature and pressure- relief valve and relief valve
discharge pipe shall be properly installed and maintained on water heaters.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.55 [P] SANITARY DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   506.1 General. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to an approved private sewage disposal system.
   506.2 Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, vent, waste and sewer line shall
function properly and be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.56 [P] STORM DRAINAGE.
   507.1 General. Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and courts, and
other open areas on the premises shall not be discharged in a manner that
creates a public nuisance.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.60 GENERAL.
   601.1 Scope. The provisions of this subchapter shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
   601.2 Responsibility.  The owner of the structure shall provide and maintain
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises, which does not comply with the requirements of
this subchapter.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.61 HEATING FACILITIES.
   602.1 Facilities required. Heating facilities shall be provided in
structures as required by this section.
   602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F (20°C) in all
habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms based on the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality indicated in Appendix D of the Ohio Mechanical/
Plumbing Code. Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to
meet the requirements of this section.
      Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F
(-1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
   602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling unit. rooming unit, dormitory or guestroom
on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof, shall supply heat during the period from September to June to maintain
a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms,
and toilet rooms.
      Exceptions:
         1.   When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall
not be required, provided that the heating system is operating at its full
design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall
be as indicated in Appendix D of the Ohio Mechanical Code.
         2.   In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-
1°C), a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained.
   602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from September to June to maintain a
temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or
special temperature conditions.
         2.   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical
activities.
   602.5 Room temperature measurement. The required room temperatures shall be
measured three feet (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the room and
two feet (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.62 MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
   603.1 Mechanical appliances. All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid
fuel-burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall
be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be
capable of performing the intended function.
   603.2   Removal of combustion products. All fuel-burning equipment and
appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.
      Exception: Fuel-burning equipment and appliances which are labeled for
unvented operation.
   603.3 Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall be
maintained.
   603.4 Safety controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall
be maintained in effective operation.
   603.5 Combustion air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel
and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel-burning equipment shall be
provided for the fuel-burning equipment.
   603.6 Energy conservation devices. Devices intended to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel-burning appliance, to the fuel supply line
thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed
unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.63 ELECTRICAL FACILITIES.
   604.1 Facilities required. Every occupied building shall be provided with an
electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this section and §
153.64.
   604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve as
a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with
the current referenced standard by the Ohio Board of Building Standards.
Dwelling units shall be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase
electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes.
   604.3 Electrical system hazards. Where it is found that the electrical
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and
lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or
for similar reasons, the Code Official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.64 ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT.
   605.1 Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
   605.2 Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at
least two separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one ground fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall
contain at least one receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have
ground fault circuit interrupter protection.
   605.3 Lighting fixtures. Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room,
kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at
least one electric lighting fixture.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.65 ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND DUMBWAITERS.
   606.1 General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained to
sustain safely all imposed loads, to operate properly, and to be free from
physical and fire hazards. The most current certificate of inspection shall be
on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the escalator or
dumbwaiter; or the certificate shall be available for public inspection in the
office of the building operator.
   606.2 Elevators. In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least
one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is
occupied.
      Exceptions: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be permitted
to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or servicing.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.66 DUCT SYSTEMS.
   607.1 General. Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and
shall be capable of performing the required function.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
  FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.70 GENERAL.
   701.1 Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior
premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
   701.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain
such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.71 [F] MEANS OF EGRESS.
   702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be
provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of
egress shall comply with the Ohio Building Code or the code in effect at the
time of construction.
   702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the adopted
Mt. Healthy Fire Code shall be unobstructed.
   702.3 Locked doors. All means of egress doors shall be readily openable from
the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special
knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that permitted
by the Ohio Building Code or code in effect at the time of the construction.
   702.4 Emergency escape openings. Required emergency escape openings shall be
maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of construction,
and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings shall be
operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or tools. Bars,
grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over emergency
escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening size complies
with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and such devices
shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use of a key, tool
or force greater than that which is required for normal operation of the escape
and rescue opening.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.72 [F] FIRE-RESISTANCE RATINGS.
   703.1 Fire-resistance-rated assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating
of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and
floors shall be maintained.
   703.2 Opening protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained
in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be maintained in
operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not be blocked or
obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
§ 153.73 [F] FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   704.1 General. All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate
an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be
maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the adopted
Mt. Healthy Fire Code.
   704.2 Smoke alarms. Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be
installed and maintained in Groups R-2, R-3, R-4 and in dwellings not regulated
in Group R occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the following
locations:
      1.   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping are in the
immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
      2.   In each room used for sleeping purposes.
      3.   In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and
cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings
or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level, provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level.
   Single or multiple-station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups
in accordance with the adopted Mt. Healthy Fire Code.
   704.3 Power source. In Group R occupancies and in dwellings not regulated as
Group R occupancies, single-station smoke alarms shall receive their primary
power from the building wiring, provided that such wiring is served from a
commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Smoke alarms
shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be permanent and
without a disconnecting switch other than as required for overcurrent
protection.
      Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery operated in
buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are not served
from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings undergoing
alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior wall or
ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic, crawl space
or basement available which could provide access for building wiring without
the removal of interior finishes.
   704.4 Interconnection. Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be
installed within an individual dwelling unit in Group R-2, R-3, R-4 and in
dwellings not regulated as Group R occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be
interconnected in such a manner that the activation of one alarm will activate
all of the alarms in the individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in
all bedrooms over background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
      Exceptions:
         1.   Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not
undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind.
         2.   Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finished exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes.
(Ord. 03-1429, passed 10-7-03)
APPENDIX: REFERENCED STANDARDS
   This appendix lists the standards that are referenced in various sections of
this code. The standards are listed herein by the promulgating agency of the
standard, the standard identification, the effective date and title and the
section or sections of this code that reference the standard. The application
of the referenced standards shall be as specified in Section 102.7.
ICC   International Code Council
      5203 Leesburg Pike, Suite 600
      Falls Church, VA 22041
Standard reference number Title Referenced in code:
                                Section number
Standard reference number Title                      Referenced in code:
                                                     Section number
ICC EC-03                 ICC Electrical Code tm -   201.3, 604.2
                          Administrative Provisions
IBC-03                    International Building     201.3, 302.7.1, 401.3,
                          Code®                     702.3, 702.4
IEBC-03                   International Existing     101.3, 102.3, 201.2
                          Building Code®
IFC-03                    International Fire Code®  201.3, 702.1, 702.2,
                                                     704.1, 704.2
IMC-03                    International Mechanical   201.3
                          Code®
IPC-03                    International Plumbing     201.3, 505.1, 602.2, 602.3
                          Code®
IZC-03                    International Zoning Code®102.3, 201.3
OBC                       Ohio Building Code
OMC                       Ohio Mechanical Code
OFC                       Ohio Fire Code
MHZC                      Mt. Healthy Zoning Code
 
CHAPTER 154: COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT
Section
   
154.01   Designation and establishment of Area No. 1 Community Reinvestment
Area; eligibility for incentive
   
154.02   Tax exemption percentage
   
154.03   Commercial and industrial projects fee requirements
   
154.04   Housing Officer designated
   
154.05   Community Reinvestment Area Housing Council
   
154.06   Tax Incentive Review Council
   
154.07   Re-evaluation of Area No. 1 designation
§ 154.01 DESIGNATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF AREA NO. 1 COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT
AREA; ELIGIBILITY FOR INCENTIVE.
   (A)   The area designated as the Area No. 1 Community Reinvestment Area
constitutes an area in which housing facilities or structures of historical
significance are located, and in which new construction or repair of existing
facilities has been discouraged.
   (B)   Pursuant to R.C. § 3735.66, Area No. 1 Community Reinvestment Area, is
hereby established in the following described area: All properties in the
zoning classification of E-1 as delineated on the official Mt. Healthy Zoning
Map. (See Exhibit B attached to Ordinance No. 98-1237)
      (1)   The Community Reinvestment Area is approximately depicted as the
cross-hatched area on the map attached to Ordinance 98-1237, marked Exhibit B,
and by this reference incorporated herein.
      (2)   Only residential, commercial and/or industrial properties
consistent with the applicable zoning regulations within the designated
Community Reinvestment Area will be eligible for exemptions under this program.
   (C)   All properties identified in Exhibit A and Exhibit B as being within
the designated Community Reinvestment Area are eligible for this incentive.
This proposal is a public/private partnership intended to promote and expand
conforming uses in the designated area. As part of the project, the city
intends to undertake supporting public improvements in the designated area.
(Ord. 98-1237, passed 2-17-98)
§ 154.02 TAX EXEMPTION PERCENTAGE.
   Within the Community Reinvestment Area, the percentage of the tax exemption
of the increase in the assessed valuation resulting from improvements to
commercial and industrial real property and the term of those exemptions shall
be negotiated on a case-by- case basis in advance of construction or remodeling
occurring according to the rules outlined in R.C. § 3765.67. The results of the
negotiation as approved by this Council will be set in writing in a Community
Reinvestment Area agreement as outlined in R.C. § 3735.671. For residential
property, a 100% tax exemption on the increase in the assessed valuation
resulting from improvements as described in R.C. § 3735.67 shall be granted
upon proper application by the property owner and certification thereof by the
designated housing officer for the following periods. Residential applications
must be filed with the Housing Officer no later than six months after
construction completion.
   (A)   Ten-year exemption (term same for all) for the remodeling of dwellings
containing not more than two housing units, and upon which the cost of
remodeling is at least $20,000, as described in R.C. § 3735.67.
   (B)   A maximum of 12 years tax exemption (negotiated--up to 12 years) for
existing commercial and industrial facilities shall be negotiated on a case-
by-case basis in advance of construction or remodeling occurring, and upon the
cost of the renovation is at least $20,000, as described in R.C. § 3735.67.
   (C)   A maximum of 15 years tax exemption (negotiated--up to 15 years) for
new commercial or industrial facilities shall be negotiated on a case-by- case
basis in advance of construction occurring.
   (D)   If remodeling qualifies for an exemption, during the period of the
exemption, the dollar amount of the increase in market value of the structure
shall be exempt from real property taxation. If new construction qualifies for
an exemption, during the period of the exemption the structure shall not be
considered to be an improvement on the land on which it is located for the
purpose of real property taxation.
(Ord. 98-1237, passed 2-17-98)
§ 154.03 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROJECTS FEE REQUIREMENTS.
   All commercial and industrial projects are required to comply with the state
application fee requirements of R.C. § 3735.672(C).
(Ord. 98-1237, passed 2-17-98)
§ 154.04 HOUSING OFFICER DESIGNATED.
   To administer and implement the provisions of this chapter, the Chief
Building Official is designated as the Housing Officer as described in R.C. §§
3735.65 through 3735.70.
(Ord. 98-1237, passed 2-17-98)
§ 154.05 COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREA HOUSING COUNCIL.
   (A)   A “Community Reinvestment Area Housing Council” shall be created,
consisting of two members appointed by the Mayor, two members appointed by the
City Council, and one member appointed by the Planning Commission. The majority
of the members shall then appoint two additional members who shall be residents
within the area. Terms of the members of the Council shall be for three years.
An unexpired term resulting from a vacancy in the Council shall be filled in
the same manner as the initial appointment was made.
   (B)   The Community Reinvestment Area Council shall make an annual
inspection of the properties within the district for which an exemption has
been granted under R.C. § 3735.67. The Council shall also hear appeals under
R.C. § 3735.70.
(R.C. § 3735.69) (Ord. 98-1237, passed 2-17-98)
§ 154.06 TAX INCENTIVE REVIEW COUNCIL.
   A Tax Incentive Review Council shall be established pursuant to R.C. §
5709.85, and shall consist of three representatives appointed by the Board of
County Commissioners, two representatives of the municipal corporation,
appointed by the Municipal CEO with Council concurrence, the County Auditor or
designee, and a representative of each affected Board of Education. At least
two members must be residents of the City of Mt. Healthy. The Tax Incentive
Review Council shall review annually the compliance of all agreements involving
the granting of exemptions for commercial or industrial real property
improvements under R.C. § 3735.671, and make written recommendations to the
Council as to continuing, modifying or terminating said agreement based upon
the performance of the agreement.
(Ord. 98-1237, passed 2-17-98)
§ 154.07 RE-EVALUATION OF AREA NO. 1 DESIGNATION.
   The Council reserves the right to re-evaluate the designation of the Area
No. 1 Community Reinvestment Area after December 31, of each year, at which
time the Council may direct the Housing Officer not to accept any new
applications for exemptions as described in R.C. § 3735.67.
(Ord. 98-1237, passed 2-17-98)
CHAPTER 155: ZONING CODE
Section
155.000 Title, Purpose and Scope
   
155.001   Title
   
155.002   Purpose
   
155.003   Scope
   
155.004   Effect of other regulations
   
155.005   Relationship to other codes, ordinances or agreements
   
155.006   Interpretation
   
155.007   Rules applying to the text
   
155.008   Severability
155.010 Zoning Districts and Map
   
155.011   Districts established
   
155.012   Official zoning map
   
155.013   District boundaries interpreted
   
155.014   Annexed land
   
155.015   Lots divided by zoning line
   
155.016   Uses not listed
155.02 Residential Districts
   
155.021   Purpose
   
155.022   Schedule of uses
   
155.023   Spatial requirements
   
155.024   Site development regulations
155.03 Business Districts
   
155.031   Purpose
   
155.032   Schedule of uses - business
   
155.033   Spatial requirements
   
155.034   Site development regulations
155.04 Industrial Districts
   
155.041   Purpose
   
155.042   Schedule of uses
   
155.043   Spatial requirements
   
155.044   Site development regulations
155.05 Recreational Districts
   
155.051   Purpose
   
155.052   Schedule of uses
   
155.053   Spatial requirements
   
155.054   Site development regulations
155.06 Planned Unit Development
   
155.061   Purpose
   
155.062   Qualifying conditions
   
155.063   PUD requirements
   
155.064   General provisions
   
155.065   Review process
   
155.066   Review standards
   
155.067   Changes to PUD
   
155.068   Appeals
155.07 RESERVED [Overlay Districts]
155.08 Schedule of District Uses
155.09 General Provisions
   
155.091   Buildings and structures
   
155.092   Dimensional provisions
   
155.093   Parking and storage
   
155.094   Uses
   
155.095   Other provisions
155.10 Conditional Use Requirements
   
155.101   Purpose
   
155.102   Procedures
   
155.103   General standards
   
155.104   Conditions of approval recommendation
   
155.105   Expiration
   
155.106   Revocation
   
155.107   Performance guarantees
   
155.108   Specific requirements
155.11 Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
155.111   Purpose
   
155.112   General requirements
   
155.113   Off-street parking and facility design
   
155.114   Off-street loading requirements
155.12 Signage
   
155.121   Purpose
   
155.122   General provisions
   
155.123   Signs not requiring permits
   
155.124   Prohibited signs
   
155.125   Permitted signs
   
155.126   Sign permits
   
155.127   Application procedure
   
155.128   Inspection and maintenance
   
155.129   Fees
   
155.1299 Nonconforming signs
155.13 Site Plan Review
   
155.131   Purpose
   
155.132   Applicability
   
155.133   Exemptions
   
155.134   Application and review
   
155.135   Site plan requirements
   
155.136   Review standards
   
155.137   Conditions
   
155.138   Changes to an approved site plan    
   
155.139   Expiration
155.14 Landscaping
   
155.141   Purpose
   
155.142   Greenbelts and parking lot landscaping
   
155.143   General requirements
155.15 Administration and Enforcement
   
155.151   Zoning permit required
   
155.152   Zoning permit process
   
155.153   Zoning permit approval; time limit
   
155.154   Fees; performance guarantees
   
155.155   Enforcement; penalty
155.16 Zoning Administrator
   
155.161   Office established
   
155.162   Duties of the Zoning Administrator
155.17 Planning Commission and City Council
   
155.171   Planning Commission established
   
155.172   Planning Commission powers and duties
   
155.173   Powers and duties of the City Council
   
155.174   Procedure on appeals
   
155.175   Architectural Review Board
155.18 Board of Zoning Appeals
   
155.181   Appointment, meetings and quorum
   
155.182   Powers and duties
   
155.183   Application procedures
   
155.184   Variances
   
155.185   Administrative appeal
   
155.186   Decisions of the Board
155.19 Amendments and Rezoning
   
155.191   Initiation of amendments
   
155.192   Review guidelines
   
155.193   Amendment process
155.20 Nonconforming Uses, Buildings and Lots
   
155.201   Purpose
   
155.202   Non-reversion
   
155.203   Nonconforming uses
   
155.204   Nonconforming buildings and structures
   
155.205   Nonconforming lots of record
   
155.206   Burden of proof
   
155.207   Zoning certificates for legal non-conformities
   
155.208   Fees
155.21 Definitions
   
155.211   Interpretation
   
155.212   Definitions A-B
   
155.213   Definitions C-D
   
155.214   Definitions E-F-G
   
155.215   Definitions H-I-J-K
   
155.216   Definitions L-M-N
   
155.217   Definitions O-P-Q
   
155.218   Definitions R-S
   
155.219   Definitions T-U
   
155.2191 Definitions V-W
   
155.2192 Definitions X-Y-Z
155.000 TITLE, PURPOSE AND SCOPE
§ 155.001 TITLE.
   This code and all its provisions, codified as
Chapter 155 of the Mt. Healthy Code of Ordinances,    the Planning and Zoning
Code, shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Code of the City of Mt.
Healthy, Ohio;" or by its shorter titles, of "The Mt. Healthy Zoning Code" or
"Zoning Code."
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.002 PURPOSE.
   This Code shall have the purposes prescribed in R.C. Chapter 713 and is
enacted for the following additional purposes:
   (A)   To promote the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity
and general welfare;
   (B)   To conserve and protect property and owner investment;
   (C)   To promote the most appropriate use of land;
   (D)   To guide the density of population;
   (E)   To manage and support efficient travel modes;
   (F)   To provide a method of administration and to prescribe penalties for
violations of provisions of this Code; and
   (G)   To support the City Comprehensive Plan and its key initiatives.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.003 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this Code shall apply to all lands within the municipal
boundaries of the City of Mt. Healthy, including all lands annexed to the city
after the effective date of this Code.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.004 EFFECT OF OTHER REGULATIONS.
   The regulations of this Code shall be in addition to any other regulations
in effect in the city. All building, subdividing, and uses within any district
shall satisfy all building, planning, platting, zoning, and any other related
regulations.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.005 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER CODES, ORDINANCES OR AGREEMENTS.
   This Code does not repeal or annul any code, ordinance, regulation, permit,
easement, covenant, or private agreement previously adopted, issued, or entered
into and not in conflict with the provisions of this Code. Where the
regulations of this Code are more restrictive or impose higher standards than
other codes, ordinances, regulations, permits, easements, covenants, or private
agreements, the requirements of this Code shall govern.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.006 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this Code shall be interpreted and applied so as to be the
minimum requirements necessary to promote the public health, safety, security
and general welfare of the city.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.007 RULES APPLYING TO THE TEXT.
   (A)   The words, terms and phrases used in this Code shall have the meanings
assigned to them in §§
155.211 through
155.2192, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
   (B)   Rules of construction. The following rules of construction apply to
this Code:
      (1)   The particular shall control the general and the use of a general
term shall not be taken to have the same meaning as another specific term. For
example, a "dry cleaning retail establishment" shall not be interpreted to be
the same as a "retail business supplying commodities on the premises," if each
term is listed as a separate and distinct use.
      (2)   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this Code and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.
      (3)   A building or structure includes any and all of its parts.
      (4)   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for,"
"intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for."
      (5)   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The
word "may" is permissive.
      (6)   The word "person" includes any individual, corporation,
partnership, incorporated association, limited liability company or any other
similar entity.
      (7)   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events
connected by the conjunctions "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:
         (a)   "And" indicates that all of the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events apply.
         (b)   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
         (c)   "Either . . . or" indicates that the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination.
   (C)   Terms not defined in this Code shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.008 SEVERABILITY.
   If a provision of this Zoning Code is found to be invalid by any court of
competent jurisdiction, that invalidation shall not affect any other provision
of this Code unless the other provision is also found to be invalid.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.010: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES AND ZONING MAP
§ 155.011 DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED.
   The City of Mt. Healthy is divided into 14 zoning districts as listed in
Table 155.01.
Table 155.01 Zoning District
Symbol District Name Regulated In
Table 155.01 Zoning District
Symbol                 District Name                       Regulated In
Residential Districts                                      
A                      Rural Residential District          Subchapter
                                                           155.02
B                      Low Density Residential             Subchapter
                                                           155.02
C                      Moderate Density Residential        Subchapter
                                                           155.02
D                      High Density
Business Districts                                         
E                      General Business District           Subchapter
                                                           155.03
CBD                    Central Business District           Subchapter
                                                           155.03
Industrial Districts                                       
F                      Light Industrial District           Subchapter
                                                           155.04
G                      Industrial District                 Subchapter
                                                           155.04
Recreational Districts                                     
H                      Parks, Playgrounds and Recreational Subchapter
                       District                            155.05
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.012 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The boundaries of the zoning districts are established as shown on the
map entitled, "City of Mt. Healthy Official Zoning District Map" which
accompanies and is made a part of this Code.
   (B)   The Official Zoning District Map shall be maintained and kept on file
by the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   The City Council may, at its discretion or upon formal application,
amend the zoning map, in accordance with the amendment procedures of Subchapter
155.19.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.013 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES INTERPRETED.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various
districts, as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   When the exact boundaries of a district are uncertain, they shall be
determined by use of the scale on the zoning map.
   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow those centerlines.
   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following those lot lines.
   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to
follow the shoreline. In the event of change in the shoreline, the boundary
shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline. Boundaries indicated as
approximately following the center line of streams, rivers or other bodies of
water shall be construed to follow the centerline. Any use of structures
extending into or over a water body shall be subject to the same zoning
restrictions as the adjoining land.
   (E)   When a right-of-way is vacated, the districts adjoining each side are
respectively extended to the center of the area so vacated.
   (F)   If the rules above are not sufficient to resolve the issue, the
Planning Commission shall make the determination by resolution.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.014 ANNEXED LAND.
   Where land is annexed into the city, it shall be zoned in accordance with
the map amendment procedure outlined in Subchapter
155.19.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.015 LOTS DIVIDED BY ZONING LINE.
   Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the entire lot shall be
considered to be wholly within the more restrictive zoning district.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.016 USES NOT LISTED.
   (A)   A use that is not listed, either by right or by conditional approval,
in a zoning district shall not be permitted in that district and shall only be
permitted in a district where it is specifically listed as either a use by
right or by conditional approval.
   (B)   If a proposed use of land or building is not specified by this Code in
any district, the City Manager or designee shall determine if the use is
similar to a permitted or conditional land use authorized in the district in
which the land or building is located. If the use is found to be similar, it
may be established in accordance with the requirements and procedures
established in the Code for the similar use. The City Manager or designee shall
notify the Planning Commission of this action, who shall then determine if the
Code should be amended to specifically include the use.
   (C)   Alternatively, the City Manager or designee may refer the
determination to the Planning Commission in the first instance.
   (D)   The determination by the City Manager or designee, or the Planning
Commission, may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals; provided, the
appeal may only be taken by the affected property owner or the owner's agent.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.02 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.021 PURPOSE.
   (A)   "A," Rural Residential District. The A District is intended to
accommodate single-family residential subdivision and in-fill development at
densities of up to approximately two units per acre, along with related uses.
Land within this district will be served by public sanitary sewer and water
facilities.
   (B)   "B," Low Density Residential District. The B District is intended to
accommodate single-family residential subdivision and in-fill development at
densities of up to approximately four units per acre, along with related uses.
Land within this district will be served by public sanitary sewer and water
facilities.
   (C)   "C," Moderate Density Residential District. The C District is intended
to encompass much of the city's existing single- family and medium density
residential neighborhoods and accommodate similarly situated new and in-fill
development at densities up to seven units per acre. This district also permits
the introduction of attached residential units and non-residential uses that
are compatible and in scale with the established neighborhood character. Land
within this district will be served by public sanitary sewer and water
facilities.
   (D)   "D," High Density Residential District. The D District is intended to
promote a high-quality mix of residential units, including multiple family
dwellings, at a density of up to nine units per acre. Other compatible, non-
residential uses may also be permitted. Land within this district will be
served by public sanitary sewer and water facilities.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.022 SCHEDULE OF USES.
   Buildings or land shall not be used and buildings shall not be erected,
except for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this
Code. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the top of
Table 155.022 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
   (A)   Permitted use (P). Land and/or buildings in this district may be used
by right.
   (B)   Accessory use (A). Uses that are permitted as part of the principal
use of the land and/or building within the specific zoning district.
   (C)   Conditional use (C). Land and/or buildings in this district may be
permitted only if conditional use
approval is granted, upon a finding that the general requirements of Subchapter
155.10 are met.
   (D)   Specific conditions. Indicates requirements or conditions, as listed
in Subchapter
155.10, are applicable to specific uses.
   (E)   Uses marked with an (-) are not permitted within the specific zoning
district.
   (F)   All structures and their placement on a lot shall conform to the
minimum dimensional requirements listed in
Table 155.023a.
Table 155.022
Use A B C D Specific Condition
Table 155.022
Use                                  A B C D Specific Condition
Accessory Uses                                
Employee quarters                    A A A A
Private garage                       A A A A
Private stable                       A A A A
Home occupation                      A A A A §
                                             155.108(E)(4)
Domestic pets                        A A A A
Roadside agriculture stand           A A A A L1
Temporary building related to        A A A A
construction
Garage sales                         A A A A §
                                             155.091(D)
Small animal agriculture             A A A A L2
Storage garages                      A A A A
Residential
Single-family                        P P P P Excludes manufactured housing
Two-family dwellings                 - C P P
Townhomes                            C C C C
Condominiums                         C C C C
Modular homes                        - - - -
Multiple dwellings                   - - - P
Residential
Group day care                       - - - -
Family day care                      - - - -
Group care homes Category I          - - - C
Mobile homes                         - - - -
Boarding and lodging houses          - - - P
                                             Except those where the chief
Fraternities, dorms, private clubs   - - - C activity is a service customarily
                                             carried on as a business
Child day care A & B                 - - - C
Short term rental                    C C C C Storage rental not permitted
Non-Residential
Agriculture                          P P P P
Offices                              - - - C §
                                             155.108(D)(6)
Parking lot                          - - - C §
                                             155.108(H)(6)
Business                             - - - - Except home occupations
Hospitals                            P P P P L3
Clinics                              - - - p
Public/Quasi-Public
Churches                             C C C C
Schools                              P P P P
Publicly owned facilities            P P P P
Cemeteries                           C C C C L4
Recreation
Forests                              P P P P
Golf course                          P P P P L5
City rec buildings                   P P P P
Other
Wireless communication facilities    - - - -
Historic properties                  - - - -
Uses similar to other uses permitted
in this zoning district and
consistent with the purpose of the   C C C C Subchapter 155.10
district, as determined in
accordance with Subchapter 155.10
L1: Only agricultural products produced on site for sale. One sign advertising
these products not exceeding 12 square feet in area per side, maximum of two
sides, which stands and signs shall be removed during any season for the period
when not in use.
L2: For agricultural use, provided, however, that buildings housing animals be
at least 15 feet from adjacent property lines and that the lot or tract of land
have an area of not less than one acre.
L3: 100 beds or more, and institutions of an educational, religious, charitable
or philanthropic nature, provided, however, that such buildings shall not be
located upon sites containing an area of less than five acres, may occupy not
over 10% of the total area of the lot, that the buildings shall be setback from
all required yard lines a distance of not less than two feet for each foot of
building height.
L4: Mausoleums shall be distant at least 200 feet from every street line and
the adjoining lots in residence districts, and provided further that any new
cemetery shall contain an area of 20 acres or more.
L5: Except miniature courses and practice driving tees operated for commercial
purposes; including such buildings, structures and uses as are necessary for
their operation, except those the chief activity of which is a service
customarily carried on as a business.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21; Am. Ord. 25-2061, passed 2-4-25)
§ 155.023 SPATIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All lots and buildings shall meet the minimum area and width
requirements of Table 155.023. New lots shall not be created, except in
conformance with these requirements.
 
Table 155.023 Lot and Width Requirements: Residential Districts
Zoning District Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
A               20,000                     80
B               10,000                     60
C               6,000                      50
D               4,0001                     50
1 For single-family dwellings the minimum lot area is 5,000 sq. ft.
   (B)   All structures and their placement on a lot shall conform to the
minimum dimensional requirements listed in Table 155.023a
 
Table 155.023a
                              Minimum Yard Setback (ft.) Unit Density1 in
Zoning   Maximum Building                                Dwelling Units (DU)/
District Height (ft./stories) Front Side Rear            sq. ft.

A        2.5 stories, 35 ft.  50    15   35              1 DU/20,000
B        2.5 stories, 35 ft.  35    8    30              1 DU/10,000
C        2.5 stories, 35 ft.  30    5    30              1 DU/6,000
D        3 stories, 45 ft.    30    52   303             1 DU/4,0004
1 Residential dwelling units shall be a minimum of 900 square feet.
2 Not less than 10 feet for buildings that exceed 2.5 stories.
3 Not less than 40 feet in depth for buildings that exceed 2.5 stories.
4 Single- family dwelling s shall adhere to 1 DU per 5,000 square feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7280.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7282.png]
 
(Res. 21-1165 , passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.024 SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the requirements of this subchapter, all development in the
residential districts shall meet the applicable requirements as listed
elsewhere in this Code:
   (A)   General provisions, see subchapter
155.09.
   (B)   Conditional use requirements, see subchapter 155.10.
   (C)   Parking and loading, see subchapter
155.11.
   (D)   Signs, see subchapter
155.12.
   (E)   Site plan review requirements, see subchapter
155.13.
   (F)   Buffering and screening requirements, see subchapter
155.14.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.03 BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 155.031 PURPOSE.
   (A)   "CBD," Central Business District. The CBD Zoning District serves as
the focal point for the social and commercial activities of the city. The
integration of business, institutional, public, quasi-public, cultural,
residential and other related uses is permitted and encouraged. Uses in this
district, for the most part, are intended to promote pedestrian movement and
social interaction and should be of a scale and character that is consistent
with the small town ambiance of the City of Mt. Healthy.
   (B)   "E," General Business District. The E District accommodates general
retail and/or auto-dependent businesses. Uses within this district typically
require high visibility, major arterial frontage, good access and ample
parking. While these uses are provided for, the E District is intended to be
limited to a confined area so as to prevent the creation of a commercial strip
and a proliferation of uses that would detract from the central business hub of
the community. E-1 Districts shall be regulated as E Districts for the purposes
of this Code.
   (C)   "OB," Office Business District. The OB District accommodates
commercial offices and other uses that may serve a greater concentration of
office uses than other commercial zoning districts in the city. Uses within
this district require high visibility, major arterial or collector frontage,
good access and ample parking. They may contain commercial offices designed to
function as a campus for technology, medical, call centers or other larger
scale corporate office configurations.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.032 SCHEDULE OF USES - BUSINESS.
    Buildings or land shall not be used and buildings shall not be erected,
except for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this
Code. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the top of Table
155.032 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following abbreviations.
The uses are permitted as one tenant per suite or building unless otherwise
specified in the Zoning Certificate of Use/Occupancy.
   (A)   Permitted use (P). Land and/or buildings in this district may be used
by right.
   (B)   Accessory use (A). Uses that are permitted as part of the principal
use of the land and/or building within the specific zoning district.
   (C)   Conditional use (C). Land and/or buildings in this district may be
permitted only if conditional use approval is granted, upon a finding that the
general requirements of subchapter
155.10 are met.
   (D)   Specific conditions. Indicates requirements or conditions, as listed
in subchapter
155.10, are applicable to specific uses.
   (E)   Uses marked with an (-) are not permitted within the specific zoning
district.
Table 155.032
Use E OB CBD Specific Condition
Table 155.032
Use                                 E OB CBD Specific Condition
Accessory Uses                                
Employee quarters                   A A  A    
Private garage                      A A  A    
Private stable                      A A  A    
Home occupation                     A A  A   §
                                             155.108(E)(4)
Domestic pets                       A A  A    
Roadside agriculture stand          A A  A   Table 155.02 L1
Temporary building related to       A A  A    
construction
Garage sales                        A A  A   §
                                             155.091(D)
Small animal agriculture            A A  A   Table 155.02 L2
Storage garages                     A A  A    
Food, Drink, Entertainment and                
Hospitality
Taverns                             - -  C    
Food, Drink, Entertainment and                
Hospitality
Outdoor dining                      A A  C    
Restaurants, excluding drive-in or  P P  P    
drive thru facilities
Drive-thru or drive-in              C C  -   See Subchapter
                                             155.10
Mobile vending (food trucks)        C C  -    
Boarding and lodging houses         P -  P    
Brew pub, night club, bar, brewery  - -  C    
Theater                             P P  P    
Bowling alley                       P P  P    
Bakery                              P P  P   Must have retail component
Bed and breakfast                   C C  C    
Hotel                               C -  C    
Short term rental                   - -  -    
Health Care and Social Assistance             
Hospitals                           P -  P   Table 155.02 L3
Group care center/facility          C -  -    
Group care Cat 1 6-15               C -  -    
Group care Cat 2 5 or less          C -  -    
Nursing homes and similar           P -  P    
General medical, hospital, health   - P  -    
centers
Hospitals and clinics unless animal P -  P    
oriented
Animal hospital                     - -  -    
Office, Financial and Commercial              
Services
Offices                             - P  P   Only sale of samples is permitted.
Banks                               P P  P   Must be FDIC
Financial institutions              P P  -    
Personal Service                              
Family day care                     P -  -    
Group day care                      C -  -    
Salon/barber shop                   P P  -    
Public/Quasi-Public                           
Churches                            C -  C    
Schools                             P -  P    
Public property                     P -  P    
Forests                             P -  P    
Cemeteries                          P -  -   Table 155.02 L4
Educational institutions and        P -  P    
private schools
Golf courses                        P -  P   Table 155.02 L5
City rec buildings                  P -  P    
Residential                                   
Single-family (not factory built)   P -  P    
Multiple dwellings                  P -  P    
Mobile homes                        - -  -    
Two-family dwellings                P -  P    
Dwellings located on second floor   - -  P    
or above 1st floor commercial
                                             Except those where the chief
Fraternities, dorms, private clubs  P -  -   activity is a service customarily
                                             carried on as a business
Retail                                        
Retail, wholesale, service          P -  P1  Wholesale storage or warehousing
                                             shall not exceed 1,000 cubic feet.
Sale of used goods                  C -  -    
Antique shops                       P -  -    
Thrift shop                         P -  -    
Vehicle Sales, Services and Related           
uses
Automotive repair (minor)           C -  -    
Automotive repair (major)           - -  -    
Automotive services                 P -  -    
Car wash                            P -  -    
Other                                         
Wireless communication facilities   - -  -    
Agriculture                         P -  P    
Uses similar to other uses
permitted in this zoning district
and consistent with the purpose of  C C  C   Subchapter 155.10
the district, as determined in
accordance with Subchapter
155.10
 
1: Outdoor display of items for retail are permitted as follows: The display of
items which are sold at retail within a retail establishment may take place on
the sidewalk outside the business as long as the items displayed are sold at
retail within the business, the display occurs only within the area
encompassing the width of the building, the items are removed outside business
hours, and the display utilizes an area that still allows a minimum of six feet
unimpeded width for pedestrian traffic.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21; Am. Ord. 24-2057, passed 12-17-24; Am. Ord. 25-
2061, passed 2-4-25)
§ 155.033 SPATIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All lots and buildings shall meet the minimum area and width
requirements of Table 155.033. New lots shall not be created, except in
conformance with these requirements.
 
Table 155.033 Lot and Width Requirements: Commercial Districts
Zoning District Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
E               6,000                      50
OB              6,000
CDB             50% of lot
 
   (B)   All structures and their placement on a lot shall conform to the
minimum dimensional requirements listed in Table 155.033a.
 
Table 155.033a
                Maximum Building  Minimum Yard Setback (ft.) Unit Density in
Zoning District Height (ft./                                 Dwelling Units
                stories)          Front Side Rear            (DU)/ sq. ft.

                                                             Determined by
E               3 stories, 45 ft. 30    01   02              Planning
                                                             Commission
OB              3 stories, 45 ft. 0                          25% of tract
CBD             4 stories, 45 ft. 0-103                      50%
1 If adjacent to residential zone then the setback is 5 feet.
2 If adjacent to zones B, C or D then the setback is 15 feet.
3 If adjacen t to resident ial zone then the setback is 5 feet. Side yards on
corner lots shall be consiste nt with minimu m and maxim um front yard setback
s. Parking setback for side yard on corner lot (side street) as allowed in the
rear yard shall have a setback of five feet from street right-of -way and at
least 50% of the setback area shall be landscaped unless otherwise approved by
Planning Commission.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7284.png]
 
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.034 SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all development in the
business districts shall meet the applicable requirements as listed elsewhere
in this Code:
   (A)   General provisions, see Subchapter
155.09.
   (B)   Conditional use requirements, see Subchapter 155.10.
   (C)   Parking and loading, see Subchapter
155.11.
   (D)   Signs, see Subchapter
155.12.
   (E)   Site plan review requirements, see Subchapter
155.13.
   (F)   Buffering and screening requirements, see Subchapter
155.14.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.04 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.041 PURPOSE.
   (A)   "F," Light Industrial District. The F District is intended to provide
dedicated locations within the community for office, research, knowledge-based
industry, services, light manufacturing and related uses that offer employment
opportunities and create economic vitality for the city and its residents.
   (B)   "G," Industrial District. The G District establishes a location for
industrial and heavy commercial uses that provide significant employment
opportunities within the city. Uses in this district tend to be more intensive
than those in the G District and due to the potential for large truck traffic,
late hours of operation and other potentially deleterious effects on the
surroundings and the community may require conditional use review.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.042 SCHEDULE OF USES.
   Buildings or land shall not be used and buildings shall not be erected,
except for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this
Code. Land and/or buildings in the F and G Districts may be used for the
purposes denoted by the following abbreviations in Table 155.042.
   (A)   Permitted use (P). Land and/or buildings in this district may be used
by right.
   (B)   Conditional use (C). Land and/or buildings in this district may be
permitted only if conditional use approval is granted, upon a finding that the
general requirements of Subchapter 155.10 are met.
   (C)   Specific conditions. Indicates requirements or conditions, as listed
in Subchapter 155.10, are applicable to specific uses.
   (D)   Uses marked with an (-) are not permitted within the specific zoning
district.
Table 155.042
Use F G Specific Condition
Table 155.042
Use                                   F G Specific Condition
Accessory Uses                             
Employee quarters/caretaker residence A A  
Private garage                        A A  
Private stable                        A A  
Domestic pets                         A A  
Roadside agriculture stand            A A Table 155.02 L1
Temporary building related to         A A  
construction
Small animal agriculture              A A Table 155.02 L2
Cafeteria facilities located within a P P  
principal use
Child care facilities located within  C C  
a principal use
Corporate offices incidental to the   P P  
principal use
Outdoor patio in conjunction with a   C C  
permitted restaurant
Outdoor storage related to a          C C  
principal use
Retail incidental to the manufacture
or production of goods on the
premises, not exceeding 30% of the    C C  
total floor area of the principal
building
Vehicle wash facilities for trucks    P P  
and trailers
Agriculture, Food and Animal-related       
Uses
Bakeries with more than 15 employees  P P  
on premise
Abattoirs and slaughterhouses, except     §
for poultry incidental to a retail    - C 155.108(B)(2)
store
Bottling works, brewing or distilling P P  
of liquors
Milk distributing stations (outside   P P  
of on-site retail)
Livery and stables or riding          P P  
academies
Farm, including raising animals       - P  
Agribusiness                          - P  
Farmers market                        - P  
Food processing plants                - P  
Greenhouse/nursery (not including     C P  
retail sale)
Kennels                               C P  
Produce and other food product        C P  
terminals
Commercial Establishments                  
Lumber yards or planning mills        P P  
Laundries, with more than 15 people   P P  
Metal working or welding shops        P P  
Stone or monument works with more     P P  
than 5 employees on premise
Storage, bailing, or treatment of     - -  
junk
Storage warehouses                    P P  
Blacksmith or horse-shoeing shop      P P  
Sale of used goods                    P P  
Business machine sales & service      P P  
Cleaning services                     P P  
Electric, plumbing supplies sales &   P P  
service (not including showroom)
Glass sales & service                 P P  
HVAC sales & service                  P P  
Locksmith shops                       P P  
Machinery and equipment sales &       P P  
service
Mail order businesses and fulfillment P P  
centers
Pest control services                 P P  
Petroleum product sales               P P  
Printing, photocopying and publishing P P  
facilities
Repair shops (non-automotive)         P P  
Tool and equipment rental             P P  
Construction                               
Building materials storage (and       P P  
lumber supply, including lumberyards)
Carting, express, hauling, or storage P P  
yards
Contractor's plant or storage yards   P P  
Landscaping service                   C P  
Educational                                
Child day care facilities             - -  
Educational instructions and private  P P  
schools
Commercial schools and studios
including art, dance, martial arts,   C P  
and music
Trade schools                         P P  
Training centers, engineering or      P P  
sales
Food, Drink, Entertainment and             
Hospitality
Retail, wholesale, service*           P P Wholesale storage or warehousing
                                          shall not exceed 1,000 cubic feet.
Sale of used goods                    C P  
Antique shops                         P P  
Bars, taverns, clubs and restaurants  C P  
serving alcoholic beverages
Brew pubs and similar establishments  C P  
Mobile vending's (food trucks)        C C  
Restaurants, excluding drive-in or    C P  
drive-thru facilities
Sexually oriented business/adult      - P §
entertainment                             155.108(D)(5)
Health Care and Social Assistance          
Hospitals*                            P P Table 155.02 L3
                                          Buildings and pens shall not be
Animal hospitals                      P P located within 100 feet of any
                                          residential district.
Group Care Cat 1 6-15                 - -  
Group Care Cat 2                      - -  
Nursing homes and similar             P P  
Medical and dental laboratories       C C §
                                          155.108(B)(2)
Manufacturing                              
Acid manufacture or wholesale storage - C §
                                          155.108(B)(2)
Smelting or reduction of ores or      - C §
metallurgical products                    155.108(B)(2)
Petroleum or its products, refining   - C §
or wholesale storage                      155.108(B)(2)
Explosive or fireworks manufacture or - C §
storage                                   155.108(B)(2)
Fat rendering, tallow, grease, or         §
lard refining or the manufacture of   - C 155.108(B)(2)
candles from fats
Fertilizer manufacture                - C §
                                          155.108(B)(2)
Garbage, offal, or dead animal        - C §
reduction or dumping                      155.108(B)(2)
Gas manufacture or storage            - C §
                                          155.108(B)(2)
Glue, size, or gelatin manufacture    - C §
                                          155.108(B)(2)
Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of    - C §
paris manufacture                         155.108(B)(2)
Manufacturing not incidental of on-   - P  
premise retail
Coal, coke, or wood yards             P P  
Crematories (except with cemetery)    P P  
Dyeing and claeing works, more than   P P  
15 ppl
Building material manufacturing
including milling, planning and       C C  
joining
Chemical manufacturing and storage    C C §
                                          155.108(B)(1)
Machine, sheet metal and wielding     C C §
shops                                     155.108(B)(2)
Manufacturing, compounding,
processing, packaging, treating or    P C §
assembly from previously prepared         155.108(B)(2)
materials
Metal stamping, pressing and buffing  C C §
                                          155.108(B)(2)
Paint, rust proofing and rust coating C C §
                                          155.108(B)(2)
Tool and die shops                    C C §
                                          155.108(B)(2)
Offices, Research and Technical            
Facilities
Offices for executive,
administrative, professional, real    P P  
estate, accounting and similar
professional activities
Research, development and testing     P P  
laboratories
Public Facilities                          
Churches                              C C  
Schools                               P P  
Public property                       P P  
Forests                               P P  
Cemeteries*                           P P Table 155.02 L4
Educational institutions and private  P P  
schools
Golf courses*                         P P Table 155.02 L5
City rec buildings                    P P  
Government offices, buildings and     P P  
facilities
Transportation and Warehousing             
Bottled gas storage and distribution  C C  
Cartage, express and parcel delivery  C C  
facilities
Heliports and helipads                C C  
Mini-warehouse and self-storage       C P  
facilities
Warehouses and distribution centers   P P  
Wholesale businesses                  P P  
Utilities                                  
Public utility buildings              P P  
Solar facilities (non-residential)    P P  
Telephone exchange buildings          P P  
Utility substations                   P P  
Wind energy conversion systems        C C  
(single accessory)
Wireless communication facilities and C C  
towers
Vehicle Sales, Service and Related         
Vehicle repair (major or minor)       P P  
Vehicle wrecking and salvaging        C C  
Vehicle services                      P P  
Vehicle body shops                    P P  
Truck and heavy equipment repair      - C  
Truck and trailer rental              C P  
Vehicle and equipment rental          C P  
Commercial Vehicle repair, major      C C  
Commercial Vehicle repair, minor      C C  
Commercial Vehicle service stations   C C  
Vehicle wash facilities               C P  
Waste Processing and Disposal              
Distillation of bones, coal or wood   - C §
                                          155.108(B)(2)
Recycling collection and/or           - C §
processing facility (non-hazardous)       155.108(B)(2)
Storage of hazardous materials        - C §
                                          155.108(B)(2)
Other                                      
Single-family (not factory built)     - -  
Multiple dwellings                    P -  
Mobile homes                          - -  
Two-family dwellings                  P -  
Business                              - P  
                                          Except those where the chief activity
Fraternities, dorms, private clubs    P P is a service customarily carried on
                                          as a business
Agriculture                           P P  
Artisan shops, such as glass blowers,
metal sculptures, wood carvers and    C P  
weavers producing their goods and
selling them for retail on premises
Bicycle sales, rental and repair      C P  
Radio, television and recording       P P  
studios
Uses similar to other uses permitted
in this zoning district and
consistent with the purpose of the    C C Subchapter 155.10
district, as determined in accordance
with Subchapter 155.10
 
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.043 SPATIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All lots and buildings shall meet the minimum area and width
requirements of Table 155.043. New lots shall not be created, except in
conformance with these requirements.
 
Table 155.043 Lot and Width Requirements: Industrial Districts
Zoning District Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
F               6,000                      50
G               6,000                      50
 
   (B)   All structures and their placement on a lot shall conform to the
minimum dimensional requirements listed in Table 155.043a.
 
Table 155.043a
                Maximum Building Minimum Yard Setback (ft.)    Unit Density in
Zoning District Height (ft./                                   Dwelling Units
                stories)         Front Side        Rear        (DU)/sq. ft.

                5 stories, 50          5 ft. if    30 ft. if
F               ft.              01    adjacent to adjacent to N/A
                                       residential residential
                5 stories, 50          5 ft. if    30 ft. if
G               ft.              01    adjacent to adjacent to N/A
                                       residential residential
1 If adjacent to residential or commercial zone then those setbacks apply as
the setback in this zone.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7286.png]
 
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21; Am. Ord. 25-2061, passed 2-4-25)
§ 155.044 SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.
   In addition to the requirements of this chapter, all development in the F
and G Districts shall meet the applicable requirements as listed elsewhere in
this Code:
   (A)   General provisions, see Subchapter
155.09.
   (B)   Conditional use requirements, see Subchapter 155.10.
   (C)   Parking and loading, see Subchapter
155.11.
   (D)   Signs, see Subchapter
155.12.
   (E)   Site plan review requirements, see Subchapter
155.13.
   (F)   Buffering and screening requirements, see Subchapter
155.14.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.05 RECREATIONAL DISTRICTS
§ 155.051 PURPOSE.
   "H," Parks, Playgrounds and Recreational District. The H District is
established for the protection of flora and fauna in significant natural areas
of the city where protection of sensitive and valued resources is a high
priority for the community. Because of natural topography, flood plain
limitations and various institutional restrictions, these lands are generally
not suited or appropriate for agriculture or development.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.052 SCHEDULE OF USES.
   Buildings or land shall not be used and buildings shall not be erected,
except for the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided for in this
Code. Land and/or buildings in the districts indicated at the top of
Table 155.052 may be used for the purposes denoted by the following
abbreviations:
   (A)   Permitted use (P). Land and/or buildings in this district may be used
by right.
   (B)   Conditional use (C). Land and/or buildings in this district may be
permitted only if conditional use approval is granted, upon a finding that the
general requirements of Subchapter 155.10 are met.
   (C)   Specific conditions. Indicates requirements or conditions, as listed
in Subchapter 155.10, are applicable to specific uses.
   (D)   Uses marked with an (-) are not permitted within the specific zoning
Uses marked with an (-) are not permitted within the specific zoning district.
Table 155.052
Use H Specific Condition
Table 155.052
Use                                                       H Specific Condition
Accessory Uses                                               
Employee quarters                                         A  
Private garage                                            A  
Private stable                                            A  
Home occupation                                           A §
                                                            155.108(E)(4)
Domestic pets                                             A  
Roadside agriculture stand                                A Table 155.02 L1
Temporary building related to construction                A  
Garage sales                                              A §
                                                            155.091(D)
Small animal agriculture                                  A Table 155.02 L2
Storage garages                                           A  
Agricultural and Animal-Related Uses                         
Community gardens                                         P  
Riding stables                                            C  
Agriculture                                               P  
Public/Quasi-Public                                          
Churches                                                  C  
Schools                                                   P  
Public property                                           P  
Forests                                                   P  
Cemeteries                                                P Table 155.02 L4
Educational institutions and private schools              P  
Golf courses                                              P Table 155.02 L5
City rec buildings                                        P  
Parking lots                                              C §
                                                            155.108(H)(6)
Hospitals and clinics unless animal oriented              P  
Recreational and Educational                                 
Forest and wildlife preserves                             P  
Interpretive centers                                      P  
Public parks/playgrounds/recreation areas                 C  
Other                                                        
Single-family (not factory built)                         P  
Other                                                        
Two-family dwellings                                      P  
Type A family day care                                    P  
Type B family day care                                    P  
Child day care                                            C  
Boarding and lodging houses                               P  
Group care homes Category I                               P  
Wireless communication facilities and towers              C  
Governmental offices, buildings and facilities            P  
Uses similar to other uses permitted in this zoning
district and consistent with the purpose of the district, C Subchapter 155.10
as determined in accordance with Subchapter 155.10
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.053 SPATIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All lots and buildings shall meet the minimum area and width
requirements of Table 155.053. New lots shall not be created, except in
conformance with these requirements.
 
Table 155.053 Lot and Width Requirements: Recreational District
Zoning District Minimum Lot Area (sq. ft.) Minimum Lot Width (ft.)
H               5,000/4,000*               50
 
   (B)   All structures and their placement on a lot shall conform to the
minimum dimensional requirements listed in Table 155.053a.
 
Table 155.053a
                Maximum Building    Minimum Yard Setback (ft.) Unit Density in
Zoning District Height (ft./                                   Dwelling Units
                stories)            Front Side Rear            (DU)/sq. ft.

H               2.5 stories, 35 ft. 50    15   35              N/A
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7288.png]
 
 
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.054 SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATION S.
   In addition to the require ments of this subchapt er, all development in the
Recreational District shall meet the applicable requirements as listed
elsewhere in this Code:
   (A)   General provisions, see Subchapter
155.09.
   (B)   Conditional use requirements, see Subchapter 155.10.
   (C)   Parking and loading, see Subchapter
155.11.
   (D)   Signs, see Subchapter
155.12.
   (E)   Site plan review requirements, see Subchapter
155.13.
   (F)   Buffering and screening requirements, see Subchapter
155.14.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.06 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
§ 155.061 PURPOSE.
   The Planned Unit Develop ment (PUD) District is established as an optional
development tool to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development;
to encourage innovation in land use, form of ownership and variety of design,
layout and type of structures constructed; to achieve economy and efficiency in
the use of land; to preserve significant natural, historical and architectural
features and open space; to promote efficient provision of public services and
utilities; to minimize adverse traffic impacts; to provide better housing,
employment and business opportunities particularly suited to residents; to
encourage development of convenient recreational facilities; and to encourage
the use and improvement of existing sites when the uniform regulations
contained in other zoning districts alone do not provide adequate protection
and safeguards for the property and surrounding areas. It is the further intent
of the PUD regulations to promote a higher quality of development than can be
achieved from conventional zoning requirements in furtherance of the vision and
goals of the adopted Mt. Healthy Comprehensive Plan.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.062 QUALIFYING CONDITIONS.
   In order to qualify for PUD approval, the project must satisfy the
conditions of this section. It is the applicant's responsibility to
demonstrate, in writing, that each of the following criteria is or will be met
by the proposed PUD:
   (A)   Recognizable benefit. A PUD shall achieve recognizable and substantial
benefits that would not be possible under the existing zoning classification
(s). At least three of the following benefits shall be accrued to the community
as a result of the proposed PUD:
      (1)   Preservation of significant natural features,
      (2)   A complementary mix of land uses or housing types,
      (3)   Extensive open space and recreational amenities,
      (4)   Connectivity of open space with new or existing adjacent greenway
or trail corridors,
      (5)   Preservation of small-town appeal,
      (6)   Improvements to public streets or other public facilities that
mitigate traffic and/or other development impacts,
      (7)   Coordinated development of multiple small parcels,
      (8)   Or removal or renovation of blighted buildings, sites or
contamination clean-up.
   (B)   Size. Each PUD shall contain a minimum of five acres; provided sites
containing less than five acres may be considered for rezoning to PUD, if the
City Council determines that the site will advance the purposes of the PUD
District. When determining the appropriateness of areas less than the
applicable minimum required, the City Council shall determine that:
      (1)   Rezoning the area to PUD will not result in a significant adverse
effect upon nearby or adjacent city lands;
      (2)   The proposed uses will complement the character of the surrounding
area;
      (3)   The purpose and qualifying conditions of the PUD District can be
achieved within a smaller area; and
      (4)   The PUD is not being used as a means to circumvent conventional
zoning requirements.
   (C)   Utilities. The PUD shall be served by public water and sanitary sewer.
   (D)   Ownership. The PUD application shall be filed by the property owner,
lessee or other person with legal interest in the property and written consent
by the owner. The proposed development shall be under unified ownership or
control, so one person or entity has proprietary responsibility for the full
completion of the project. The applicant shall provide sufficient documentation
of ownership or control in the form of agreements, contracts, covenants, and/or
deed restrictions indicating that the development will be completed in its
entirety as proposed.
   (E)   Comprehensive Plan and vision. Proposed uses and design of the PUD
shall be substantially consistent with the city's adopted Comprehensive Plan
and the principles for land stewardship contained in the Healthy Hilltops Plan.
   (F)   Pedestrian accommodation. The PUD shall provide for integrated, safe
and abundant pedestrian and bicycle access and movement within the PUD and to
adjacent properties.
   (G)   Architecture. Building forms, relationships, scale and styles shall be
harmonious and visually integrated.
   (H)   Traffic. The PUD shall provide for safe and efficient vehicular
movement within, into and out of the PUD site. Traffic calming techniques,
parking lot landscaping, and other sustainable design solutions shall be
employed to improve traffic circulation, storm water management, pedestrian
safety and aesthetic appeal.
   (I)   Eligible districts. Land within any zoning district may qualify for
PUD zoning.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.063 PUD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted by right or conditional approval in
any zoning district may be permitted within a PUD, subject to the provisions of
§
155.062, Qualifying Conditions and the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Minimum lot size and zoning requirements. Lot area, width, setbacks,
height, lot coverage, minimum floor area, parking, landscaping, lighting and
other requirements for the district applicable to the proposed use, as provided
in Table
155.063, shall be applicable for all such uses within a PUD, unless modified in
accordance with division (D) of this section. In the case of a mix of uses, the
zoning requirements applicable to each use category shall apply to that use.
Table 155.063 Minimum Zoning Requirements
Land Use Applicable Zoning District
Table 155.063 Minimum Zoning Requirements
Land Use                 Applicable Zoning District
Single-family            B
Two family               C
Townhome                 C
Multiple family          D
Retail, service business CBD (Or E?)
Office                   OB
Industry                 F
 
   (C)   Connectivity. Pathways for bicycles and pedestrians shall be
incorporated throughout the development and along all perimeter streets to
ensure connectivity between uses and with adjacent properties. The pathways
shall be paved and shall be designed to city standards.
   (D)   Modification of minimum requirements. District regulations applicable
to a land use in the PUD may be altered from the requirements specified in
Table 155.063, including but not limited to, modification from the lot area and
width, building setbacks, height, lot coverage, signs and parking. The
applicant for a PUD shall identify, in writing, all intended deviations from
the zoning requirements. Modifications may be approved by the City Council
during the preliminary development plan review stage, after Planning Commission
recommendation. These adjustments may be permitted only if they will result in
a higher quality and more sustainable development consistent with the purposes
of PUD expressed in §
155.061. The modifications shall also satisfy at least four of the following
criteria:
      (1)   Preserve the best natural features of the site;
      (2)   Create, improve or maintain open space for the residents, employees
and visitors beyond the minimum required by division (E) of this section;
      (3)   Commit that at least 10% of all dwelling units in the PUD will be
"permanently" affordable units or 20% affordable units, or commit to a payment
in lieu of constructing such units, as agreed to with the City Council;
      (4)   Provide a mix of residential types such as single-family, townhome
and/or multiple family;
      (5)   Employ low impact design and/or other best practices to manage
storm water and reduce the off-site impacts of runoff;
      (6)   Employ practices in site layout, building construction and
materials that will result in a measurable reduction in energy consumption;
      (7)   Introduce new development concepts, such as co-housing; and/or
      (8)   Include a mix of residential and non-residential uses.
   (E)   Density bonus. In addition to the modification of minimum requirements
permitted in division (D) of this section, the City Council, after Planning
Commission recommendation, may permit an increase in the total number of
residential units allowed within a PUD where it is demonstrated that at least
three of the following amenities will be included in the development:
      (1)   More than 20% of the total units within the PUD will be committed
as "permanently" affordable units;
      (2)   Cool roof technology will be employed on all buildings within the
PUD;
      (3)   Fresh food market will be incorporated into the PUD;
      (4)   Buildings will be designed and constructed to accommodate green
roof gardens;
      (5)   One or more of the buildings within the PUD will be LEED certified
building(s);
      (6)   Low impact development (LID) design principles will be employed to
minimize storm water runoff;
      (7)   Solar panels will be installed on one or more of the buildings
within the development and will yield a measurable reduction in energy usage;
      (8)   Additional accommodation beyond the required pathways will be made
for bicycles and pedestrians; and/or
      (9)   A minimum of 25% open space will be dedicated within the
development.
   (F)   Open space. At least 15% of the area of a PUD site shall be preserved
as open space, in accordance with the following requirements. For purposes of
this requirement, "green roofs" shall be counted as open space.
      (1)   Areas not considered open space. The following land areas shall not
be counted as required open space for the purposes of this section:
         (a)   The area within any public street right-of-way or private street
easement;
         (b)   Any easement for overhead utility lines, unless adjacent to
qualified open space;
         (c)   Storm water detention ponds; provided rain gardens or ponds
designed as water features that may also provide for storm water storage may be
counted toward required open space;
         (d)   Fifty percent of any flood plain, wetland, water body or steep
slope (15% or greater) area and 50% of the area of any golf course;
         (e)   The area within a platted lot, unless the lot has been dedicated
to open space on the plat via conservation easement or other means of ensuring
that the lot is permanent open space; and
         (f)   Parking and loading areas.
      (2)   Specifications for required open space. Required open space areas
shall meet the following specifications:
         (a)   Shall be for use by all residents, employees and visitors of the
PUD, subject to reasonable rules and regulations. In the case of a golf course,
stable or similar facility, membership shall be available to all residents of
the PUD, subject to charges, fees or assessments for use;
         (b)   If the site contains a river, stream or other body of water, the
city may require that a portion of the required open space abuts the body of
water;
         (c)   Leaves scenic views and vistas unblocked or uninterrupted,
particularly as seen from public street rights-of-way;
         (d)   Protects the roadside character by establishing buffer zones
along scenic corridors and improves public safety and vehicular carrying
capacity by avoiding development that fronts directly onto existing roadways;
         (e)   Shall be configured so the open space is reasonably usable by
residents of the PUD;
         (f)   Shall be of sufficient size and dimension and located,
configured, or designed in such a way as to achieve the applicable purposes of
this chapter and enhance the quality of the development. The open space shall
neither be perceived nor function simply as an extension of the rear yard of
those lots abutting it;
         (g)   To the extent practical, open space areas shall be linked with
adjacent open spaces, public parks, bicycle paths or pedestrian paths;
         (h)   Pedestrian access points to the required open space areas from
the interior of the PUD shall be provided and clearly identified by signs or a
visible improved path for safe and convenient access;
         (i)   Grading shall be minimal, with the intent to preserve existing
topography and landscaping where practical; and
         (j)   May contain ball fields, tennis courts, swimming pools and
related buildings, community buildings, golf courses, and similar recreational
facilities. However, no more than 50% of the required open space may contain
any of these uses.
   (G)   Existing PUDs, EE, DD, and FF Zones. Within the city there are
previously approved planned unit developments, identified on the zoning map as
"PUD," "DD," "EE," "FF"". These developments shall be exempt from the
requirements of this chapter and shall conform to the prior approved
development plans for each respective project. However, any expansion to or
modification of the existing approved developments that constitutes a major
change, as defined in §
155.067, shall be subject to the following procedural requirements of this
chapter:
      (1)   Major changes shall be subject to the final development plan
requirements of §
155.065(D).
      (2)   The review standards of §
155.066(C) to (H) shall apply.
      (3)   The general provisions of §
155.064 shall apply.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.064 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conditions. Reasonable conditions may be imposed upon the PUD approval
by the Planning Commission and/or City Council. The conditions imposed shall be
recorded in the minutes of the approval action, and shall remain unchanged
except upon amendment of the PUD in accordance with the procedures of §
155.067. Conditions may include, but are not limited to, those necessary to:
      (1)   Ensure public services and facilities will be capable of
accommodating increased loads;
      (2)   Protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and
energy;
      (3)   Ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land;
      (4)   Meet the intent and purpose of this Code;
      (5)   Be related to the standards established in the Code for the
proposed PUD;
      (6)   Ensure compliance with the final development plan and the
provisions of this Code.
   (B)   Performance guarantees. The City Council or Planning Commission may
require reasonable performance guarantees, in accordance with §
155.154 to ensure completion of specified improvements within the PUD.
   (C)   Interior streets. Public or private streets may be required to be
extended to exterior lot lines in order to allow connection to existing or
planned streets on adjacent parcels, so as to provide for secondary access,
continuity of the circulation system and to reduce traffic on collector
streets.
   (D)   Time limits. Each PUD shall be under construction within 12 months
after the date of approval of the final development plan. If this requirement
is not met, the City Council may, in its discretion, grant extensions not
exceeding 12 additional months for each such extension; provided that prior to
the expiration of the initial 12 month period and any subsequent extension, the
applicant submits reasonable evidence in writing to the effect that unforeseen
difficulties or special circumstances have been encountered, causing delay in
commencement of the PUD. If the PUD has not been commenced within the initial
12 month approval period, or within an authorized extension thereof, any
building permits issued for the PUD or any part thereof shall be of no further
effect. At the expiration of the applicable period of time, the Planning
Commission or City Council may initiate proceedings for the rezoning of the
property to some other zoning district.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.065 REVIEW PROCESS.
   The following procedures shall be followed in the establishment of any
planned unit development:
   (A)   Pre-application conference. Prior to filing a formal application for a
planned unit development, the applicant shall meet with the Zoning
Administrator and/or other city officials in order to review the general
character of the proposed development, i.e., its scope, nature and location. At
this time, the applicant shall be advised of the PUD review procedures and the
various information, studies, etc., which may be required as part of the review
process.
   (B)   Preliminary PUD application. An application for rezoning to PUD shall
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on a form for that purpose, along with
an application fee in accordance with the schedule of fees established by the
City Council. In addition, the application shall include the following:
      (1)   Parallel plan. Residential density shall be determined through the
preparation of a conventional development plan illustrating how the site could
be developed in accordance with the basic requirements specified in
Table 155.063. A concept layout shall be prepared to scale showing, as
applicable, single- family and two-family lots, townhome and multiple family
buildings, parking, setbacks and street rights-of-way. The number of units that
could be accommodated under the requirements of
Table 155.063 shall serve as maximum number permitted, unless a density bonus
is approved in accordance with §
155.063(E). Live/work units located above main floor businesses shall not be
counted toward the maximum number of dwellings.
      (2)   Preliminary development plan. A preliminary development plan
containing the following information shall be submitted:
         (a)   General location map;
         (b)   Legal description of the subject property;
         (c)   Title block, date, north arrow, scale, name and contact
information of applicant and name and contact information of plan preparer;
         (d)   Current topographical map clearly showing existing topographic
conditions, including contour intervals of no more than two feet based on field
survey or photogrammetric methods;
         (e)   Property boundary survey;
         (f)   Location of existing natural features including woods, streams,
ponds, wetlands and steep (15% or greater) slopes;
         (g)   Existing land uses within the development site and surrounding
areas for a distance of 300 feet, including the approximate location of all
buildings, structures, lots and streets (an aerial photo may suffice);
         (h)   Location and identification of existing and proposed public,
semi-public, or community facilities such as schools, parks, trails, churches,
public buildings and dedicated open space;
         (i)   Existing zoning on all abutting properties;
         (j)   Approximate location of existing and proposed utilities,
including a preliminary utility and drainage concept plan;
         (k)   Uses proposed within the PUD;
         (l)   Number and type of dwelling units proposed, including the number
and type of committed affordable units, if any;
         (m)   Conceptual layout;
         (n)   General location of proposed interior streets and access points
to abutting streets;
         (o)   Number and general location of off-street parking facilities;
and
         (p)   Perspective drawings or photographs of representative building
types, indicating the proposed architectural style and appearance.
      (3)   Summary of intent. A written statement containing the following
information shall be submitted with the preliminary development plan:
         (a)   Statement of how the proposed PUD meets each of the qualifying
conditions of §
155.062;
         (b)   Statement of the present ownership of all land within the
proposed development;
         (c)   Explanation of the character of the proposed development
including a summary of acres or square footage by type of use, number and type
of dwelling units, gross density calculation for dwelling units, and minimum
standards for floor area, lot size, and setbacks;
         (d)   Verification that the subject site is not located within an
existing flood plain;
         (e)   A complete description of any requested variations from the
applicable spatial or other requirements applying to the property, in
accordance with §
155.063(D);
         (f)   General statement of the proposed development schedule and
progression of each phase or stage; and
         (g)   Intended agreements, provisions, and covenants to govern the use
of the development, building materials or architectural styles and any common
or open space areas, including the provisions which will organize, regulate and
sustain a property or home owners association, if applicable.
   (C)   Preliminary PUD plan and rezonnng.
      (1)   Planning Commission review. Upon receipt of the PUD application and
related materials, the Planning Commission shall conduct a work session with
the applicant to review the development concept and determine the need for
additional information and referral to the Architectural Review Board prior to
conducting a public hearing.
      (2)   Additional information. If required by the Planning Commission, the
applicant shall submit additional information and/or studies to support the
request such as, but not limited to: impact assessment, traffic analysis, storm
water study, market feasibility study.
      (3)   Public hearing. Upon completion of its initial review and following
receipt of any additional materials, the Planning Commission shall conduct a
public hearing, notice of which shall be in accordance with the requirements of
§
155.183(B).
      (4)   Recommendation. Following the public hearing, the Planning
Commission shall review the PUD request and the preliminary development plan,
based on conformance with the standards of § 155.066 and shall make a
recommendation to the City Council to approve, disapprove, or approve with
modifications the request for PUD zoning and the preliminary development plan.
      (5)   City Council action. Upon receipt of the Planning Commission
recommendation, the City Council shall review the preliminary development plan,
the record of the Planning Commission proceedings, the standards of §
155.066 and the recommendation of the Planning Commission and shall approve,
disapprove, or approve with modifications the preliminary development plan and
rezoning request.
      (6)   Zoning map. If the PUD zoning is approved, the Zoning Administrator
shall cause the zoning map to be changed to indicate the planned unit
development. If the preliminary development plan is approved with
modifications, the applicant shall file with the Zoning Administrator written
notice of consent to the modifications and a properly revised preliminary
development plan prior to the map being changed.
   (D)   Final development plan. Within 12 months of the City Council's
approval of the preliminary development plan and PUD rezoning, the applicant
shall submit a final development plan for the entire PUD or one or more phases
to the Zoning Administrator, in accordance with the requirements for final site
plan review as contained in §
155.135. If determined to be complete by the Zoning Administrator, copies of
the plan shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission.
      (1)   Phased projects. If the PUD is to be developed in phases, the final
development plan may be submitted for one or more phases of the overall PUD. A
tentative schedule for the completion of each phase and commencement of the
next phase shall also be submitted for Planning Commission approval.
      (2)   Extension of time limit. One extension of the time period for
submitting the final development plan may be granted by the City Council for up
to an additional 12 months, if a request is submitted by the applicant, in
writing, prior to the expiration of the original 12 month approval period. If
an application for final development plan approval has not been submitted prior
to the expiration of the original 12 months or an approved extension, the
preliminary development plan shall be null and void. In addition, the Planning
Commission or City Council may initiate a rezoning of the property to another
zoning district.
      (3)   Subdivision plat. For any PUD requiring subdivision plat approval,
the subdivision plat shall be submitted simultaneously with the final
development plan and reviewed concurrently as part of the PUD.
      (4)   Review and action. The Planning Commission shall review the final
development plan in relation to its conformance with the preliminary
development plan and any conditions or modifications attached to the PUD
rezoning by the City Council. If it is determined that the final plan does not
substantially conform with the preliminary development plan, the review process
shall be conducted as a preliminary development plan review, in accordance with
§ 155.065(B). If the final development plan is consistent with the approved
preliminary development plan, the Planning Commission shall review the final
plan in accordance with the standards for site plan review, and the PUD
standards of §
155.066. The Planning Commission shall prepare a record of its findings and
shall approve, disapprove, or approve with modifications the final development
plan.
   (E)   PUD agreement.
      (1)   Prior to issuance of any building permits or commencement of
construction on any portion of the PUD, the applicant shall enter into an
agreement with the city, in recordable form, setting forth the applicant's
obligations with respect to the PUD.
      (2)   The agreement shall describe all improvements to be constructed as
part of the PUD and shall incorporate, by reference, the final development plan
with all required modifications, other documents which comprise the approved
PUD, and all conditions attached to the approval by the city.
      (3)   A phasing plan shall also be submitted, if applicable, describing
the intended schedule for start and completion of each phase and the
improvements to be undertaken in each phase.
      (4)   The agreement shall also establish the remedies of the city in the
event of default by the applicant in carrying out the PUD, and shall be binding
on all successors in interest to the applicant.
      (5)   All documents shall be executed and recorded in Hamilton County.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.066 REVIEW STANDARDS.
   The proposed development must, to the satisfaction of the reviewing body,
meet all of the following general standards:
   (A)   The PUD will comply with the standards, conditions, and requirements
of this chapter.
   (B)   The PUD will promote the intent and purpose of this chapter.
   (C)   The proposed project will be compatible with adjacent uses of land,
the natural environment, and the capacities of public services and facilities
affected by the proposed project.
   (D)   The proposed project will be consistent with the public health,
safety, and welfare needs of the city.
   (E)   Granting the PUD rezoning will result in a recognizable and
substantial benefit to ultimate users of the project and to the community,
which would not otherwise be feasible or achievable under the conventional
zoning districts.
   (F)   The PUD will not result in a significant increase in the need for
public services and facilities and will not place a significant burden upon
surrounding lands or the natural environment, unless the resulting adverse
effects are adequately provided for or mitigated by features of the PUD as
approved.
   (G)   The PUD will be consistent with the city's Comprehensive Plan and the
Healthy Hilltops Plan. Specifically, the following planning principles shall be
adhered to, as applicable:
      (1)   Redevelopment and infill locations should be favored over
greenfield development;
      (2)   Natural features and resources should be preserved or at least
conserved;
      (3)   Future development/redevelopment shall strengthen the physical
character of the city;
      (4)   Quality design is emphasized for all uses to create an attractive,
distinctive public and private realm;
      (5)   Places are created with an integrated mix of uses that contribute
to the city's identity and vitality;
      (6)   Diverse housing choices are found throughout the city, including
relatively high density and affordable units;
      (7)   Parks, open space and recreational areas are incorporated into
future development; and
      (8)   Places are connected and accessible throughout the community by
transportation methods other than automobiles.
   (H)   The PUD will respect or enhance the established or planned character,
use, and intensity of development within the area of the city where it is to be
located.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.067 CHANGES TO PUD.
   Changes to an approved PUD shall be permitted only under the following
circumstances:
   (A)   Notify Zoning Administrator. The holder of an approved PUD final
development plan shall notify the Zoning Administrator of any desired change to
the approved PUD.
   (B)   Minor change determination. Minor changes may be approved by the
Zoning Administrator upon determining that the proposed revision(s) will not
alter the basic design and character of the PUD, nor any specified
modifications imposed as part of the original approval. Minor changes shall
include the following:
      (1)   Reduction of the size of any building and/or sign;
      (2)   Movement of buildings and/or signs by no more than ten feet;
      (3)   Landscaping approved in the final development plan that is replaced
by similar landscaping to an equal or greater extent;
      (4)   Changes in floor plans which do not alter the character of the use
or increase the amount of required parking;
      (5)   Internal rearrangement of a parking lot that does not affect the
number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design; or
      (6)   Changes required or requested by the City of Mt. Healthy or other
county, state or federal regulatory agency in order to conform to other laws or
regulations.
   (C)   Major change determination. A proposed change not determined by the
Zoning Administrator to be minor shall be submitted as an amendment to the PUD
and shall be processed in the same manner as the original PUD application for
the final development plan. While not required, the Planning Commission may
elect to hold a public hearing in which case the notification requirements of §
155.183(B) shall be followed.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.068 APPEALS.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have no jurisdiction or authority to
accept or consider an appeal from any PUD determination or decision, or any
part thereof, nor shall the Board of Zoning Appeals have authority to grant
variances for or with respect to a PUD or any part thereof.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.07 OVERLAY DISTRICTS [RESERVED]
155.08 SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT USES
DISTRICTS RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS INDU S- TRIA L RECR EA- TIONA L
DISTRICTS                 RESIDENTIAL BUSINESS  INDU S- TRIA L RECR EA- TIONA L
Use                       A B C D     E OB CB D F G            H
ACCESSORY USES
Employee quarters         A A A A     A A  A    A A            A
Caretaker residence       - - - -     - -  -    A A            -
Private garage            A A A A     A A  A    A A            A
Private stable            A A A A     A A  A    A A            A
Home occupation           A A A A     A A  A    A A            A
Domestic pets             A A A A     A A  A    A A            A
Roadside agriculture      A A A A     A A  A    A A            A
stand
Temporary building        A A A A     A A  A    A A            A
related to construction
Garage sales              A A A A     A A  A    - -            A
Small animal agriculture  A A A A     A A  A    A A            A
Storage garages           A A A A     A A  A    - -            A
Cafeteria facilities
located within a          - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
principal use
Childcare facilities
located within a          - - - -     - -  -    A A            -
principal use
Corporate offices
incidental to the         - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
principal use
Outdoor patio in
conjunction with a        - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
permitted restaurant
Outdoor storage related   - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
to a principal use
Retail incidental to the
manufacture or production
of goods on the premises, - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
not exceeding 30% of the
total floor area of the
principal building
Vehicle wash facilities   - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
for trucks and trailers
AGRICULTURAL, FOOD AND ANIMAL-RELATED USES
Community gardens         - - - -     - -  -    - -            P
Riding stables            - - - -     - -  -    - -            C
Agriculture               - - - -     - -  -    - -            P
Bakeries with more than   - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
15 emp on premise
Abattoirs and
slaughterhouses, except   - - - -     - -  -    - P            -
for poultry incidental to
a retail store
Use                       A B C D     E OB CB D F G            H
Bottling works, brewing   - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
or distilling of liquors
Milk distributing
stations (outside of on-  - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
site retail)
Livery and stables or     - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
riding academies
Farm, including raising   - - - -     - -  -    - P            -
animals
Agribusiness              - - - -     - -  -    - P            -
Farmers market            - - - -     - -  -    - P            -
Food processing plants    - - - -     - -  -    - P            -
Greenhouse/nursery (not   - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
including retail sale)
Kennels                   - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
Produce and other food    - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
product terminals
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
Lumber yards or planning  - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
mills
Laundries, with more than - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
15 people
Metal working or welding  - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
shops
Stone or monument works
with more than 5 emp on   - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
premise
Storage, bailing, or      - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
treatment of junk
Storage warehouses        - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Blacksmith or horse-      - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
shoeing shop
Business machine sales &  - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
service
Cleaning services         - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Electric, plumbing
supplies sales & service  - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
(not including showroom)
Glass sales & service     - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
HVAC sales & service      - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Locksmith shops           - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Machinery and equipment   - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
sales & service
Mail order businesses and - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
fulfillment centers
Pest control services     - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Use                       A B C D     E OB CB D F G            H
Petroleum product sales   - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Printing, photocopying    - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
and publishing facilities
Repair shops (non-        - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
automotive)
Tool and equipment rental - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
CONSTRUCTION
Building materials
storage (and lumber       - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
supply, including
lumberyards)
Carting, express,         - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
hauling, or storage yards
Contractor's plant or     - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
storage yards
Landscaping service       - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
FOOD, DRINK, ENTERTAINMENT, AND HOSPITALITY
Taverns                   - - - -     - -  C    - -            -
Night clubs               - - - -     - -  C    - -            -
Outdoor dining            - - - -     A A  C    - -            -
Restaurants, excluding
drive-in or drive thru    - - - -     P P  P    C P            -
facilities
Drive-thru or drive-in    - - - -     C C  -    - -            -
Mobile vending (food      - - - -     C C  -    C C            -
trucks)
Boarding and lodging      - - - -     P -  P    - -            -
houses
Brew pub                  - - - -     - -  C    C P            -
Bar                       - - - -     C C  -    - -            -
Brewery                   - - - -     C C  -    - -            -
Theater                   - - - -     P P  P    - -            -
Bowling alley             - - - -     P P  P    - -            -
Bakery                    - - - -     P P  P    - -            -
Bed and breakfast         - - - -     C C  C    - -            -
Hotel                     - - - -     - -  -    - -            -
Bars, taverns, clubs and
restaurants serving       - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
alcoholic beverages
Sexually oriented
business/adult            - - - -     - -  -    - P            -
entertainment
Use                       A B C D     E OB CB D F G            H
HEALTHCARE AND SOCIAL ASSISTANCE
Hospitals                 P P P P     P -  P    P P            -
Group care center/        - - - C     C -  -    - -            -
facility
Group care home Cat 1 6-  - - - C     C -  -    - -            -
15
Group care home Cat 2 5   - - -       C -  -    - -            -
or less
Nursing homes and similar - - - -     P -  P    P P            -
General medical,          - - - -     - P  -    - -            -
hospital, health centers
Hospitals and clinics     - - - -     P -  P    - -            P
unless animal oriented
Animal hospitals          - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Medical and dental        - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
laboratories
MANUFACTURING
Acid manufacture or       - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
wholesale storage
Smelting or reduction of
ores or metallurgical     - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
products
Petroleum or its
products, refining or     - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
wholesale storage
Explosive or fireworks    - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
manufacture or storage
Fat rendering, tallow,
grease, or lard refining  - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
or the manufacture of
candles from fats
Fertilizer manufacture    - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
Garbage, offal, or dead
animal reduction or       - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
dumping
Gas manufacture or        - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
storage
Glue, size, or gelatin    - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
manufacture
Cement, lime, gypsum or
plaster of paris          - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
manufacture
Manufacturing not
incidental of on-premise  - - - -     - -  -    - P            -
retail
Coal, coke, or wood yards - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Crematories (except with  - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
cemetery)
Dyeing and claeing works, - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
more than 15 ppl
Building material
manufacturing including   - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
milling, planning and
joining
Use                       A B C D     E OB CB D F G            H
Chemical manufacturing    - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
and storage
Machine, sheet metal and  - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
wielding shops
Manufacturing,
compounding, processing,
packaging, treating or    - - - -     - -  -    P C            -
assembly from previously
prepared materials
Metal stamping, pressing  - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
and buffing
Paint, rust proofing and  - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
rust coating
Tool and die shops        - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
NON-RESIDENTIAL
Agriculture               P P P P     - -  -    P P            -
Parking lot               - - - C     - -  -    - -            -
Business                  - - - -     - -  -    - P            -
Clinics                   - - - P     - -  -    - -            -
OFFICE, FINANCIAL AND COMMERCIAL SERVICES
Offices                   - - - C     - P  P    - -            -
Banks                     - - - -     P -  -    - -            -
Financial institutions    - - - -     P -  -    - -            -
OFFICE, RESEARCH AND TECHNICAL FACILITIES
Offices for executive,
administrative,
professional, real        - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
estate, accounting and
similar professional
activities
Research, development and - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
testing laboratories
OTHER
Wireless communication    - - - -     - -  -                   C
facilities
Historic properties       - - - -     P    P                   -
Agriculture               - - - -     P -  P    P P            -
Commercial schools and
studios including art,    - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
dance, martial arts, and
music
Trade schools             - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Training centers,         - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
engineering or sales
Use                       A B C D     E OB CB D F G            H
Artisan shops, such as
glass blowers, metal
sculptures, wood carvers
and weavers producing     - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
their goods and selling
them for retail on
premises
Bicycle sales, rental and - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
repair
Radio, television and     - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
recording studios
Uses similar to other
uses permitted in this
zoning district and
consistent with the       C C C C     C C  C    C C            C
purpose of the district,
as determined in
accordance with
Subchapter 155.10
PERSONAL SERVICE
Family day care           - - - -     P -  -    - -            -
Group day care            - - - -     C -  -    - -            -
Salon/barber shop         - - - -     P P  -    - -            -
PUBLIC/QUASI-PUBLIC
Churches                  C C C C     C -  C    C C            C
Schools                   P P P P     P -  P    P P            P
Publicly owned            P P P P     P -  P    P P            P
facilities/property
Cemeteries                C C C C     P    P    P P            P
Educational institutions  - - - -     P -  P    P P            P
and private schools
Parking lots              - - - -     - -  -    - -            C
Governmental offices,     - - - -     - -  -    P P            P
buildings and facilities
RECREATION
Forests                   P P P P     P -  P    P P            P
Golf courses              P P P P     P -  P    P P            P
City rec buildings        P P P P     P -  P    P P            P
Forest and wildlife       - - - -     - -  -    - -            P
preserves
Interpretive centers      - - - -     - -  -    - -            P
Public parks/playground/  - - - -     - -  -    - -            C
recreation areas
RETAIL
Retail, wholesale,        - - - -     P -  P    P P            -
service
Use                       A B C D     E OB CB D F G            H
Sale of used goods        - - - -     C -- -    C P            -
Antique shops             - - - -     P -  -    P P            -
Thrift shop               - - - -     P -  -    - -            -
RESIDENTIAL
Single-family (not        P P P P     P -  P    - -            P
factory built)
Two-family dwellings      - C P P     P -  P    P -            P
Townhomes                 C C C C     - -  -    - -            -
Condominiums              C C C C     - -  -    - -            -
Modular homes             - - - -     - -  -    - -            -
Multiple dwellings        - - - P     P -  P    P -            -
Dwellings located on
second floor or above 1st - - - -     - -  P    - -            -
floor commercial
Type B family day care    - - - C     P -  -    P P            P
Type A family day care    - - - C     P -  -    P P            P
Mobile homes              - - - -     - -  -    - -            -
Boarding and lodging      - - - P     - -  -    - -            P
houses
Fraternities, dorms,      - - - C     P -  P    P P            -
private clubs
Child day care            - - - C     - -  -    - -            C
TRANSP0RTATI0N AND WAREHOUSING
Bottled gas storage and   - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
distribution
Cartage, express and
parcel delivery           - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
facilities
Heliports and helipads    - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
Mini-warehouse and self-  - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
storage facilities
Warehouses and            - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
distribution centers
Wholesale businesses      - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
UTILITIES
Public utility buildings  - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Solar facilities (non-    - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
residential)
Telephone exchange        - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
buildings
Utility substations       - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Wind energy conversion
systems (single           - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
accessory)
Wireless communication    - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
facilities and towers
VEHICLE SALES, SERVICES AND RELATED USES
Vehicle repair (minor)    - - - -     C -  -    P P            -
Vehicle repair (major)    - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Vehicle services          - - - -     P -  -    P P            -
Vehicle wrecking and      - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
salvaging
Vehicle body shops        - - - -     - -  -    P P            -
Truck and heavy equipment - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
repair
Truck and trailer rental  - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
Vehicle and equipment     - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
rental
Commercial Vehicle        - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
repair, major
Commercial Vehicle        - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
repair, minor
Commercial Vehicle        - - - -     - -  -    C C            -
service stations
Vehicle wash facilities   - - - -     - -  -    C P            -
WASTE PROCESSING AND DISPOSAL
Distillation of bones,    - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
coal or wood
Recycling collection and/
or processing facility    - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
(non-hazardous)
Storage of hazardous      - - - -     - -  -    - C            -
materials
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21; Am. Ord. 25-2061, passed 2-4-25)
155.09 GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 155.091   BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Fences and walls. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Zoning
Code, fences, walls and foliage are permitted in required yards under the
following conditions:
      (1)   Only decorative fencing as regulated below shall be permitted in
the front yard. The height shall not exceed four feet in the front yard,
including both front yards of a corner or through lot, except within the clear
vision triangle (see §
155.092(B)) which shall be three feet.
         (a)   A decorative fence shall be limited in type to types commonly
referred to as split rail, wrought iron, or decorative metal, wood picket
fence, but shall exclude chain link wire fences or otherwise permitted
decorative fences less than 30% open to light and air.
      (2)   Fences, walls and foliage adjacent to any public sidewalk shall be
set back at least one foot from the inside of the sidewalk.
      (3)   Visibility into and out of any driveway or street shall remain
unobstructed.
      (4)   Within a side or rear yard in a residential district, no fence or
wall shall be permitted to exceed a height of six feet, measured from the
natural grade to the uppermost portion of the fence.
      (5)   In residential districts, if both sides of the fence are not
identical, the finished side shall face the adjoining property.
      (6)   Fences in nonresidential districts shall be permitted up to eight
feet in height, provided for each foot exceeding six feet, there shall be a one
and one-half foot setback from side property lines.
         (a)   Except fences for permitted recreational and agricultural uses
where no height limitation shall apply.
      (7)   Barbed wire or electrically charged fences may be erected in
nonresidential districts, provided the electrically charged or barbed section
of the fence shall be no lower than seven feet above grade.
      (8)   Fences, walls or foliage erected or maintained above or within
utility easements shall be subject to removal, as necessary, to provide access
to such easements.
   (B)   Temporary buildings and structures.
      (1)   Construction buildings and structures, including trailers,
incidental to construction work on a lot, may be placed on that lot, subject to
the following:
         (a)   Construction buildings and structures may only be used for the
storage of materials, tools, supplies and equipment, for construction
management and supervision offices, and for temporary on-site sanitation
facilities related to construction activity on the lot. An enclosed structure
for temporary sanitation facilities shall be required on all construction
sites.
         (b)   No construction building or structure shall be used as a
dwelling unit.
         (c)   A permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator prior
to installation of a construction building or structure.
         (d)   Construction buildings and structures shall be removed from the
site within 15 days after an occupancy permit is issued by the Zoning
Administrator for the permanent structure on the lot, or within 15 days after
the expiration of a building permit issued for construction on the lot.
      (2)   Sales offices or model homes may be placed on a lot subject to the
following:
         (a)   A permit shall be obtained from the Zoning Administrator prior
to installation or construction. The permit shall specify the location of the
office and shall be valid for a period of up to one year. A temporary permit
may be renewed by the Zoning Administrator for up to two successive one year
periods or less at the same location, if it is determined that the temporary
building is still incidental and necessary.
         (b)   Only transactions related to the development in which the
temporary building is located shall be conducted within the building. General
offices for real estate, construction, development or other related businesses
associated with the project shall not be permitted.
   (C)   Dumpsters. All uses that maintain garbage dumpsters on site shall
provide a screened enclosure by means fence/wall, or a combination thereof
equal in height to the dumpster as regulated by §
155.091. All such garbage collection areas shall be located in the rear yard
and setback a minimum of two feet from any property line, unless site
limitations such as topography, yard area, or access prevent such placement, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator.
   (C-1)   Temporary dumpsters. Roll off containers/construction dumpsters.
Roll off containers/construction dumpsters shall be regulated on residential
and commercial properties as follows:
      (1)   A permit is required to place one roll off container/construction
dumpster on residential and commercial property for a period not to exceed 30
days. A maximum of three permits may be issued during a 12-month period. Longer
periods (greater than 30 days) may be approved for exceptional circumstances at
the discretion of the Building Official. Fee for each individual permit shall
be $50.
      (2)   The roll off container/construction dumpster shall be located on a
paved surface which may be located in the right-of-way and/or roadway.
      (3)   The roll off container/construction dumpster shall only be used for
the disposal of construction waste and/or demolition debris.
      (4)   In the event that a roll off container/construction dumpster
remains on a residential or commercial property beyond the permitted time, the
PMO shall issue a legal notice of violation.
      (5)   In the event a notice of violation and/or order to comply has been
issued by the city regarding a violation of this division (C-1), a property
shall be provided a specific period of time to come into compliance which shall
be verified upon a reinspection of the property at the end of the time
specified for compliance. An appeal and/or petition for a hearing process shall
also be available to the property owner regarding an alleged violation of this
division (C-1). If it is determined, after the appeal and/or the petition for
hearing process (if timely filed by a property owner), that a violation has not
been remedied, the PMO shall cause the roll off container/construction dumpster
to be removed. All costs of such removal shall be charged against the land as a
municipal lien or be recovered in a civil suit against the property owner.
   (D)   Garage sales. Wherein personal property may be sold from a residential
district, provided that:
      (1)   No property shall be offered for sale which has not been owned and
used by the occupant of the premises.
      (2)   Not more than two garage sales shall be conducted on the premises
in any calendar year.
      (3)   No garage sales shall be conducted for longer than three
consecutive days in duration.
      (4)   Garage sales may be conducted during daylight hours only.
      (5)   No garage sale shall be conducted within the City of Mt. Healthy
without the issuance of a garage sale permit.
      (6)   Any person(s) or group desiring to have a garage sale shall make
application to the City Clerk. Such application shall state the name of the
person(s) or group who is having the sale, the address of the person(s) or
group, the location of the sale, and the dates of the sale. Upon submission of
the application the person(s) or group shall be issued a permit that must be in
a conspicuous place on the premises on which the sale is being held.
      (7)   The City Clerk shall charge and collect a fee of $5 for the second
garage sale permit.
   (E)   Unlawful buildings and uses. Any building, use or lot which has been
unlawfully constructed, occupied or created prior to the date of adoption of
this Code shall continue to be unlawful, unless expressly permitted by this
Zoning Code. Such buildings, uses or lots shall not be considered to be
nonconforming and are not entitled to any consideration under the provisions of
Subchapter
155.19.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21; Am. Ord. 24- 2049, passed 10-1-24)
§ 155.092 DIMENSIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Average front setback. The minimum front setback requirements for a
principal building in any residential district may be reduced in accordance
with the following:
      (1)   Where two or more lots entirely or partially within 200 feet of a
subject lot, on the same side of the street and the same block, are occupied by
principal buildings whose existing front setback is less than required by the
zoning district, the average of the established setbacks for those buildings
shall be the minimum required front setback for the subject lot.
      (2)   In no case, however, shall the front yard setback for a garage,
whether attached or detached, be less than 20 feet in order to provide adequate
vehicle parking space in front of the garage without blocking a sidewalk or
otherwise impeding pedestrian movement.
   (B)   Clear vision corner. Fences, walls, structures, shrubbery or other
potential obstructions to vision, except utility poles, lights and street
signs, shall not be permitted to exceed a height of three feet within a
triangular area formed by the intersection of the street right-of-way lines and
a line connecting two points located on those intersecting right-of-way lines
20 feet from the point of intersection with the right- of-way lines.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7290.png]
   (C)   Cul-de-sac lots. In the case of lots abutting the turn-around radius
of a cul-de-sac street, the minimum required lot width shall be measured at the
required front setback line; provided all such cul-de-sac lots shall have a
minimum width of 40 feet at the front lot line.
   (D)   Height exceptions. Height limits specified elsewhere in this Zoning
Code shall not apply to:
      (1)   Churches, schools, hospitals and public buildings including, but
not limited to: libraries, museums, art galleries, fire stations or public
buildings of a cultural, recreational or administrative nature.
      (2)   Barns, silos or other buildings or structures on farms; church
spires, belfries, cupolas and domes; monuments; transmission towers; windmills;
chimneys; smokestacks; flagpoles; and radio towers, masts and aerials. These
structures shall be limited to 100 feet in height in any case, unless otherwise
permitted in this Code.
      (3)   Structures needed as part of an industrial facility where the
manufacturing process requires a greater height; provided, however, that all
such structures shall be limited to 25% of the area of the lot and shall meet
all yard setback requirements for a principal building, but in no case less
than 25 feet.
   (E)   Minimum lot frontage. Any lot created after the effective date of this
Code shall have frontage on an improved public street or approved private
street or access easement, equal to the minimum required lot width in the
zoning district in which it is located.
   (F)   Required yards or lots. No lot or lots in common ownership and no
yard, court, parking area or other space shall be so divided, altered or
reduced as to make the area or space less than the minimum size required by
this Code. If already less than the minimum size required, the area or space
shall not be further divided or reduced.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.093 PARKING AND STORAGE.
   (A)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage of merchandise, equipment, supplies,
products or other materials shall only be permitted in those districts and
under the conditions specifically authorized by this Code.
   (B)   Recreational vehicle parking. It shall be unlawful for any person to
park or cause to be parked any mobile home or recreational vehicle on any
street, alley, highway, or other public place in the city and to use the same
as a dwelling. This provision shall not prohibit the temporary occupancy for
periods up to 72 hours of a recreational vehicle; provided the recreational
vehicle contains sleeping accommodations, is parked on a paved lot per
Subchapter
155.11 in a residential district, located behind the frontage of the primary
building, and is for the use of the owner of that lot or guests of the owner.
Vehicles longer than 40 feet in length and taller than 14 feet are prohibited.
Vehicles regulated in this section that exceed 24 feet in length shall meet
following setback requirements:
      (1)   Recreational vehicles greater than 24 feet but less than or equal
to 35 feet in overall length and up to ten feet in height shall maintain a side
and rear yard setback of no less than five feet;
      (2)   Recreational vehicles greater than 24 feet but less than or equal
to 35 feet in overall length and greater than ten feet up to 14 feet in height
shall maintain a side and rear yard setback of no less than ten feet;
      (3)   Recreational vehicles greater than 35 feet but less than or equal
to 40 feet in overall length and up to ten feet in height shall maintain a side
and rear yard setback of no less than ten feet;
      (4)   Recreational vehicles greater than 35 feet but less than or equal
to 40 feet in overall length and greater than ten feet up to 14 feet in height
shall maintain a side and rear yard setback of no less than 20 feet.
   (C)   Storage and repair of vehicles.
      (1)   The repair, restoration and maintenance of vehicles in any
residential district, shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building,
except for those activities that can be and are completed in less than 48
hours. All such repair shall take place on private property and may not be
conducted within the public right-of-way.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or lessee of any
building or lands within the city to permit the open storage or parking of any
inoperable motor vehicle, machinery or equipment, or parts thereof, outside of
an enclosed garage or enclosed building, for a period of more than 48 hours. An
inoperable motor vehicle for purposes of this division shall include motor
vehicles which, by reason of dismantling, disrepair or other cause, are
incapable of being propelled under their own power, or are unsafe for operation
on the streets and highways of this state because of the inability to comply
with the State Motor Vehicles and Traffic Code, or do not have a current
license and registration, as required for operation by the State Motor Vehicles
and Traffic Code.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or lessee of any lot or
building in a residential district to permit the open storage or parking
outside of a building of semi-truck tractors and/or semi-truck trailers,
bulldozers, earth carriers, cranes or any other similar equipment or machinery,
unless parked for purposes of construction being conducted on that lot.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.094 USES.
   (A)   Accessory buildings and structures.
      (1)   Accessory buildings or garages shall be considered to be part of
the principal building and subject to all setback requirements of the principal
building, if structurally and architecturally integrated into the building or
if attached by an enclosed breezeway or similar enclosed structure not greater
than three feet in length. Detached accessory buildings shall be located at
least three feet from any principal building.
      (2)   Accessory buildings and structures shall not be erected in any
front yard.
      (3)   Accessory buildings and structures may be erected in a rear yard if
set back at least ten feet from the rear and five feet from the side property
lines. In any case, accessory buildings and structures shall not occupy more
than 30% of the required rear yard.
      (4)   An accessory building or structure designed for and containing a
vehicle entrance to be accessed from an existing publicly dedicated and
commonly used alley may be located on the rear lot line, if parking space plans
have been approved by the Zoning Administrator.
      (5)   The height of an accessory structure shall not exceed 18 feet when
a hip or gable roof is used, 15 feet when a mansard or gambrel roof is used and
12 feet when a flat or shed roof is used, except when a dwelling unit is
included in the structure, in which case the height shall not exceed 24 feet.
      (6)   Accessory structures shall not exceed 50% of the principal building
floor area or 750 square feet, whichever is less.
      (7)   An accessory building or accessory structure shall not be
constructed or occupied on a lot before the principal building or use on the
lot is constructed.
      (8)   Accessory buildings and structures in planned unit developments
shall be subject to the same requirements as in the residential districts.
      (9)   Accessory structures located in a designated flood hazard area
shall comply with the additional provisions set forth in Subchapter
155.19.
      (10)   Buildings and structures accessory to non-residential uses shall
meet the minimum setback requirements and height limitations for principal
buildings in the respective zoning district.
      (11)   Accessory structures and buildings shall share all public
utilities (water/sewer/electric) with the principal building. Accessory
structures and buildings will not be separately metered.
   (B)   Essential services. The installation and maintenance of essential
service equipment is exempt from this Zoning Code.
   (C)   Illegal dwellings. The use of any basement for dwelling purposes is
prohibited in any zoning district, unless the basement meets the appropriate
city building codes. Buildings erected as garages or accessory buildings shall
not be occupied for dwelling purposes, except in conformance with the
requirements of §
155.108(E)(1) for accessory dwellings.
   (D)   Principal use per lot. A lot or parcel shall not be devoted to more
than one principal use, or contain more than one principal building, except for
groups of multiple family dwellings, agricultural buildings, approved mixed use
developments, PUDs, or commercial or industrial buildings determined by the
Planning Commission to be a principal use collectively, based on meeting all of
the following criteria:
      (1)   Individual buildings share common parking areas, signs, access and
similar features;
      (2)   Buildings are under single ownership;
      (3)   Individual activities support one another (such as auto sales/
vehicle repair or gas station/ restaurant/convenience store); or
      (4)   Buildings are architecturally unified and compatible.
   (E)   Prohibited uses. Uses not specifically permitted by right or
conditional approval by this Zoning Code shall be prohibited.
   (F)   Uses in conformance. No building, structure or land shall be used or
occupied and no building, structure or part thereof shall be erected,
constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged or structurally altered unless in
conformity with the provisions of this Code.
   (G)   Uses on a lot. Every building, structure or use erected or established
within the city shall be located on a legally recorded lot or parcel and shall
conform to all applicable requirements of this Code.
   (H)   Unique domestic animals. Unique domestic animals such as chickens and
similar fowl, potbelly pigs, small ponies and similar nontraditional pets are
reasonable accessories in residence districts and a conditional use in the E
Zoning District. It is the purpose and intent of this section to allow unique
domestic animals while preserving and protecting the residential character of
residence districts. It is also the intent of this section to distinguish
ownership of unique domestic pets from otherwise permitted agricultural uses.
Unique domestic animals in residence districts shall comply with the following
standards:
      (1)   No more than 12 chickens or similar fowl on any residential lot of
one-half acre or less with shelter setbacks at three feet minimum from rear and
side lot lines;
      (2)   No more than 24 chickens or similar fowl on any residential lot of
greater than one-half acre up to and including one acre with shelter setbacks
at ten feet minimum from rear and side lot lines;
      (3)   Any residential lot greater than one acre may increase the number
of chickens or similar fowl by 12 for each half acre (1 to 1.5 acre equals 36;
greater than 1.5 to 2 acres equals 48, and the like) with shelter setbacks at
15 feet minimum from rear and side lot lines;
      (4)   Roosters as defined by the American Poultry Association shall not
be permitted in any residential zoned district of less than two acres. No more
than one rooster is permitted on any residential zoned district of two acres or
more;
      (5)   Other unique domestic animals as defined, to include potbelly pigs,
pigmy goats, llamas, alpacas, small ponies and similar shall be limited to no
more than two on any residential lot one acre or more in area, and one
additional unique domestic animal may be permitted on any residential lot over
two acres, with shelter setbacks at ten feet minimum from rear and side lot
lines. Planning Commission may grant conditional use approval in accordance
with Subchapter 155.10 for additional unique domestic animals on a case by case
basis;
      (6)   Chickens, similar fowl, and other unique domestic animals shall be
contained on premises by approved fencing or similar means of containment and
not allowed to roam free on any neighboring property or public right-of-way.
      (7)   Coops and other structures accessory to this use shall be located
in the rear yard and no closer than ten feet from side and rear property lines.
      (8)   An operating plan is presented to the city.
      (9)   The Planning Commission shall utilize these criteria in addition to
the requirements of Subchapter 155.10 for conditional use review in the E
Zoning District.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.095 OTHER PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Control of heat, glare, fumes, noise, odor, dust and vibration. Every
use shall be conducted and operated in a way that does not create a nuisance
and is not dangerous by reason of heat, glare, fumes, odor, dust, noise or
vibration beyond the lot on which it is located.
   (B)   Trash, litter and junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to
accumulate, place, store or allow or permit the accumulation, placement or
storage of trash, litter or junk on premises in the city, except in a lawful
sanitary landfill.
   (C)   Lighting. All light fixtures shall be direct cut-off fixtures,
designed to prevent light spill or trespass beyond the boundaries of the
property where the fixture is located. Bead or string lighting is prohibited on
or adjacent to building windows fronting the street in commercial districts.
   (D)   Stormwater. When land is developed or redeveloped and/or the surface
characteristics of the property change (increased impervious surfaces, site
grading, etc.), these activities shall not result in additional stormwater
runoff flowing to adjacent properties.
   (E)   Voting place. The provisions of this Code shall not be construed in
any manner that would interfere with the temporary use of any property as a
voting place in connection with any public election conducted by a duly
authorized Board of Elections.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.10 CONDITIONAL USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 155.101 PURPOSE.
   Conditional uses are uses of land specifically permitted within a zoning
district only with the approval of City Council at the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, following a review of the use and its potential impact on
its surroundings. These uses are generally consistent with the purpose of the
zoning district in which they are permitted but, due to unique operational
characteristics, may not be desirable or compatible in all locations within the
district. Factors such as traffic, hours of operation, noise, odor or similar
potential nuisance effects require that the conditional use be evaluated
relative to its appropriateness on a case-by-case basis. This chapter
establishes the review procedure for conditional uses and the general standards
that must be met for all conditional uses. In addition, more specific
requirements are established for certain individual uses, as necessary, to
mitigate their potential negative impacts.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.102 PROCEDURES.
   Applications for conditional uses shall be considered by the Planning
Commission in accordance with the following procedures:
   (A)   Application. An application for conditional use approval shall be made
to the Planning Commission in writing, on a form for that purpose, and shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator at least 20 days before the next regularly
scheduled meeting at which it is to be heard. The application must be
accompanied by a fee, as established by the City Council, a site plan in
accordance with the requirements of Subchapter
155.13 and such other material as the Commission determines necessary.
   (B)   Public notice. When an application has been filed in proper form with
the required data, the Clerk of Council shall cause notice of the time, place
and purpose of the hearing to be posted on the city's official digital media
platform and be given, in writing by first class mail, to the applicant(s), to
owners of property contiguous to and directly across the street from the
property that is the subject of the conditional use application. The notice
shall be given at least seven days in advance of the hearing, noting the
request and the property location. The name and address of any property owner
on the most recent property record of the Hamilton County Auditor shall be the
address used for public notification. If the address is unclear or uncertain,
the property owner may be notified by legal notice published one time via the
city's official digital media platform at least seven days in advance of any
hearing, listing the address of the property to receive notification.
   (C)   Sign. At least ten days prior to the scheduled public hearing, a
temporary sign six square feet in area shall be posted on the property subject
to a conditional use request by the applicant. The sign shall be removed within
three days following the public hearing at which the request was heard. The
sign shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The specific request being made,
      (2)   Date of the public hearing,
      (3)   Location of the public hearing, and
      (4)   Location where additional information may be obtained regarding the
request.
   (D)   Representation. The applicant shall appear at the public hearing in
person or by agent. If the applicant or authorized representative is not
present, no action shall be taken by the Planning Commission on that
application.
   (E)   Record of proceedings. The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of
its proceedings showing the action of the Commission and the vote of each
member or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact. The Commission
shall act by resolution.
   (F)   Required vote. The concurring vote of three Planning Commission
members shall be necessary to approve a conditional use application.
   (G)   Review criteria. The Planning Commission shall review the application
in relation to the general standards of this chapter for conditional uses, as
provided in §
155.103, and any specific standards required for the use proposed, as
identified in this chapter. The Planning Commission may refer a conditional use
in the CBD Zoning District to the Architectural Review Board.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.103 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   Any request for a conditional use shall only be approved upon a finding that
each of the following general standards is satisfied, in addition to any
applicable requirements pertaining to the specific use:
   (A)   The proposed use will be consistent with the intent and purposes of
this Zoning Code and the vision, goals and recommendations of the Mt. Healthy
Comprehensive Plan and the Healthy Hilltops Plan.
   (B)   The proposed use will comply with all applicable requirements of this
Code, except as specifically altered in the approved conditional use.
   (C)   The proposed use will be compatible with the character of the general
vicinity.
   (D)   The area and proposed use will be adequately served by essential
public facilities and services, as applicable, such as highways, streets,
police, and fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and
sewers, and schools. The applicant or landowner will be required to install
public utilities, streets or other public infrastructure as required by the
city, state or other agencies to applicable specifications. Dedication of said
public infrastructure may be required.
   (E)   The proposed use will not involve uses, activities, processes,
materials, equipment and conditions of operations, including, but not limited
to, hours of operation, that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or
the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke,
fumes, glare, odor or other characteristic not comparable to the uses permitted
in the zoning district.
   (F)   The proposed use will not impede the normal and orderly development
and improvement of the surrounding property for uses permitted in the district.
   (G)   The proposed use will not block sight lines from the right-of- way to
existing signs or windows on the front or side of a building.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.104 CONDITIONS OF APPROVAL RECOMMENDATION.
   Reasonable conditions may be imposed on the approval of a conditional land
use in order to achieve the following:
   (A)   Insure public services and facilities affected by the proposed use or
activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads
necessitated by the proposed use.
   (B)   Insure that the use is compatible with adjacent conforming land uses
and activities.
   (C)   Protect natural resources; the health, safety, and welfare; and the
social and economic well being of those who will use the land use or activity
under consideration; residents, business owners and landowners immediately
adjacent to the proposed use or activity; and the community as a whole.
   (D)   Relate to the valid exercise of the police power and purposes which
are affected by the proposed use or activity.
   (E)   Meet the purpose of the Zoning Code, be in compliance with the
standards established in the Code for the land use or activity under
consideration, and be in compliance with the zoning district standards.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.105 EXPIRATION.
   Approval of a conditional use shall expire 12 months after it is granted,
unless construction is complete or commencement of the use has begun. The
Planning Commission may, upon written request by the applicant, extend the term
of the conditional use approval by one additional period of up to 12 months
upon a finding that there have been no changed conditions in the area which
would require reconsideration of the conditional use application or site plan.
A request for an extension of the initial permit period shall be submitted in
writing to the Zoning Administrator prior to the expiration of the initial
approval.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.106 REVOCATION.
   If a violation of any of the conditions or standards imposed on a
conditional land use is found to exist, the Zoning Administrator shall notify
the owner of the premises, the Planning Commission and the City Manager that a
violation exists and that the permit will be revoked within 15 days of
notification. If the violation is not corrected within 15 days, the City
Manager shall revoke the permit. Furthermore, the violation shall be declared
by the City Manager to be a violation of the Zoning Code, subject to all of the
remedies and penalties provided for in this Code.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.107 PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
   To assure compliance with this Code and any conditions of approval,
performance guarantees may be required by the Planning Commission, as
authorized by §
155.154.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.108 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS.
   In addition to the general standards of §
155.103 applicable to all conditional uses, additional requirements may be
applicable to specific conditional uses and shall be satisfied in order to
obtain approval. Conditional uses for which added requirements apply are:
   (A)   Commercial.
      (1)   Drive-through businesses, excluding restaurants.
         (a)   The drive-up or drive-through facility must be attached to a
building; except that an automated teller machine may be in a stand-alone
structure with a canopy or similar roof to protect users from the elements.
         (b)   The facility shall be screened from any adjacent residential
district or use and lighting shall be limited and fully shielded to prevent
glare and light trespass.
         (c)   Drive-through and stacking lanes and parking lot access shall be
clearly identified and delineated.
         (d)   A drive-through shall have an escape lane to allow a vehicle to
pass those waiting to be served.
         (e)   All drive-through service windows shall be located on the side
or rear of the building to minimize visibility from any abutting street.
         (f)   Amplified speakers and sound equipment shall be located at least
50 feet from any adjoining residential property. Additional landscaping and
fencing shall be installed between such equipment and the adjoining residential
property to minimize associated noise impacts.
         (g)   At least three stacking spaces shall be provided per each drive
through lane.
      (2)   Mortuaries and funeral homes.
         (a)   Lighting for parking areas or outdoor activity areas shall be
shielded to prevent light from spilling onto any residential district or use.
         (b)   Minimum lot area shall be one acre and minimum lot width shall
be 150 feet.
         (c)   An off-street vehicle assembly area shall be provided to be used
in support of funeral processions and activities. This area shall be in
addition to the required off-street parking and its related maneuvering area.
         (d)   Access driveways shall be located no less than 100 feet from the
centerline of the intersection of any street or other driveway.
      (3)   Retail of 10,000 square feet or more.
         (a)   The building and site design shall be compatible with and
complementary to the established character of the district with respect to
scale, height, bulk, setbacks, building materials and pedestrian and bicycle
transportation amenities.
         (b)   Off-street parking areas shall be designed to minimize their
visibility and obtrusiveness from the adjacent street(s).
         (c)   No new driveways or other means of vehicular access shall be
permitted on Hamilton Avenue between Hastings and Stevens Streets.
   (B)   Industrial.
      (1)   Chemical manufacturing and storage.
         (a)   As part of the conditional use application, the applicant shall
provide documentation, reports, studies and other materials required by the
city specifying the materials to be handled, safety measures, existing soil
conditions, methods of protecting groundwater and all other information
required by the city in the course of reviewing the proposed use and its
location.
         (b)   The facility shall at all times operate according to all
applicable local, Hamilton County, State of Ohio and federal regulations.
         (c)   Adequate safety measures shall be implemented and in use at all
times.
         (d)   There shall be no storage of hazardous materials outdoors,
except in tanks or containers designed for that purpose that are inaccessible
to anyone not authorized to process or handle such materials, and that meet all
applicable safety regulations.
         (e)   The applicant shall provide a disaster mitigation plan and fire
pre-plan, approved by the appropriate authorities, as part of the application
for a conditional use.
         (f)   Truck routes to and from the facility shall be subject to
approval.
      (2)   Conditional uses in the G Zoning District. No zoning certificates
shall be issued for any conditional use in this unless a development plan is
approved by the Planning Commission. The plan shall include the following
detailed specifications:
         (a)   Building location, circulation and parking, lighting, storm
water drainage and detention, sediment control, public utilities, and other
such information as required to conduct a plan review.
         (b)   The best practical means known for the abatement of obnoxious or
offensive odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, vibration or similar nuisance shall be
employed.
         (c)   The Planning Commission may make reasonable additional
requirements as to landscaping, lighting, signing, screening, access-ways,
building setbacks and pollution controls to project adjacent property.
         (d)   If regulated by other specifications of §
155.108, those requirements shall also apply.
   (C)   Public/quasi-public.
      (1)   Churches, places of worship, schools (elementary, middle and high).
         (a)   The use shall have frontage on and direct access to an arterial
or collector street. Secondary access to a local street may be permitted if the
applicant provides evidence satisfactory to the Planning Commission that the
added traffic will not have a negative impact on the surrounding neighborhood.
         (b)   All outdoor activity, parking areas and recreational space shall
be screened from adjacent property in any residential district.
         (c)   Exterior lighting shall be 90° style cut-off fixtures, directed
away from adjacent property and the public right-of-way.
         (d)   Parking areas shall not be located within the required front
setback area and the building setback shall be consistent with the established
average setback of adjacent properties, as provided in §
155.092(A).
         (e)   In the CBD Zoning District:
            1.   Purpose and intent. Consistent with the vision and goals of
the Comprehensive Plan, limited conditional use approval of churches and
similar places of religious assembly would provide places of destination and
offer complementary uses to the CBD District. Consideration should be given to
the CBD District as a whole, and approvals should be proportioned to allow a
larger percentage of commercial uses overall.
            2.    Development standards. Development in the CBD District shall
be consistent with Subchapter
155.03, Purpose and Intent with guidance as needed from the Comprehensive Plan.
The following standards and criteria shall be considered as part of the
approval process:
               a.    Front, side, and rear yard setbacks for building and
parking shall comply with the regulations established in §
155.033.
               b.    Height and coverage (density) shall comply with the
regulations established in §
155.033.
               c.    Conditional use approvals for churches and similar places
of religious assembly shall not exceed 7% of total land area in the district,
either for single or multiple sites. Once approvals are granted that total 7%
of total land area in the district, no more approvals for churches and similar
places of religious assembly shall be granted. The CBD District contains
approximately 28 acres. Seven percent equals approximately two acres.
   (D)   Recreation/food/entertainment.
      (1)   Mobile vending (food trucks).
         (a)   Permit. Application for a mobile vending permit shall be made to
the Zoning Administrator, together with payment of such fee as may be
established by City Council.
         (b)   Mobile vending shall be tied to an event and shall not operate
longer than 90 days over the course of the calendar year unless a conditional
use approval is granted. If the Zoning Administrator determines that any mobile
vending is operating on site in violation of this section the Zoning
Administrator shall refer the matter to the Planning Commission for a
conditional use hearing in accordance with the procedures of this chapter.
         (c)   Food trucks may be permitted to operate within the CBD, E and F
Zoning Districts.
         (d)   The food truck shall be located only within an approved off-
street parking lot; provided, the food truck shall not displace any required
parking spaces.
         (e)   The food truck shall not be located closer than ten feet to any
driveway.
         (f)   Outdoor seating may be permitted; provided, written permission
is obtained from the property owner and the seating area does not displace any
required parking spaces.
         (g)   Amplified sound and freestanding signs shall not be permitted.
         (h)   The food truck shall be stationary at all times when open for
business.
         (i)   The owner or an employee shall be present within the vehicle at
all times while open for business.
         (j)   Access to restroom facilities must be available.
         (k)   The owner or operator of the food truck shall provide trash
receptacles, other than public receptacles.
         (l)   All equipment, other than outdoor seating, shall be inside,
attached to or within three feet of the food truck.
         (m)   Evidence of Hamilton County Health Department approval shall be
provided.
         (n)   Disposal of wastewater shall be into the sanitary sewer system.
The use of storm drains or any other form of discharge is prohibited.
         (o)   The conditional use approval shall be reviewed annually by the
City Manager to ensure compliance with all standards of this section and any
other conditions that may have been imposed upon the original approval.
      (2)   Internet sweepstakes cafe.
         (a)   A license shall be obtained in accordance with City Ordinance
2011-12.
         (b)   An internet sweepstakes cafe shall be located no closer than 500
feet from any school, church, public park, library or other internet
sweepstakes cafe, as measured from nearest property line to nearest property
line.
         (c)   Hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday.
      (3)   Outdoor commercial recreation.
         (a)   The front, side and rear yard minimum setbacks shall be 50 feet
for all buildings and outdoor components of the recreational facility.
         (b)   The parking setback shall be 20 feet from lot lines in the
front, side and rear yards in
non-residential zoning districts and 50 feet from lot lines in residential
districts.
         (c)   Building design and materials shall be compatible with the
existing or intended character of the surrounding area.
         (d)   An operations plan describing the nature of the use, hours of
operation, etc. shall be provided.
         (e)   The Planning Commission may also establish conditions to
minimize negative impacts on nearby uses and traffic operations along public
streets, such as, but not limited to hours of operation, noise buffering and
location of waste receptacles.
      (4)   Restaurants, drive-through.
         (a)   Sufficient vehicular stacking capacity for the drive-through
portion of the operation shall be provided to ensure that traffic does not
extend into the public right-of-way. A minimum of eight stacking spaces for
each service ordering station shall be provided. Stacking spaces shall be
located so as not to interfere with vehicular circulation, parking spaces and
egress from the property by vehicles not using the drive-through portion of the
facility.
         (b)   A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided in close
proximity to the exit of the drive-through portion of the operation, to allow
for customers waiting for delivery of orders.
         (c)   Public access to the site shall be located at least 100 feet
from any intersection or other driveway on the same side of the street, as
measured from the nearest right-of-way line to the nearest edge of the access.
         (d)   Internal circulation and access to egress from the site shall
not substantially impair the movement of other modes of transportation, such as
bicycles and pedestrians, to and through the site.
         (e)   Amplified speakers and sound equipment shall be located at least
50 feet from any adjoining residential property. Additional landscaping and
fencing shall be installed between such equipment and the adjoining residential
property to minimize associated noise impacts. Noise levels must comply with
the city noise ordinance (Chapter 132.4).
      (5)   Sexually oriented business. Sexually oriented businesses should
comply with
Chapter 119 of the City of Mt. Healthy Code of Ordinances in addition to the
following regulations:
         (a)   The proposed use shall not be closer than 1,000 feet from a
residential district or public use such as a school or church.
         (b)   All activity shall be totally enclosed.
         (c)   Signage for the proposed use shall not contain any adult
messages or images.
      (6)   Offices in D Zoning Districts.
         (a)   Purpose and intent. Offices, as restricted in §
155.092(D) may be allowed by conditional use permit in the D Multi-Family
District where such use is not prohibited or restricted by conditions adopted
by ordinance or specific developments. The intent is to allow businesses with
minimal pedestrian or vehicular traffic and those which otherwise have low
impact on nearby residential uses.
         (b)   Development standards. The city shall not approve requests for a
conditional use permit for offices that do not substantially meet the following
development standards:
            1.    Developments shall be located on streets having a significant
amount of through traffic or on a corner lot.
            2.    Developments shall be in close proximity to, or affected by,
an existing or imminent commercial, office or non-profit facility, including
churches and schools, or adjacent to multiple family residential buildings
having more than three dwelling units.
            3.    Developments shall preserve the architecture of existing
buildings where practical and appropriate and shall in all cases have a
residential appearance.
            4.   The development shall not have an adverse impact, either by
size or location, on single-family residential districts in the immediate
vicinity.
            5.   The conduct of business shall cease from 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m. and all lighting including sign lighting shall cease during the same time
period, except that minimal security lighting may be provided.
            6.   Lighting shall be down-directed and shall not extend into any
adjacent residential property.
            7.   Parking shall be provided as required by Subchapter
155.11. Parking in the required front yard area shall be limited to a maximum
of one parking space, with the balance of the required parking spaces confined
to the rear and side yards or in approved off-site locations.
            8.   No drive-up windows shall be permitted.
         (c)   Office restrictions. Offices that may be permitted by
conditional use permit in the D Multi-Family District shall be restricted to
include only:
            1.   Those businesses where no product is stored or available for
sale, rent, returned for service or exchange on the premises, except where
sale, rent or exchange of such product constitutes less than 5% of gross
revenue for the business. The sale of produce delivered from or picked up at
other locations is permitted.
            2.   Services shall not include the production or repair of any
goods or products on-site except as an incidental use to a permitted business,
and such repair or production shall not exceed 5% of gross revenue.
            3.   There shall be no service performed upon the client except
those related to a state regulated medical or counseling profession.
            4.   All conduct of business, goods, and equipment shall be within
a completely enclosed building, and there shall be no emission of noxious odor,
vibration or nuisances caused by the conduct of such business.
            5.    Conditionally permitted office uses shall include, but not
limited to: architect, dentist, doctor, engineer, insurance agent, lawyer,
minister of religion, and real estate agent or broker.
            6.   The following uses are specifically prohibited: barber shops,
beauty shops, banks, mortgage companies, and financial institutions.
   (E)   Residential.
      (1)   Accessory dwelling units.
         (a)   An accessory dwelling unit may be located within a principal
single-family detached dwelling or a detached accessory building on the same
lot as a principal dwelling.
         (b)   The accessory dwelling unit shall share all public utilities
(water/sewer/electric) with the principal dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling
units will not be separately metered.
         (c)   A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided on
the lot for the accessory dwelling unit in addition to the off-street parking
spaces required for the principal dwelling unit.
         (d)   The accessory dwelling unit shall be limited in size to a
maximum of 50% of the total living area of the principal dwelling or 750 square
feet, whichever is less.
         (e)   The accessory dwelling shall contain a living area, one bath and
a kitchenette (including a refrigerator, microwave oven, stove and sink) and
may contain no more than one bedroom.
         (f)   No more than two adults shall occupy the accessory dwelling
unit.
         (g)   No new access points or driveways shall be created or installed
for access to the accessory dwelling unit.
      (2)   Bed and breakfasts.
         (a)   A bed and breakfast shall not provide more than six guest rooms
plus a common area for use by all guests.
         (b)   A bed and breakfast establishment shall be located only in a
detached single-family dwelling, designed and constructed for single-family
use, which shall contain at least 1,500 square feet of useable floor area. For
each guest room in excess of two, an additional 100 square feet of floor area
shall be required.
         (c)   The bed and breakfast shall be the principal residence of the
owner or manager, who shall reside there when the bed and breakfast is in
operation.
         (d)   Meals shall be limited to breakfast and evening snack, and shall
be served only to guests of the facility and members and guests of the owner's
family.
         (e)   There shall be at least one off-street parking space provided
for each guest room, in addition to the parking spaces required to serve the
principal residence.
         (f)   One sign, not exceeding four square feet, shall be allowed for
identification purposes only and shall either be mounted on the front wall of
the dwelling or placed within the front yard no closer than ten feet to the
front lot line. Sign lighting shall be indirect and shielded from view off
site. Internally lighted signs are not permitted.
         (g)   Cooking facilities shall not be permitted in bed and breakfast
guest rooms.
         (h)   Exterior refuse storage facilities shall be screened from view
on all sides by a six foot solid decorative fence, wall, vegetation or similar
visual barrier.
         (i)   In addition to the site plan required by this chapter, a floor
plan of the dwelling unit and the use of each room shall be submitted with the
conditional use application.
      (3)   Boarding houses.
         (a)   The boarding house shall front on and have direct access to an
arterial or collector street.
         (b)   A maximum of ten guest rooms may be permitted.
         (c)   Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space per
guest room. The parking area shall be located in the rear yard and screened
from adjoining properties.
         (d)   One sign, not exceeding four square feet, shall be allowed for
identification purposes only and shall either be mounted on the front wall of
the dwelling or placed within the front yard no closer than ten feet to the
front lot line. Sign lighting shall be indirect and shielded from view off
site. Internally lighted signs are not permitted.
      (4)   Home occupation.
         (a)   Permit. Application for a home occupation permit shall be made
to the Zoning Administrator, together with payment of such fee as may be
established by City Council. The requirement for a permit shall be waived if
all of the following conditions apply to the home occupation: the proposed home
occupation will not employ any persons other than residents of the dwelling;
the home occupation is such that it will not significantly generate customers,
clients or visitors to the home; there will be no sign on the property
identifying the home occupation and all other provisions of this section shall
be met.
         (b)   If the Zoning Administrator cannot determine if the home
occupation conditional use requirements are met, in his or her sole discretion
the Zoning Administrator may refer the matter to the Planning Commission for a
conditional use hearing in accordance with the procedures of this chapter.
         (c)   The use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling, with
the following exception(s):
            1.   The use may be conducted entirely within a garage or accessory
building unattached to the dwelling in property zoned A or B as long as the use
is not prohibited in a planned unit development, recorded deed restrictions or
other similar applicable recorded restrictions upon the parcel.
            2.   Any dwelling, garage or accessory building used in the home
occupation shall comply with all other applicable city ordinances and
requirements and shall not be nonconforming with respect to lot, width and
dimensional requirements.
         (d)   The use shall be carried on only by the residents of the
dwelling and not more than one other person or multiple employees that
constitute a full-time equivalent.
         (e)   The use of the dwelling for a home occupation must be clearly
accessory, incidental and subordinate to the permitted principal residential
use, and shall not utilize more than 25% of the usable floor area of the
principal dwelling or its equivalent if conducted within an accessory building,
or 250 square feet 1 , whichever is less.
         (f)   The appearance of the dwelling shall not be altered, nor shall
the occupation within the dwelling be conducted in any manner that would cause
the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of
colors, materials, construction, lighting or the emission of sounds, vibrations
or light that carry beyond the premises.
         (g)   No outdoor storage, activities or displays shall be permitted.
         (h)   No combustible, toxic or hazardous materials may be used or
stored on the premises, except in a safe manner and in full compliance with all
federal, state and other governmental requirements concerning the use,
handling, transport, storage and disposal of any such materials.
         (i)   There shall be no activity that would interfere with radio or
television transmission in the area, nor shall there be any offensive noise,
vibrations, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare noticeable at or beyond the
property line. The use shall not create a nuisance for the public and any
surrounding property.
         (j)   Traffic generated by the combined home and home occupation shall
be compatible with traffic normally expected in a residential district.
Vehicles used in the home occupation or making deliveries shall be no larger
than utility vehicles commonly used for noncommercial purposes, i.e., pick-up
trucks, vans, panel trucks and the like and parcel package delivery trucks.
         (k)   The home occupation shall not entail more than eight client
visits per day or 40 per week. The operator of the home occupation is
responsible for maintaining a log of such visits.
         (l)   Retail sales of items in connection with a home occupation that
are produced or processed on or off the premises, which are accessory to the
main residential use, which shall only be conducted wholly within enclosed
buildings, and which sales and/or storage does not occupy more than 25% of a
detached accessory building.
         (m)   Parking of motor vehicles shall be limited to one vehicle used
for the home occupation per parcel. Parking generated by the conduct of the
home occupation shall be provided for on the lot's driveway, which shall meet
the minimum size requirements for off-street parking set forth in Subchapter
155.11. Parking of motor vehicles generated by the home occupation are not
allowed on the street or on any unpaved area of the lot.
         (n)   In the event any of the above conditions or other conditions
required by the Planning Commission are not met, the revocation process as set
forth in §
155.106 shall take place.
      (5)   Group care homes.
         (a)   Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section to
regulate the location, operation, and maintenance of group care homes in order
to promote the public health, safety and welfare. It is the intent of this
section to provide for the assimilation of group care homes in stable and
suitable neighborhoods so that the living environments of their residents are
conducive to their rehabilitation.
         (b)   Development standards. No group care home shall be established,
operated or maintained on any premises unless authorized by the issuance of a
conditional use permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter,
except as provided in division (E)(5)(c) of this section. In addition to said
provisions, group care homes shall comply with the following development
standards:
            1.   Evidence is presented that the proposed facility meets the
certification, licensing, or approval requirements of the appropriate state or
local agency;
            2.   Evidence is presented that the proposed facility meets local
fire safety requirements for the proposed use and level of occupancy;
            3.   Evidence is presented that the proposed facility will not
generate an unreasonable increase in traffic volume;
            4.   Such facilities shall comply with the district regulations
applicable to other properties in the zoning district in which they are
located;
            5.   No such facility may be located within a 1,200 foot radius of
another such facility;
            6.   No signs shall be erected by such facility for purposes of
identification except a permitted street address sign;
            7.   The exterior of all such facilities shall not be altered in
character but shall be compatible with other residential dwellings. However,
any improvement required by code or necessitated by licensing requirements
shall not be deemed incompatible.
            8.   The applicant shall provide a plan indicating the manner in
which the facility will maintain contact with neighborhood residents, to
include a structured procedure whereby their grievances may be filed and
resolved.
            9.   The applicant shall provide documentation indicating the need
for the facility, the specific clientele it will serve, and the location and
type of similar facilities operated by the applicant.
            10.   The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet.
            11.   A conditional use shall be granted for a specific type of
group home. The type of home shall be defined as the specific nature of the
condition being treated or rehabilitated. Any change in the type of home shall
require a new conditional use.
         (c)   Exception Category I. Group care homes, Category I, as defined
in this chapter with five or less residents shall be allowed as a permitted use
in the D, H, E, E-1, F and G Districts when the Planning Commission determines
the applicant, upon submittal of documentation, meets the development standards
as described above in (E)(5)(b) of this section.
         (d)   Zoning of group care homes Category I and II. Group care homes
as defined in this chapter shall be permitted as follows:
 
Table 155.10a Category I                      Category II
Zoning                          11 or more,                     11 or more, not
District      5 or less 6 to 10 not to exceed 5 or less 6 to 10 to exceed 15
                                15
A, B, C       C         C       -             P         C       C
D, H          P         C       C             C         -       P
E, CBD, OB    P         C       C             P         C       C
F, G          C         C       C             C         C       C
All counts do not include resident administrators.
   Definition. GROUP CARE HOME shall mean any community residential facility
which provides residential care and rehabilitative or habilitative services.
There are two categories of group care homes:
            1.   Group care homes, Category I. Any state, federal or locally
approved dwelling or place used as a foster home for children or adults or as a
home for the care or rehabilitation of dependent or pre-delinquent children,
the physically ill or infirm, abused or battered children, or adults, the
physically handicapped or disabled, those with developmental disabilities, or
similar groups whose residents do not require constant supervision or
treatment. Group care homes, Category I, is designed to provide living
accommodations as a primary use, where medical or psychiatric care is provided
therein no more than on an occasional basis. The term does not include a
nursing home, boarding home, or group care home, Category II.
            2.   Group care home, Category II. Any state, federal, or locally
approved dwelling or place used as a home for juvenile offenders; a halfway
house providing residential care or rehabilitation for adult offenders in lieu
of institutional sentencing; a halfway house providing residence for persons
leaving correctional and psychiatric institutions; and residential
rehabilitation centers for alcohol and drug users. Detoxification shall be
expressly prohibited in residential rehabilitation centers.
      (6)   Short-term rentals.
         (a)   Permit. Upon approval of the conditional use, the owner shall
submit to the Zoning Administrator the name and emergency contact information
for the owner or property manager who can be contacted and will respond within
a reasonable time period to any complaints, violations, emergencies or other
concerns related to the short-term rental property or tenants.
         (b)   Location. The Planning Commission shall consider the proposed
location relative to its proximity to other such uses in the vicinity in order
to avoid an undue concentration that could have a negative effect on the
surrounding neighborhood.
         (c)   Maximum occupancy. The maximum number of tenants permitted shall
be determined by applicable health department requirements.
         (d)   Storage. The location shall not be rented for the purposes of
storage.
      (7)   Townhomes.
         (a)   Provided they are compatible in size and scale with the
character of the area or neighborhood.
         (b)   All single-family residential attached dwellings shall not
exceed three stories and 35 feet in height, shall not exceed a density of 14
dwelling units per net acre, and shall comply with all other requirements of
this zone.
         (c)   A development plan, as regulated by Subchapter
155.13, shall be required. Each residence shall be on a separately deeded lot
not less than 2,500 square feet for interior units, and 3,500 square feet for
end units. Interior units may have "zero" side yard setbacks. Exterior units
shall comply with the required side yard setbacks contained in this section. No
more than two interior adjacent units may be located in each grouping. The
minimum lot width for interior single-family residential attached units shall
be 25 feet.
      (8)   Group day care.
         (a)   The Planning Commission shall consider the proposed location
relative to its proximity to other such uses in the vicinity in order to avoid
an undue concentration that could have a negative effect on the surrounding
neighborhood.
            1.   Shall be located on an arterial or collector street.
            2.   A traffic circulation plan shall be submitted for review by
the Planning Commission.
            3.   Parking shall be required in compliance with Subchapter
155.11.
         (b)   The Planning Commission shall also consider the hours of
operation and capacity of the proposed use.
         (c)   The site shall have adequate fencing and protected access as
determined by the city.
         (d)   The applicant must present state certification to the Planning
Commission at the time of application.
   (F)   Storage and distribution.
      (1)   Cartage, express and parcel delivery facilities, freight terminals,
warehousing and storage.
         (a)   The site shall have a minimum area of ten acres, provided the
Planning Commission, may reduce the site area to no less than five acres where
it is demonstrated to its satisfaction that the truck terminal operation will
be compatible with other surrounding uses.
         (b)   All ingress and egress from the site shall be directly onto an
arterial street.
         (c)   The site shall be designed so all vehicles are able to enter and
leave the site without having to back-out onto the street. Driveways shall be
curbed for their full length in the front yard.
         (d)   The Planning Commission shall determine that traffic will be no
more hazardous nor the volume of traffic any greater than the capacity for the
street involved, taking into consideration vehicular turning movements in
relation to routes of traffic flow, proximity and adequacy of intersections.
All access to the site shall be from arterial streets built to a standard to
accommodate heavy trucks.
      (2)   Mini-warehouse and self-storage facilities.
         (a)   The minimum size of the site shall be not less than two acres.
         (b)   All ingress and egress from the site shall be directly onto an
arterial or collector street.
         (c)   No storage of combustible or flammable liquids, combustible
fibers, or explosive materials, as defined in the fire prevention code, or
toxic materials, shall be permitted within the self-storage buildings or upon
the premises. However, storage of recreational vehicles containing fuel and
other automotive fluids is permitted.
         (d)   The use of the premises shall be limited to storage of personal
items and business items
and shall not be used for operating any other business, maintaining or
repairing vehicles or for any recreational activity or hobby.
         (e)   Limited retail sales of products and supplies incidental to the
principal use, such as packing materials, packing labels, tape, rope,
protective covers, locks and chains shall be permitted.
         (f)   All yards abutting a street shall be screened from view in
accordance with the requirements of §
155.142(B).
         (g)   A security manager may be permitted to reside on the premises. A
minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided for the dwelling unit.
   (G)   Utility.
      (1)   Wireless communication facilities.
         (a)   Required approvals. The placement of wireless communications
facilities and towers shall meet the following approval requirements:
            1.   Installation of new antenna. The installation of new antenna
(s) on existing towers, including legal non-conforming towers, and existing
alternative structures (such as water towers, buildings, or church steeples)
may be approved by the Zoning Administrator subject to all requirements of this
section. Any new antenna that will add either 10% or 20 feet, whichever is
less, above the highest point of any existing tower or alternative structure
shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter for the installation of new
towers as described below.
            2.   Installation of new accessory structures. The installation of
new accessory structure(s), such as equipment buildings, to support the
installation of additional antennas on existing towers or alternative
structures may be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
         (b)   Removal. Any tower unused or left abandoned for 12 consecutive
months shall be removed by the property owner at his/her expense. Regardless of
the tower ownership, the property owner shall be responsible for removal. Upon
the request of the Zoning Administrator, the operator of any facility to which
this provision applies shall provide documentation of the use of that facility
for the purpose of verifying any abandonment.
         (c)   Interference with public safety facilities. No new wireless
communications facilities or tower shall result in any interference with public
safety telecommunications.
         (d)   Required documentation for all facilities. In addition to the
requirements provided in this chapter for the receipt of conditional use
approval, applications for new towers, new antenna, and new related facilities
shall include the following: Where the equipment is mounted on an existing
building, the comparable information for that structure shall be provided.
            1.   Engineer's report. A report from a professional engineer
licensed in the State of Ohio that:
               a.    Describes the height and design of any new tower and/or
antenna including a cross-section, latitude, longitude, and elevation;
               b.    Describes or updates (in the case of new antenna) the
tower's capacity, including the type and number of antennae it can accommodate;
               c.    Certifies compliance of the construction specifications
with all applicable building codes (including but not limited to the foundation
for the tower, anchors for the guy wires if used, co-location, and strength
requirements for natural forces: ice, wind, earth movements, etc.);
               d.    Certifies that the facility will not interfere with
established public safety telecommunication facilities; and
               e.    Includes the engineer's seal and registration number.
            2.   Letter of intent. A letter of intent committing the tower
owner, property owner, antenna owners, and their successors to allow the shared
use of the tower.
            3.   Proof of compliance. Copies of any required approvals from the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
and all other appropriate state and federal agencies.
            4.   Removal affidavit. A letter committing all parties, including
the property owner and his/her successors, to remove the tower and all related
accessory structures, fences, landscaping, and equipment if the tower is
abandoned (unused for a period of 12 consecutive months). The removal affidavit
shall be recorded in Hamilton County, with a copy of the recorded affidavit
provided to the Zoning Administrator.
         (e)   Determination of new tower need. Any proposal for a new
telecommunications tower shall only be approved if the applicant submits
verification from a professional engineer licensed in the State of Ohio that
the antenna(s) planned for the proposed tower cannot be accommodated on any
existing or approved towers or other structures within a two mile radius of the
proposed tower location due to one or more of the following reasons:
            1.   Existing public site. There are no existing publicly owned
towers or sites suitable to accommodate the proposed tower or antennas.
            2.   Inadequate structural capacity. The antenna(s) would exceed
the structural capacity of an existing or approved tower or other structure.
            3.    Interference. The antennas would cause interference impacting
the usability of other existing or planned equipment at the tower site.
            4.   Inadequate height. The existing or approved towers or
structures within the search radius cannot accommodate the planned equipment at
the height necessary.
            5.   Land availability. Additional land area is not available (when
necessary).
         (f)   Design requirements for new towers and related facilities. All
telecommunications facilities shall meet the following design requirements:
            1.   Lighting. Tower lighting shall only be as required for safety
or security reasons or as required by the FAA or other federal or state
authority. All ground level security lighting shall be oriented inward so as
not to project onto surrounding properties, and shall have 90° cut-off
luminaries (shielded down lighting).
            2.    Co-location. All telecommunication towers shall be designed,
and engineered structurally, electrically and in all other respects to
accommodate both the applicant's equipment and at least one additional user for
every 50 feet in total tower height in excess of 75 feet.
               a.    Each additional user shall be assumed to have an antenna
loading equal to that of the initial user.
               b.    Towers must be designed to allow for rearrangement of
antennas and to accept antennas mounted at varying heights.
            3.   Height. All towers and antenna shall conform to FAA tall
structure requirements. The maximum height of accessory structures shall be 15
feet. Exceptions:
               a.   In Zone E, tower and antenna shall not exceed 45 feet.
            4.   Signs. Signs for all telecommunications facilities shall be
permitted up to a total of four square feet per user and mounted on the fence.
         (g)   Site requirements for new towers and related facilities. All
telecommunications facilities shall meet the following site requirements:
            1.   Vehicular access. Vehicle access drives may be gravel or paved
and shall be located within an access easement that is a minimum of 20 feet in
width. Any portion of the entrance located in a public right-of-way shall meet
the applicable public street design, construction, and pavement requirements.
            2.   Site area. The lot (or lease area) where the tower is located
shall be large enough to accommodate all future anticipated accessory
structures needed by future antenna users. The size of the site shall also be
of sufficient area to allow the location of one additional tower and associated
support facilities.
               a.   The arrangement of the initial tower and the topography of
the site shall be considered in determining the sufficiency of the site area.
               b.   At a minimum, the width and depth of the tower site shall
be a distance equal to the tower height. The tower shall be placed within the
property so it is no closer to any lot line than one-half the tower height.
               c.   All tower supporting and stabilizing wires shall be located
within the site area.
               d.    Antennae under 20 feet in height shall not be located
along public streets unless it is determined by the Planning Commission that
such antennae cannot be located in a public alley.
            3.   Setback. The required setbacks for the tower and related
facilities shall be as follows:
               a.   Side and rear setback. The minimum side and rear setback
for all facilities, including the security fence, shall be 25 feet.
               b.    Front setback. The minimum front setback for all
facilities shall be as specified by this Code for the zoning district in which
it is located. No part of a wireless telecommunications facility, including the
security fence, and any required guide wires or bracing shall be permitted in
the required front setback.
               c.    Additional setback from residential districts. No facility
shall be placed closer than one and one-half times the total height of the
tower or 200 feet, whichever is greater, to any property included in a
residential district.
               d.    Additional landscaping. Landscape screening, in addition
to the requirements of this chapter, may be provided in the setback area.
            4.    Encroachment. No part of any telecommunications facility nor
associated lines, cables, equipment, wires or braces shall at any time extend
across or over any part of a public right-of-way, sidewalk, or property line.
            5.   Fencing. An eight foot high security fence shall completely
surround the tower and accessory equipment building site. Any deterrents, such
as barbed wire, shall be at least eight feet above grade.
               a.   An area ten feet in width shall remain outside of the fence
for the purpose of providing the landscape screening described in division (G)
(1)(h) of this section.
               b.   In the residential districts, the required security fence
enclosing the facility shall be 100% opaque and of wood, brick, or stone
construction. Opaque, eight foot tall gates shall be provided for access. In no
instance shall the use of chain link fencing or gates with screening inserts be
considered as opaque.
         (h)   Landscape screening. Evergreen buffer plantings shall be located
and maintained around the outermost perimeter of the security fence of all
wireless communications facilities. The landscape plan for the site shall
provide plants in a number and design to provide a screen of the fence, all
equipment and the base of the tower, as determined by the Planning Commission.
            1.   If evergreen shrubs are used they shall be planted a maximum
of five feet apart on center.
            2.   If evergreen trees are used they shall be planted a maximum of
ten feet apart on center.
   (H)   Vehicle and transportation.
      (1)   New and used vehicle sales.
         (a)   The minimum lot size shall be one-half acre with a minimum lot
width of 200 feet.
         (b)   Signs shall conform to the requirements of Subchapter 155.12.
Flags, pennants, balloons, ribbons, or other attention getting devices are not
permitted.
         (c)   Temporary or portable structures are not permitted.
         (d)   Outdoor display.
            1.   Vehicles, for sale or otherwise, shall be parked on approved
hard surfaces.
            2.   Vehicle display areas shall meet the setback requirements for
parking areas as required in the E District.
            3.   Vehicle display or storage shall not be allowed in areas
required for visitor, employee or service parking, as required by Subchapter
155.11.
            4.   All other merchandise available for sale, including, but not
limited to, clothing, accessories, collectibles etc. shall be sold and
displayed within an enclosed building.
         (e)   All service work, including car washing, repair and general
maintenance, shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
         (f)   Audible paging systems or outdoor speakers are not permitted.
         (g)   The use of spotlights or similar equipment is prohibited.
      (2)   Vehicle repair, major.
         (a)   All main and accessory structures shall be setback a minimum of
75 feet from any residential district.
         (b)   There shall be a minimum lot frontage of 100 feet or the zoning
district requirement, whichever is greater, on an arterial or collector street;
and all access to the property shall be from that street.
         (c)   Driveways or curb openings shall be located at least 100 feet
from any intersection and 50 feet from any adjacent residential district
boundary line. No drive shall be located nearer than 75 feet, as measured along
the property line, to any other driveway.
         (d)   A raised curb of six inches in height shall be constructed along
the perimeter of all paved and landscaped areas.
         (e)   Overhead doors shall not face a public street or residential
district. The Planning Commission may modify this requirement upon a
determination that there is no reasonable alternative and the poor visual
impact will be diminished through use of building materials, architectural
features and landscaping.
         (f)   All maintenance and repair work shall be conducted completely
within an enclosed building.
         (g)   There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle
components and parts, materials, commodities for sale, supplies or equipment.
         (h)   Storage of wrecked, partially dismantled, or other derelict
vehicles, or overnight parking of any vehicle except a tow truck shall be
permitted up to 30 days in a designated area. Such area shall be screened from
public rights-of-way by a solid, sight-obscuring fence or wall six feet in
height.
         (i)   If the use includes installation of oil or other automotive
fluids except for fuel, the applicant shall submit a Pollution Incidence
Protection Plan (PIPP). The PIPP shall describe measures to prevent groundwater
contamination caused by accidental spills or leakage of gasoline or other
hazardous materials, such as special check valves, drain back catch basins, and
automatic shut off valves, as approved by the Fire Department.
      (3)   Vehicle repair, minor.
         (a)   A building or structure shall be located at least 40 feet from
any side or rear lot line abutting a residential district.
         (b)   Driveways or curb openings shall be located at least 100 feet
from any intersection and 50 feet from any adjacent residential district
boundary line. No drive shall be located nearer than 75 feet, as measured along
the property line, to any other driveway.
         (c)   Equipment, including hydraulic hoists, pits, and lubrication,
greasing, and other automobile repairing equipment shall be located entirely
within an enclosed building. Outdoor storage or display of merchandise, such as
tires, lubricants and other accessory equipment is not permitted.
         (d)   All activities shall occur inside a building. No vehicle may be
stored outside on the property for more than five days.
         (e)   Storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil or other
flammable liquids or gas above ground shall not be permitted.
         (f)   Floor drains shall not connect to the sanitary sewer system.
         (g)   The minimum required lot frontage shall be on an arterial or
collector street and all access to the property shall be from that street.
         (h)   If the use includes installation of oil or other automotive
fluids except for fuel, the applicant shall submit a Pollution Incidence
Protection Plan (PIPP). The PIPP shall describe measures to prevent groundwater
contamination caused by accidental spills or leakage of gasoline or other
hazardous materials, such as special check valves, drain back catch basins, and
automatic shut off valves, as approved by the Fire Department.
         (i)   If the use includes fuel sales, the requirements for a vehicle
service station shall also be met.
      (4)   Vehicle service stations.
         (a)   There shall be a minimum lot area of one acre and minimum lot
width of 150 feet on an arterial street.
         (b)   Only one driveway shall be permitted from each street, unless
the Planning Commission determines additional driveways will be necessary to
ensure safe and efficient access to the site. Driveways or curb openings shall
be located at least 100 feet from any intersection and 50 feet from any
adjacent residential district boundary line. No drive shall be located nearer
than 75 feet, as measured along the property line, to any other driveway.
         (c)   Pump islands shall be a minimum of 30 feet from any public
right-of-way or lot line. Tanks, propane, and petroleum products shall be set
back at least 15 feet from any lot line.
         (d)   Overhead canopies shall be setback at least 20 feet from the
right-of-way and constructed of materials consistent with the principal
building. The proposed clearance of any canopy shall be noted on the site plan.
All signs, logos, or identifying paint scheme shall be in accordance with
Subchapter
155.12. The canopy shall not exceed 18 feet in height. Lighting in the canopy
shall be recessed, fully shielded, and directed downward to prevent off-site
glare.
         (e)   If the use includes installation of oil or other automotive
fluids except for fuel, the applicant shall submit a Pollution Incidence
Protection Plan (PIPP). The PIPP shall describe measures to prevent groundwater
contamination caused by accidental spills or leakage of gasoline or other
hazardous materials, such as special check valves, drain back catch basins, and
automatic shut off valves, as approved by the Fire Department.
         (f)   In the event that a service station use has been abandoned or
terminated for a period of more than 12 months, all underground gasoline
storage tanks shall be removed from the premises, in accordance with state
requirements.
         (g)   A vehicle service station may be combined with other uses, such
as convenience store, vehicle wash, and/or restaurants; provided all
requirements, including parking, are met for each use and the most restrictive
requirements applicable to any single use shall apply.
      (5)   Vehicle wash facilities.
         (a)   All washing activities must occur inside a building.
         (b)   The building exit for washed vehicles must be at least 75 feet
from the entrance drive that accesses the site.
         (c)   Required stacking spaces for waiting vehicles shall not be
located within a public or private right-of-way and shall not conflict with
maneuvering areas, parking spaces and other activities. Stacking lanes shall be
designed to prevent vehicle queues from extending beyond the property.
         (d)   Wastewater must be recycled, filtered or otherwise cleansed to
minimize discharge of soap, wax and solid matter into public sewers. All such
water shall be discharged only into the public sanitary sewer system.
         (e)   Only one driveway shall be permitted from any street, unless the
Planning Commission determines additional driveways will be necessary to ensure
safe and efficient access to the site.
         (f)   Driveways or curb openings shall be located at least 100 feet
from any intersection and 50 feet from any adjacent residential district
boundary line. No drive shall be located nearer than 75 feet, as measured along
the property line, to any other driveway.
         (g)   For automated drive-through wash facilities, a by-pass lane is
required that allows by-passing waiting vehicles.
         (h)   Overhead doors shall not face a street, except if approved by
the Planning Commission in these circumstances:
            1.   When the doors of a through-garage are located at the front
and rear of a building; or
            2.   When a garage is located on a corner or through lot; or
            3.   When determined that a rear garage door would negatively
affect an abutting residential use or district.
         (i)   A vehicle wash facility building and any accessory buildings and
uses, including vacuums, shall be located at least 50 feet from a street right-
of-way line and 100 feet from any residential district boundary.
         (j)   The property owner or operator must comply with all applicable
noise regulations. Air handling equipment shall be located on a roof, be
equipped with intervening noise reduction baffles, be in proper working
condition and must also comply with this provision.
      (6)   Parking lots, subject to additional standards and restrictions as
described herein.
         (a)   Purpose and intent. Parking lots serving adjacent and nearby
commercial or industrial uses may, in certain instances and when developed with
the following development standards, allow a higher utilization of commercial
and industrial districts without adversely affecting the permitted uses in the
D District.
         (b)   Development standards. Parking lots, including municipal parking
lots, parking lots serving commercial or industrial establishments, or private
parking lots, may be allowed by means of a conditional use permit when such
parking lots substantially meet the following development standards:
            1.   The use of parking lots shall be limited to the parking of
cars, motorcycles, and small trucks.
            2.   There shall be no storage or servicing of vehicles,
merchandise, or equipment, whether or not enclosed, and there shall be no
loading or offloading of merchandise or equipment on such parking lots.
            3.   All use of the parking lot shall cease between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
            4.   All lighting shall be down-directed and shall not extend into
any adjacent residential district. Such lighting shall cease between 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., except that minimal security lighting may be provided.
            5.   Parking shall be provided as required by Subchapter
155.11.
            6.   Parking structures shall meet the following standards:
               a.    Structures, whether above or below grade, shall meet the
same front, rear, and side setbacks as is specified for a main building in the
D District, except that the rear and side setbacks may, through the approval of
the conditional use permit, be reduced to five feet where such setback adjoins
an E District or less restrictive district.
               b.   The height of parking structures shall not exceed 15 feet
above grade, except that parking structures may be increased to a maximum
height of 30 feet above grade when the setbacks facing or abutting a
residential district are increased one foot for each two feet of height above
15 feet.
               c.   All sides of the structure shall have architectural
treatment, dense landscaping, or a combination thereof that sufficiently
screens the structural members from view and shall be compatible with
surrounding buildings.
               d.   Exit ramps from parking structures shall not exceed a 5%
grade below horizontal for a distance of at least 20 feet from a sidewalk or
street.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
 
Notes
1 For building code purposes, the Residential Code of Ohio limits usable floor
  area for a commercial purpose to 10%.
155.11 OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 155.111 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to prescribe regulations for off-street
parking of motor vehicles in residential and non-residential zoning districts;
to ensure by the provision of these regulations that adequate parking and
access is provided in a safe and convenient manner; and to afford reasonable
protection to adjacent land uses from light, noise, air pollution and other
effects of parking areas.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.112 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Applicability of parking requirements. For all buildings and uses
established after the effective date of this Code, with the exception of
division (D) of this section, new off-street parking shall not be required
unless otherwise determined by the Planning Commission. If new parking, drive-
thru stacking, or loading areas are created, they shall be provided by the
standards of this chapter. The Planning Commission may choose to enact off-
street parking requirements under these standards:
      (1)   Whenever use of a building or lot is changed to another
classification of use, off-street parking facilities shall be provided, as
required by this chapter.
      (2)   If the intensity of use of any building or lot is increased,
through the addition of floor area, increase in seating capacity, number of
employees or other means, additional off-street parking shall be provided, as
required by this chapter.
      (3)   Off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of
this Code shall not be reduced below the requirements of this chapter, nor
shall nonconforming parking facilities that exist as of the effective date of
this Code be further reduced or made more nonconforming.
      (4)   An area designated as required off-street parking shall not be
changed to another use, unless equal facilities are provided elsewhere in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Location. Off-street parking facilities required for all uses other
than single- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the lot or within 300
feet of the building(s) or use they are intended to serve, as measured along
lines of public access from the nearest point of the parking facility to the
building(s) or use served. Off-street parking facilities required for single-
and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as
the building they are intended to serve, and shall consist of a parking strip,
parking apron, and/or garage. All residential driveways shall meet city
engineering standards. In the B-1, Central Business District, parking
facilities shall be located within 600 feet of the building or use to be
served.
   (C)   Shared/common parking.
      (1)   Two or more buildings or uses may share a common parking facility,
provided the number of parking spaces available equals the required number of
spaces for all the uses computed separately. Cumulative parking requirements
for mixed-use developments or shared facilities may be reduced by the Planning
Commission where it can be determined that one or more of the factors listed in
division (D) of this section apply.
      (2)   Parking facilities for a church or place of worship may be used to
meet not more than 50% of the off-street parking for theaters, stadiums and
other places of public assembly, stores, office buildings and industrial
establishments lying within 600 feet of a church or place of worship, as
measured along lines of public access; provided, the church or place of worship
makes the spaces available and there is no conflict between times when the uses
are in need of the parking facilities.
   (D)   Handicap parking. Handicapped parking spaces shall be provided
according to Table 155.112.
Table 155.112: Handicap Parking Requirements
Parking Spaces Provided Handicapped Spaces Required
Table 155.112: Handicap Parking Requirements
Parking Spaces Provided Handicapped Spaces Required
0-5                     0
6-25                    1
26-50                   2
51-75                   3
76-100                  4
101-500                 4 + 1 per 100 spaces over 100
501+                    2% of total spaces provided + 1 handicap space for each
                        100 spaces over 1,000
 
Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide and 20 feet long,
and shall be clearly designated by signs.
NOTE: Division (D) of this section shall affect only those uses not regulated
by the Ohio Basic Building Code.
   (E)   Modification of parking requirements. The Planning Commission may
reduce the parking space requirements of this chapter for any use, based upon a
finding that other forms of travel are available and likely to be used and, in
particular, the site design will incorporate both bicycle parking facilities
and pedestrian connections. In addition, one or more of the following
conditions shall also be met:
      (1)   Shared parking by multiple uses where there will be a high
proportion of multipurpose visits or where uses have peak parking demands
during differing times of the day or days of the week and meeting the following
requirements:
         (a)   Pedestrian connections shall be maintained between the uses.
         (b)   For separate lots, shared parking areas shall be adjacent to
each other, with pedestrian and vehicular connections maintained between the
lots.
         (c)   Unless the multiple uses all are within a unified business
center, office park or industrial park all under the same ownership, shared
parking agreements shall be filed with the Clerk of Council after approval by
the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Convenient municipal off-street parking or on-street spaces are
located adjacent to the subject property.
      (3)   Expectation of walk-in trade is reasonable due to sidewalk
connections to adjacent residential neighborhoods or employment centers. To
allow for a parking space reduction, the site design shall incorporate
pedestrian connections to the site and on-site pedestrian circulation,
providing safe and convenient access to the building entrance.
      (4)   Where the applicant has provided a parking study, conducted by a
qualified traffic engineer, demonstrating that another standard would be more
appropriate based on actual number of employees, expected level of customer
traffic, or actual counts at a similar establishment.
      (5)   The Planning Commission may require a parking study to document
that any one or more of the criteria (1) through (4) above would be met.
   (F)   Deferred parking.
      (1)   Where a reduction in the number of parking spaces is not warranted,
but an applicant demonstrates that the parking requirements for a proposed use
would be excessive, the Planning Commission may defer some of the required
parking. A site plan shall designate portions of the site for future
construction of the required parking spaces, meeting the design and dimensional
requirements of this chapter. Any area so designated shall be maintained in a
landscaped appearance and not occupy required buffers, greenbelts or parking
lot setbacks, or be used for any other purpose. Landscaping, such as parking
lot trees, that would otherwise be required for the deferred spaces shall be
installed within the deferred parking area.
      (2)   The deferred parking shall meet the requirements of this chapter,
if constructed. Construction of the additional parking spaces within the
deferred parking area may be initiated by the owner or required by the city,
based on parking needs or observation, and shall require approval of an amended
site plan.
   (G)   Temporary parking. It is recognized that there may be special events
or situations that occur infrequently which would result in a temporary
reduction in the availability of required parking spaces or create a need for
temporary off-site parking. Such events could include outdoor vehicle sales,
festivals, fairs, church/school car washes or garage sales. In those instances,
the Zoning Administrator may authorize the temporary use of the required
parking area or temporary off-site parking upon a demonstration by the
applicant that:
      (1)   The loss of the required parking spaces may be off-set by requiring
employees or customers to park elsewhere or that due to the time of year or
nature of the on-site business, the required spaces are not needed;
      (2)   Permission has been granted by neighboring property owners or
operators to use their parking facilities;
      (3)   The duration of the special event is so short or of such a nature
as to not create any parking problems for the normal operation of the existing
on-site use;
      (4)   Temporary off-site parking is located and designed to ensure safe
and efficient circulation for both pedestrians and vehicles (a site plan may be
required to demonstrate this);
      (5)   The proposed special event satisfies all other applicable city
regulations.
   (H)   Maximum allowed parking. In order to minimize excessive areas of
pavement that detract from aesthetics, contribute to high rates of storm water
runoff and generate reflective heat, the minimum parking space requirements of
this section shall not be exceeded by more than 10%, unless approved by the
Planning Commission as part of site plan review. In approving additional
parking space, the Planning Commission shall determine that the parking is
necessary, based on documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a typical
day.
   (I)   Downtown parking. The minimum off-street parking spaces required for
any nonresidential use in the CBD District shall be exempt from the
requirements of
Table 155.112. These requirements may be further reduced by the Planning
Commission in conformance with the provisions of division (D) of this section.
   (J)   Bicycle parking. Accommodation for bicycle parking is encouraged in
all districts, but especially in the Central Business District (CBD) zone.
   (K)   Required off-street parking spaces. The minimum number of required
off-street parking spaces shall be provided and maintained on the premises or
as otherwise allowed by this chapter, on the basis of the applicable
requirements of
Table 155.112a. As a condition of approval, the City Council may require that a
performance guarantee be posted, in accordance with the provisions of §
155.154.
      (1)   When units or measurements determining the number of required
parking spaces result in a fraction over one-half, a full parking space shall
be required.
      (2)   In the case of a use not specifically mentioned, the requirement
for off-street parking facilities for a specified use which is most similar, as
determined by the Zoning Administrator, shall apply.
      (3)   Each 24 inches of bench, pew, or similar seating facilities shall
be counted as one seat, except if specifications and plans filed in conjunction
with a building permit application specify a maximum seating capacity, that
number may be used as the basis for required parking spaces.
      (4)   Where parking requirements are based upon maximum seating or
occupancy capacity, the capacity shall be as determined by the building code
and fire code.
      (5)   Unless otherwise indicated, floor area shall be usable floor area
(UFA).
Table 155.112a Parking Requirements by Use
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Table 155.112a Parking Requirements by Use
Use                                     Number of Parking Spaces
Residential Uses
Accessory dwellings                     1 space per dwelling unit
Bed and breakfast                       2 for the owner/operator and 1 per
                                        leasable room
Boarding or rooming house               1 space per 2 beds, plus 2 additional
                                        spaces for owner or employees
Dormitories, fraternities and similar   1 per 3 occupants, plus 1 per 2 full-
student housing                         time equivalent employees
Group homes, juvenile and adult         1 per 4 occupants
                                        2 spaces per dwelling unit, except in
Multiple-family residential dwellings   B-1 District (downtown) where 1 per
                                        dwelling unit is required
                                        1.25 spaces per unit. Should units
Senior apartments and senior            revert to general occupancy, the
independent living                      requirements for multiple family
                                        dwellings shall apply
Single-family and two-family dwellings  2 spaces per dwelling unit
Institutional Uses
Auditoriums, assembly halls, meeting    1 space per 3 seats, based on maximum
rooms, theaters, and similar places of  seating capacity in the main place of
assembly                                assembly therein, as established by the
                                        city fire and building codes
                                        1 per 350 sq. ft. of UFA, plus 1 per
Child day care centers, nursery         employee. Sufficient area shall be
schools, and day nurseries; adult day   designated for drop-off of children or
care centers                            adults in a safe manner that will not
                                        result in traffic disruptions
                                        1 per 5 seats in the main unit of
Churches and customary related uses     worship, plus spaces required for each
                                        accessory use such as a school
Colleges and universities; business,    1 per classroom plus 1 per 3 students
trade, technical, vocational, or        based on the maximum number of students
industrial schools                      attending classes at any one time
                                        1 per teacher, employee, or
                                        administrator, in addition to the
Elementary and middle schools           requirements for places of assembly
                                        such as auditorium, gymnasium, or
                                        stadium
                                        1 per 300 sq. ft. of UFA plus
Government offices                      requirements for auditoriums, meeting
                                        halls or other assembly rooms
                                        1 per teacher, employee, or
                                        administrator, and 1 for every 10
High schools; performing and fine arts  students, in addition to the
schools                                 requirements for places of assembly
                                        such as auditorium, gymnasium, or
                                        stadium
Hospitals and similar facilities for    1 per 2 beds, plus 1 per employee on
human care                              the largest shift
                                        1 per 3 beds or occupants and 1 space
Nursing and convalescent homes          per staff member or employee on the
                                        largest shift
Post office                             1 per 200 sq. ft. of UFA
                                        1 per 800 sq. ft. of UFA, plus
Public libraries and museums            requirements for auditoriums,
                                        classrooms or other assembly rooms
Retail Uses
Retail stores except as otherwise       1 for every 250 sq. ft. of UFA
specified herein
Mortuary establishment, funeral home    1 per 50 sq. ft. of assembly room or
                                        parlor floor space
                                        1.25 per guest unit. In addition,
                                        spaces required for ancillary uses such
Motel, hotel or other commercial        as lounges, restaurants or places of
lodging establishment                   assembly shall be provided and
                                        determined on the basis of specific
                                        requirements for each individual use
Restaurants, Bars and Clubs
Standard sit-down restaurants with      1 per 50 sq. ft. of UFA
liquor license and brew pubs
Standard sit-down restaurants without   1 per 75 sq. ft. of UFA
liquor license
Use                                     Number of Parking Spaces
Restaurants, Bars and Clubs
Carry-out restaurant (with no or        6 per service or counter station, plus
limited seating for eating on premises) 1 per employee
Open front restaurant/ice cream stand   6 spaces, plus 1 per employee and 1 per
                                        4 seats
Drive-through restaurant                1 per 30 sq. ft. UFA, plus 8 stacking
                                        spaces per food pickup window
Bars, lounges, taverns, nightclubs
(majority of sales consist of alcoholic 1 per 50 sq. ft. of UFA
beverages)
                                        1 for every 3 persons allowed within
Private clubs, lodge halls, or banquet  the maximum occupancy load as
halls                                   established by the city fire and
                                        building codes
Recreation
Athletic clubs, exercise                1 per 3 persons allowed within the
establishments, health studios, sauna   maximum occupancy load as established
baths, martial art schools and other    by city fire and building codes, plus 1
similar uses                            per employee
                                        1 per 3 persons allowed within the
                                        maximum occupancy load as established
Billiard parlors                        by city building and fire codes or 1
                                        per 300 square feet of gross floor
                                        area, whichever is greater
                                        8 per bowling lane plus additional for
Bowling alleys                          accessory uses such as bars or
                                        restaurants
Indoor recreation establishments        1 space for every 3 persons allowed
including gymnasiums, tennis courts and within the maximum occupancy load as
handball, roller or ice skating rinks,  established by the city fire and
exhibition halls, dance halls, and      building codes
banquet halls
                                        6 per 1 golf hole, plus 1 per employee,
Golf courses open to the public, except plus additional for any bar,
miniature or "par-3"                    restaurant, banquet facility or similar
                                        use
Miniature or "par-3" courses            3 per 1 hole plus 1 per employee
                                        1 for every 3 seats or 1 for every 6
Stadium, sports arenas, sports fields   feet of bench, plus 1 per employee. For
(ball diamonds, soccer fields, etc.) or fields without spectator seating, there
similar place of outdoor assembly       shall be a minimum of 30 spaces per
                                        field
Offices
Business offices or professional        1 for every 300 sq. ft. of UFA, but no
offices of lawyers, architects or       less than 5 parking spaces
similar professionals
Medical offices of doctors, dentists,   1 for every 200 sq. ft. of UFA
veterinarians or similar professions
Industrial Uses
Industrial establishments, including
manufacturing, research and testing     1 for every 1.5 employees or 550 sq.
laboratories, creameries, bottling      ft. of gross floor area, whichever is
works, printing, plumbing or electrical greater
workshops
                                        1 per employee computed on the basis of
                                        the greatest number of persons employed
Warehouses and storage buildings        at any one time during the day or
                                        night, or 1 for every 5,000 square feet
                                        of gross floor area, whichever is
                                        greater
                                        Unobstructed parking area equal to 1
Mini warehouses/self storage            for every 10 door openings, plus
                                        parking for other uses on site such as
                                        truck rental
                                        1 per employee plus 2 truck spaces of
Truck terminal                          10 by 70 feet per truck berth or
                                        docking space
 
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.113 OFF-STREET PARKING AND FACILITY DESIGN.
   (A)   Location and setbacks. Off-street parking lots shall meet the setback
requirements applicable to parking, as specified in the zoning district or
requirements which may be specified for individual uses.
   (B)   Parking construction and development. The construction of any parking
lot shall require approval of a site plan, in accordance with Subchapter
155.13. Construction shall be completed and approved by the Zoning
Administrator before a certificate of occupancy is issued and the parking lot
is used.
      (1)   Pavement. All parking lots and vehicle and equipment storage areas
shall be paved with an asphalt or concrete binder, and shall be graded and
drained so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate. The Planning
Commission may approve alternative paving materials, such as permeable/grass
pavers, for all or a portion of the parking areas, based upon credible evidence
of the durability and appearance of the proposed materials. For storage areas,
the Planning Commission may approve a substitute for hard-surfaced pavement
upon a determination that there are no adverse effects on adjoining properties.
      (2)   Drainage. Surface water from parking areas shall be managed in
accordance with the city engineering standards. The City Manager shall, in
consultation with the City Engineer, determine the appropriate detention
treatment. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs associated with the
City Engineer's review.
      (3)   Dimensions. Parking space and aisle dimensions shall meet the
applicable requirements specified in
Table 155.113.
         (a)   Angled parking between these ranges shall be to the nearest
degree.
         (b)   Space length may be reduced by up to two feet if an unobstructed
overhang, such as a landscaped area or sidewalk, is provided. A sidewalk shall
have a minimum width of seven feet where abutting a parking area. There shall
be a minimum distance of seven feet between the parking lot curb and building.
Where curbing does not exist, bumper blocks shall be provided to protect
pedestrian space adjacent to the building.
         (c)   All parking lots shall be striped and maintained showing
individual parking bays, in accordance with the following dimensions.
      (4)   Stacking spaces. Waiting/stacking spaces for drive-through uses
(such as banks, restaurants, car washes, pharmacies, dry cleaners and oil
change establishments) shall be at least 24 feet long and ten feet wide.
Stacking spaces shall not block required off-street parking spaces. Where the
drive-through waiting lane provides for a single lane for five or more vehicles
an escape/bypass lane shall be provided to allow vehicles to exit the waiting
lane.
 
Table 155.113 Dimensional Requirements (feet)
                Parking Space                                   Total Bay (Two
                              Maneuvering Lane Total One Row of Rows of Parking
Parking Pattern Width Length  Width            Parking and      and Maneuvering
                                               Maneuvering Lane Lane)

0° (parallel)  8     21      12               20               28
30° to 53°    9     18      14               32               50
54° to 74°    9     18      18               36               54
75° to 90°    9     18      24               42               60
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7292.png]
 
      (5)    Ingress and egress. Adequate vehicular ingress and egress to the
parking area shall be provided by means of clearly limited and defined drives.
All parking lots shall provide interior access and circulation aisles for all
parking spaces. The use of public streets for maneuvering into or out of off-
street parking spaces shall be prohibited. Ingress and egress to a parking lot
in a non-residential zoning district shall not be through a residential
district, except in instances where access is provided by means of an alley
that forms the boundary between a residential and non-residential district.
Except in the CBD Zoning District (downtown), access to nonresidential parking
lots shall meet the following standards:
         (a)   Ingress and egress driveways shall be located no closer than 50
feet to the intersecting right-of-way of two streets and no closer than three
feet to any adjoining property line.
         (b)   Driveways shall not exceed 30 feet in width, as measured at the
right-of-way line.
         (c)   A maximum of one driveway shall be permitted per street
frontage; provided a second driveway may be allowed where the frontage exceeds
200 feet.
         (d)   No driveway shall be closer than 75 feet to another driveway on
the same or abutting property.
         (e)   Driveways shall be perpendicular or no more than 30° from
perpendicular to the curb.
         (f)   Driveways shall not be located closer than 25 feet to any
property line, unless approved as a shared driveway for two or more properties.
         (g)   All driveways shall be constructed in accordance with the city
engineering standards.
      (6)   Curbing. A six inch concrete curb, or alternative as determined by
the Planning Commission, shall be provided around all sides of any parking lot
of five or more spaces to protect landscaped areas, sidewalks, buildings, or
adjacent property from vehicles that might otherwise extend beyond the edge of
the parking lot. Curb openings are allowed for storm water drainage, as
recommended by the City Engineer. Plantings shall be set back two feet from
curbs to allow for bumper overhang.
      (7)   Landscaping. Off-street parking areas shall be landscaped and/or
buffered, in accordance with the requirements of Subchapter
155.14.
      (8)   Lighting. Light fixtures used to illuminate off-street parking
areas shall be arranged to deflect the light away from adjoining properties and
adjacent streets. Lighting fixtures in parking areas adjacent to any
residentially zoned or used property shall not exceed 20 feet in height.
Fixtures in all other parking areas shall not exceed 35 feet in height. Light
fixtures shall be designed to achieve 90° luminary cutoff.
      (9)   Fire lanes. Fire lanes shall be designated on the site and posted
with signage prior to occupancy. Vehicle circulation shall meet turning radius
requirements set by the Fire Department.
         (a)   Barrier free parking in parking lots. Within each parking lot,
signed and marked barrier free spaces shall be provided at a convenient
location, in accordance with the Barrier Free Parking Space Requirements of the
Ohio Department of Transportation. Barrier free spaces shall be located as
close as possible to building entrances. Where a curb exists between a parking
lot surface and a sidewalk entrance, an inclined approach or curb cut with a
gradient of not more than a 1:12 slope and width of a minimum four feet shall
be provided for wheelchair access.
         (b)   Maintenance. All parking areas shall be maintained free of trash
and debris. Surface, curbing, light fixtures and signage shall be maintained in
good condition.
         (c)   Limitations on use of parking lots.
            1.   Off-street parking areas are intended only for temporary
vehicle parking for public safety. Except when land is used as storage space in
connection with the business of a repair or service garage, use of parking
areas or open land is not permitted for the storage or parking of wrecked or
junked cars, or for creating a junk yard or nuisance.
            2.   Loading spaces, as required in §
155.114, and parking spaces, required in §
155.112, shall be considered separate and distinct requirements and shall be
provided as individual components on the site. In no case shall one component
be construed as meeting the requirements of the other.
            3.   Parking lots and loading areas shall not be used for the long-
term storage of trucks or trailers, except where such outdoor storage is
specifically permitted in the industrial district. Overnight parking or storage
of commercial vehicles shall be prohibited, except for uses and locations
approved for vehicle storage. This shall not be construed to prohibit the
parking overnight of commercial fleet vehicles or the short-term parking of
trailers in loading bays or staging areas in business or industrial districts.
            4.   It shall be unlawful to use a parking lot or open area to
store or park any vehicle for the purpose of displaying vehicles for sale,
except in an approved vehicle sales dealership.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.114 OFF-STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Uses requiring loading area. On the same premises with every building,
structure or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage,
warehouse, retails sales, consumer services or other uses similarly involving
the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall
be provided and maintained on the lot adequate space for standing, loading and
unloading services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the
streets, alleys and parking spaces. This provision shall not apply to uses in
the CBD Zoning District.
   (B)   Loading area requirements. Loading and unloading spaces shall be paved
and, unless otherwise adequately provided for, shall be ten feet by 50 feet,
with 15 foot height clearance, according to the following schedule:
 
Table 155.114 Minimum Off-Street Loading Requirements
Building Net GFA        Minimum Truck Loading Spaces
0–1,400 sq. ft.       None
1,401–20,000 sq. ft.  1 space
20,001–100,000 sq. ft.1 space plus 1 space for each 40,000 sq. ft. in excess
                        of 20,000 sq. ft.
100,001–500,000 sq. ft5 spaces plus 1 space for each 40,000 sq. ft. in excess
                        of 100,000 sq. ft.
Over 500,000 sq. ft.    15 spaces plus 1 space for each 80,000 sq. ft. in
                        excess of 500,000 sq. ft.
 
   (C)   Orientation of overhead doors. Overhead doors for truck loading areas
shall not face a public right-of-way and shall be screened to not be visible
from a public street or an adjacent residential district.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.12 SIGNAGE
§ 155.121   PURPOSE.
   The regulations of this subchapter are intended to protect and further the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Mt. Healthy; to
maintain and improve the appearance of the community; to conserve community
character; to prevent traffic hazards; to provide safe conditions for
pedestrians; and to promote economic development by regulating the
construction, alteration, repair, maintenance, size, location and number of
signs. It is further determined that to allow signs of excessive number and
size in the city would unduly distract pedestrians and motorists, create
traffic hazards and reduce the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the
public. The regulations of this subchapter are intended to provide reasonable
identification for businesses and other uses within the community; but are not
intended to serve as a means of advertising.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.122 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   The following regulations are applicable to all signs in all zoning
districts.
   (A)   Sign structure and placement.
      (1)   Signs shall be constructed to withstand all wind and vibration
forces which can normally be expected to occur.
      (2)   Signs shall not be placed in, upon or over any public right-of-way,
alley, or other place, except as may be otherwise permitted by the Mt. Healthy
City Manager or Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT).
      (3)   A light pole, utility pole, tree, fence or other supporting member
shall not be used for the placement of any sign, except as may be specifically
permitted by this chapter.
      (4)   A sign shall not be erected in any location where it may, by reason
of its position, shape, color, lighting or other characteristics, interfere
with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign,
signal, or device, or constitute a nuisance per se.
      (5)   No sign shall be placed in a manner as to obstruct any fire escape,
any required exit, door or window or any ventilation system or other
operational necessities of a building.
      (6)   A sign attached to a building shall not be placed in any location
that would cause significant architectural features of a building to be
covered, hidden or obscured.
      (7)   A wall sign shall not extend past the edge of the wall to which it
is affixed and no wall sign shall extend above the roof line of a building.
      (8)   A sign and its supporting mechanism shall not extend beyond any lot
lines of the property on which it is located.
      (9)   All signs shall be stationary and shall pertain only to the
business or activity conducted on the premises, except for permitted community
special event signs.
      (10)   One changeable message display may be permitted on either a
permitted freestanding ground sign or wall sign on a parcel, within the maximum
size limits permitted for the sign; provided the message is static and is not
changed more than once in any 12 hour period.
      (11)   Any vehicle which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, has
the intended function of serving as a sign shall conform to the provisions of §
155.124(I).
   (B)   Measurement of sign area. No sign shall exceed the maximum sign area
allowed for the district in which it is located. The sign area is to be
expressed in square feet, computed to the nearest tenth of a square foot, and
shall be calculated as follows:
      (1)   Area. The area of a sign shall be measured as the area within a
single, continuous perimeter composed of any straight line geometric figure
which encloses the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, logo or
any other figure of similar character, together with any frame or other
material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed,
excluding only the structure necessary to support the sign.
      (2)   Double-faced sign. The area of a ground or projecting sign that has
two or more faces shall be measured by including the area of all sign faces,
except if two faces are placed back-to-back and are no more than two feet apart
at any point, the area of one face shall be counted toward the maximum size
requirement. If the two back-to-back faces are of unequal size, the larger of
the two sign faces shall be counted as the one face.
      (3)   Wall sign. For a sign consisting of individual letters and/or a
logo affixed directly onto a building, the area of the sign shall be computed
by measuring the area of the envelope required to enclose the lettering and
logo.
      (4 )   Height. The height of a sign shall be measured as the vertical
distance from the highest point of the sign to the finished grade of the ground
immediately beneath the sign, excluding any artificially constructed earthen
berms.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7278.png]
 
      (5)   Multi-tenant buildings. For buildings with multiple tenants, the
sign area for wall, projecting, canopy or awning signs shall be determined by
taking that portion of the front wall of the building applicable to each tenant
and computing the sign requirements for that portion of the total wall.
   (C)   Illumination and movement.
      (1)   Unless otherwise provided, signs shall not be illuminated
internally. The source of the light for externally illuminated signs shall be
enclosed and directed to prevent light from shining directly onto traffic or
neighboring property and shall be directed in a downward manner to prevent
light pollution into the night sky.
      (2)   A sign shall not contain any moving or animated parts including
lighting, nor have the appearance of having moving or animated parts, except
for time and temperature signs, standard sized barber pole signs, scoreboards
and gasoline price signs as otherwise permitted.
      (3)   Neon signs shall only be permitted within the E District, but not
within 50 feet of a residential district unless the sign is not visible from
adjacent property within the residential district.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.123 SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMITS.
   The following signs shall not require a permit, as otherwise required by §
155.126, but shall be subject to all other applicable general requirements of
this chapter.
Table 155.123 Signs Exempt from Permit
Type of Sign Requirements
Table 155.123 Signs Exempt from Permit
Type of Sign                Requirements
                            Numeral height no greater than 6 inches for
Address sign                residences and 18 inches for businesses and other
                            nonresidential uses.
                            The bottom of the barber pole must be at least 8
                            feet from the ground or sidewalk and the top must
                            be lower than the height of the building. The
Barber pole                 barber pole must not extend more than 12 inches
                            from the exterior face of the wall to which it is
                            attached. Placement within any ROW requires
                            approval by either the City Nanager or ODOT.
                            Not over 20 square feet in area for public,
Bulletin board              charitable, or religious institutions; provided
                            that if such signs are electrically illuminated, an
                            electrical permit must be obtained.
                            Permanent signs on gas pumps or ice containers
                            indicating only the contents of such devices,
Device sign                 provided that the sign area of each device shall
                            not exceed 3 square feet in area, limit of 1 sign
                            per vending machine, gas pump or ice container.
                            The sign shall not exceed 2 square feet in area and
                            3 feet in height; shall be setback from the street
                            right-of-way line and the edge of any driveway at
Directional sign            least 5 feet; and may contain a logo or trademark
                            up to one-third of the sign area, but shall not
                            contain a name or commercial message. Only words
                            such as "enter," "exit," "one way," "do not enter,"
                            and similar traffic directions may be displayed.
                            "Help wanted" signs soliciting employees for the
Employment sign             place of business where posted, provided that the
                            maximum area for all such signs shall be 6 square
                            feet with a maximum height of 4 feet.
                            Flags or insignia of any nation, state, local
Flag                        government, community organization or educational
                            institution.
                            Garage sale and estate sale signs announcing the
                            sale of household goods, provided the following: A
                            maximum of 4 signs may be placed off-premise and 1
                            on-premise; the signs shall not exceed 4 square
Garage and estate sale      feet in area and 3 feet in height above grade; the
                            signs shall not be affixed to other signs, utility
                            poles, fire hydrants or trees; the signs are
                            erected no more than 3 days before and removed
                            within 1 day after the announced sale.
                            Historical marker including plaques or signs
                            describing a property's designation as a historical
Historic marker             site or structure and containing narrative, not
                            exceeding 2 square feet in area, unless an official
                            state or federal historical marker.
                            Incidental signs not exceeding a total of 2 square
                            feet, a total of 2 signs per business indicating
                            acceptance of credit cards, the location of
Incidental sign             restrooms, restrictions on smoking and restrictions
                            on building entrances or describing business
                            affiliations and are attached to a permitted sign,
                            exterior wall, building entrance, or window.
                            Any sign which is located completely within an
                            enclosed building, and which is not visible from
Interior sign               outside the building or which is primarily directed
                            at persons within the premises upon which the sign
                            is located.
                            Memorial signs or tablets not exceeding 2 square
                            feet in area, having the name of a building and/or
Memorial sign               the date of erection and cut, cast or engraved into
                            a masonry or metal surface and made an integral
                            part of the structure.
                            Murals not containing any logos, product or service
                            representations are exempt; provided, the name of
                            the use, business or entity located on the premises
Murals                      to which the mural is affixed may be displayed if
                            it occupies no more than 10% of the area of the
                            mural. Any other mural shall be regulated as a wall
                            sign.
                            Signs identifying the occupants of the building
Nameplate                   and/or their profession, provided the sign shall
                            not exceed 2 square feet in area; the sign must be
                            attached to an exterior building wall.
Political sign              Signs shall not be placed in the street right-of-
                            way.
                            Only 1 sign is permitted per lot. However, 2 signs
                            are permitted if the lot is a corner lot; the size
                            of each sign may not exceed 4 square feet per side
                            and a maximum height of 4 feet for single-family
                            and two-family dwellings or 16 square feet per side
Real estate sign            and a maximum height of 8 feet for all other uses;
                            they must be non-illuminated. The sign shall not be
                            affixed to other signs, utility poles, fire
                            hydrants or trees; the sign must be located outside
                            of the public right-of-way; and the sign must be
                            removed within 30 days of the property's sale or
                            lease.
                            A maximum of 2 signs may be placed off-premise and
                            1 on-premise; the signs shall not exceed 4 square
                            feet in size and 3 feet in height above grade; the
                            signs shall not be affixed to other signs, utility
                            poles, fire hydrants or trees; any person or firm
Real estate open house sign placing the signs shall obtain the written
                            permission from the owner or occupant of all
                            properties on which the signs are placed; the sign
                            shall not be displayed for more than 8 hours per
                            day; and the signs must be removed within 1 hour
                            following closing of the open house.
                            Religious symbols incorporated into the
                            architecture on places of worship or structures
Religious symbols           owned and operated by religious organizations shall
                            not be considered a sign unless accompanied by
                            text.
                            One temporary sign identifying the contractor
                            performing major home repairs or remodeling such as
                            roofing, siding, landscaping and similar work of
Residential contractor      limited duration. The sign shall be a maximum of 4
                            square feet in area and 3 feet in height. It shall
                            be located on the premises where the work is being
                            performed and shall be removed within 2 weeks of
                            completion of the work.
                            One double-sided sign no more than 8 square feet in
                            size and chalkboard or similar in design. Shall be
Sandwich board              permitted on public sidewalk within businesses
                            posted hours with a maximum of 1 hour prior to open
                            and after closing.
                            Used in conjunction with a legally established
Scoreboards                 sports field; not exceeding 20 feet in height above
                            the ground; not exceeding 100 square feet in area;
                            and the scoreboard is single sided.
                            Signs on a bus, truck, trailer, or other vehicle
                            while operated and used for transport in the normal
Sign on vehicle             course of a business, provided that the primary use
                            of the vehicle displaying the sign shall not be for
                            the purpose of advertising a business on the
                            premises where the vehicle is parked.
                            Traffic or other municipal signs, legal notices,
                            danger signs and such temporary emergency or non-
Traffic control sign        advertising signs, or private traffic control signs
                            which conform to the requirements of the Manual of
                            Uniform Traffic Control Devices and as may be
                            approved by the city.
                            Publicly authorized warning signs, such as no
Warning sign                trespassing, warning of electrical currents or
                            animals, provided the sign does not exceed 2 square
                            feet in area.
                            The total area of all signs within 1 foot of the
Temporary window sign       window shall not obscure more than 25% of the
                            window area.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.124 PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Signs not specifically allowed under this chapter, unless exempt per §
155.123, are prohibited in the City of Mt. Healthy. Further, the following sign
types are expressly prohibited:
   (A)   Balloons, balloon signs, strings of light bulbs, pennants, streamers,
feather signs, banners or flags, except banners or flags specifically permitted
by the City Manager related to permitted events.
   (B)   Any sign, including window signs, employing flashing, moving or
oscillating lights, excluding time-temperature signs.
   (C)   Internally lit signs, with the exception of permitted neon signs that
comply with the applicable regulations.
   (D)   Roof signs.
   (E)   Pole sign.
   (F)   Off-premise signs, except for community special event signs.
   (G)   Billboard signs.
   (H)   Portable trailer signs.
   (I)   The use of vehicles, trailers or similar movable structures as signs
is prohibited when the vehicle, trailer or similar movable structure is parked
on public or private property within 50 feet of any property line abutting a
public street, except for those:
      (1)   Lawfully parked overnight or during non-business hours in a place
not visible from a public street or designated truck parking or loading area;
      (2)   Making deliveries, sales calls, or other customary practices
relating to doing business;
      (3)   Making trips to transport persons or property;
      (4)   In conjunction with active construction operations on the site; or
      (5)   Passenger vehicles, pick-up trucks, and vans, containing signs that
do not exceed 16 square feet in area painted on or permanently affixed to the
doors or integral body panels and such vehicles are of a size that can fully
fit within a standard parking space.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.125 PERMITTED SIGNS.
   The following signs are permitted in combination, unless noted otherwise, in
each district, subject to the requirements described in
Table 155.125, issuance of a sign permit and all other applicable regulations.
In any B or I District, a maximum of two types of signs and three total signs
per principal building shall be permitted on any lot, regardless of the number
of tenants.
Table 155.125 Schedule of Permitted Signs by District
Table 155.125 Schedule of Permitted Signs by District
Recreational Districts
Ground sign for non-residential uses
Number   1 per street frontage
Size     8 square feet
Location Minimum 10 feet from front line, minimum 50 feet from all other lot
         lines
Height   6 feet maximum
Wall sign for non-residential uses
Number   1 per street frontage, but only 1 per wall
Size     5% of wall area to which it is attached, not exceeding 12 square feet
Location Mounted flat against the wall
Residential Districts
Gateway sign
Number   1 per street frontage
Size     24 square feet
Location Minimum 15 feet from all lot lines
Height   6 feet maximum
Development sign - Promoting a newly-developed subdivision of at least 10
dwelling units
Number   1 non-illuminated
Size     Maximum 48 square feet
Location Minimum 10 feet from all property lines
Height   8 feet maximum
Other    May be in place for up to 1 year from the date the subdivision record
         plan is recorded
Ground sign for non-residential principal uses
Number   1
Size     24 square feet
Location Minimum 10 feet from front lot line, minimum 10 feet from all other
         lot lines
Height   6 feet maximum
Wall sign for non-residential uses
Number   1 per street frontage, but only 1 per wall
Size     5% of wall area to which it is attached, not exceeding 64 square feet
Location Mounted flat against the wall
Permitted home occupations
Number   1 non-illuminated sign identifying the home occupation
Size     Maximum 2 square feet in area
Type     Ground, projecting or wall signs
Location If a ground sign is utilized it must be setback from the front lot
         line a minimum of 10 feet
Business Districts
Business Center sign (E, General Business District only)
Number   1 per property. No other freestanding sign shall be permitted on the
         property for individual businesses
Size     48 square feet
Location Minimum 10 feet from front lot line, minimum 25 feet from all other
         property lines
Height   6 feet maximum
Canopy, Projecting or Awning sign (CBD, Central Business District only)
Number   1 per business
Size     8 square feet maximum
Location Projecting out from building wall not more than 3 feet
Height   A clearance of at least 10 feet is required between the sidewalk and
         the bottom of the sign
Gateway sign (E, General Business District only)
Number   1 per street frontage
Size     24 square feet
Location Minimum 15 feet from all lot lines
Height   6 feet maximum
Ground sign (E General Business District only)
Number   1 per street frontage
Size     32 square feet
Location Minimum 10 feet from front lot line, minimum 50 feet from all other
         lot lines
Height   6 feet maximum
Marquee sign (E, Central Business District only)
Number   1 per business
Size     48 square feet maximum
Location Projecting out from building wall not more than 6 feet
Height   A clearance of at least 8 feet is required between the sidewalk and
         the bottom of the sign
Other    Flashing lights are not permitted
Wall sign
Number   1 per street frontage, but only 1 per wall
Size     5% of wall area to which it is attached, not exceeding 25 square feet
         total aggregate for wall signs
Location Mounted flat against the wall
Window sign
Size     Permanent window signs are limited to 25% coverage of the window that
         they are posted within
Industrial Districts
Business Center sign
Number   1 per property. No other freestanding sign shall be permitted on the
         property for individual businesses
Size     48 square feet
Location Minimum 10 feet from front lot line, minimum 25 feet from all other
         property lines
Height   6 feet maximum
Gateway sign
Number   1 per street frontage
Size     24 square feet
Location Minimum 15 feet from all lot lines
Height   6 feet maximum
Ground sign
Number   1 per street frontage
Size     32 square feet
Location Minimum 10 feet from front lot line, minimum 50 feet from all other
         lot lines
Height   6 feet maximum
Wall sign
Number   1 per street frontage, but only 1 per wall
Size     5% of wall area to which it is attached, not exceeding 64 square feet
Location Mounted flat against the wall
All Districts
Community Special Event sign
Number   No limit
Size     24 square feet maximum
         On or off the property on which the event will occur; set back at
Location least 15 feet from any side or rear property line and set back from
         the front property line the same distance as required for a ground
         sign in the district in which the sign is located
Height   6 feet maximum
         The sign shall be installed no more than 10 days prior to the
Other    scheduled event and must be removed within 48 hours of the event's
         conclusion
Construction sign
Number   1 per street frontage, but only 1 on each street
Size     32 square feet maximum
Location Minimum 6 feet from all street right-or-way lines and at least 10 feet
         from any other lot line
Height   10 feet maximum
         The sign shall be posted from the time the building permit is issued
Other    and removed within 10 days after a certificate of occupancy is issued
         for the building to which the sign refers or when at least 50% of the
         lots within a development have been sold
Temporary sign
Number   1 per street frontage, but only 1 on each street
Size     32 square feet
Location Minimum 5 feet from front lot line
Height   6 feet maximum
         Temporary signs may be displayed for a maximum of 21 consecutive days
Other    for any single permit period and a maximum of 3 permit periods may be
         permitted in a calendar year. The sign shall be removed by the permit
         holder upon expiration of the permit period
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.126 SIGN PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits required. A sign permit shall be required for the erection,
use, construction or alteration of all signs, except those specifically
exempted by §
155.123. For purposes of this section alteration shall mean any change to an
existing sign including changing the copy to promote, advertise, or identify
another use. Alteration shall not mean normal maintenance of a sign nor apply
to changeable message signs.
   (B)   Electrical signs. All signs requiring electrical service shall be
reviewed for compliance with the applicable electrical code. Approval of signs
requiring electrical service shall be noted on or attached to the sign permit.
   (C)   Issuance of sign permit. The Zoning Administrator shall issue a sign
permit if all provisions of this Code and other applicable city regulations are
met. A sign authorized by a permit shall be installed or be under construction
within six months of the date of issuance of the sign permit or the permit
shall expire. A new permit may be issued upon filing of a new application and
fee.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.127 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   An application for a sign permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator
along with a fee as established by the City Council. The application, at a
minimum, shall include the following:
   (A)   Name, address, and telephone number of applicant and the person, firm
or corporation erecting the sign.
   (B)   Address or permanent parcel number of the property where the sign will
be located.
   (C)   A sketch showing the location of the building, structure, or lot upon
which the sign is to be attached or erected, and showing the proposed sign in
relation to buildings and structures along with setback from lot lines.
   (D)   Two sets of plans and specifications showing all dimensions, method of
construction, and attachment to structures or ground.
   (E)   The zoning district in which the sign is to be located.
   (F)   Any other information which the Zoning Administrator may require in
order to determine compliance with this Code.
   (G)   Signature of applicant or person, firm or corporation erecting the
sign.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.128 INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Sign inspection.
      (1)   Responsibility for compliance. The owner of any property on which a
sign is located is declared to be responsible for the permit, erection,
inspection, safety, condition, and removal of a sign.
      (2)   Inspection of new signs. All signs for which a permit has been
issued shall be inspected by the Mt. Healthy building official when erected.
Approval shall be granted only if the sign has been constructed in compliance
with the approved plans and applicable requirements of all codes.
      (3)   Inspection before enclosure. In cases where fastenings or
anchorages are to be eventually bricked in or otherwise enclosed, the sign
erector shall advise the Mt. Healthy building official when such fastenings are
to be installed so that inspection may be completed before enclosure.
      (4)   Inspection of existing signs. The Mt. Healthy building official
may, at such times as deemed necessary, inspect any sign allowed under this
section and, if upon inspection, a sign is found to be unsafe or in a condition
that does not comply with all the provisions of this section, the Mt. Healthy
building official shall give notice of that condition to the owner of the sign
and cause the necessary repairs or alterations to be made, or require removal
of the sign.
   (B)   Sign maintenance.
      (1)   Maintenance of signs. All signs for which a permit is required, as
well as those that are
exempt from the requirement of a permit, as set forth in §
155.126, and all structural supports shall:
         (a)   Be kept in compliance with the plans and specifications filed
and approved for issuance of the construction permit;
         (b)   Be kept and maintained in a safe condition, consistent with
adopted building and mechanical codes; and
         (c)   At all times conform to all provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Correction of defects. If the Mt. Healthy building official finds
that any sign is unsafe, insecure, improperly constructed, or poorly
maintained, the owner of the sign shall make the sign safe and secure by
completing any necessary reconstruction or repairs, or entirely remove the sign
in accordance with the timetable established by the Mt. Healthy building
official. Existing signs determined to be unsafe and an immediate hazard to
health or safety shall be removed or repaired within 24 hours of notification.
      (3)   Obsolete signs.
         (a)   Signs which are no longer functional, in disrepair, or are
abandoned for more than 60 days, shall be removed, at the expense of the owner
of the property on which the sign is located, within 30 days following notice
of non-compliance. The owner shall be notified by certified mail. If the sign
is not removed within 30 days, the City Manager may cause the sign to be
removed and assess the cost of removal against the property.
         (b)   A sign which no longer identifies a use, product, business or
entity located on the property, but is otherwise in conformity with the other
provisions of this Code, may remain in place if the sign face is completely
covered or obscured by a blank panel attached within the frame of the sign. In
such case, the sign shall be permitted to remain for a period not to exceed 120
days. Following expiration of the 120 days, the sign shall be removed, at the
expense of the owner of the property on which the sign is located, unless
identifying a new use, product, business or entity located on the property.
   (C)   Sign removal. The City Manager may obtain a court order to compel
removal of a sign that is obsolete or otherwise in violation of this section.
The cost of removal shall be added as a lien on the property tax rolls.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21; Am. Ord. 25- 2061, passed 2-4-25)
§ 155.129 FEES.
   Any application for a sign permit or other request for action pursuant to
the regulations of this chapter shall be subject to and accompanied by a fee as
established by the City Council. Such fees shall be collected in advance of any
application review, inspection, or issuance of any permit or approval. Upon
notification of deficient payment of fees, the building official shall cause
any permits to be suspended and reject applications for new permits directly
associated with the request.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.1299 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Any permanent sign or sign structure which was legally established,
but no longer conforms to the height, size, area or location requirements of
this chapter is deemed to be nonconforming.
   (B)   Nonconforming signs may not be altered, expanded, enlarged, or
extended; however, nonconforming signs may be maintained and repaired so as to
continue the useful life of the sign.
   (C)   For the purposes of this chapter, a nonconforming sign may be
diminished in size or dimension or the copy of the sign amended or changed
without jeopardizing nonconforming status.
   (D)   Any nonconforming sign destroyed by fire or other casualty loss shall
not be restored or rebuilt if reconstruction will constitute more than 50% of
the value of the sign on the date of the loss.
   (E)   Any sign which for a period of 60 days or more no longer identifies a
bona fide business conducted or product sold on the premises shall be removed
by the owner of the building, structure, or property upon which the sign is
located within 30 days of receipt of written notice from the Zoning
Administrator.
   (F)   A sign accessory to a nonconforming use on the premises may be
erected, in accordance with the sign regulations for the district in which the
property is located.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.13 SITE PLAN REVIEW
§ 155.131 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish a uniform set of requirements
for the planning and design of developments within the city in order to achieve
the following objectives:
   (A)   To determine compliance with the provisions of this Code;
   (B)   To promote the orderly development of the city; to prevent
depreciation of land values;
   (C)   To ensure a consistent level of quality throughout the community;
   (D)   To ensure a harmonious relationship between new development and the
existing natural and manmade surroundings; to achieve the goals and principles
of the Mt. Healthy Comprehensive Plan and the Healthy Hilltops Plan;
   (E)   To promote consultation and cooperation between applicants and the
city in order that applicants may accomplish their objectives in the
utilization of land, consistent with the public purposes of this Code and the
comprehensive plan and vision.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
2021 S-16
§ 155.132 APPLICABILITY.
   Site plan review shall be required, as applicable, under the following
conditions, unless exempted by §
155.133:
   (A)   Level "A" Review. The Zoning Administrator shall review site plans in
connection with the creation of a use or the erection of a building or
structure in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Any "permitted" use within any zoning district, if the proposed
building is less than 5,000 square feet.
      (2)   Additions to existing buildings or parking areas in any zoning
district.
      (3)   Changes in the use of any existing building in any zoning district;
provided the use is a "permitted" use in that zoning district.
      (4)   When, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, a project which
otherwise qualifies for level "A" site plan review may have a negative impact
on surrounding properties, the Zoning Administrator may, at their discretion,
submit the site plan to the Planning Commission for review. In such cases, the
Planning Commission shall follow the review procedure for level "B" site plans
and may require any additional information needed to make an informed decision.
   (B)   Level "B" Review. The Planning Commission shall act upon all site
plans, other than those provided for level "A" review, in connection with the
creation of a use or the erection of a building or structure in any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   Any "permitted" use within any zoning district occupying a building
of 5,000 square feet or more.
      (2)   Any "conditional" use in any district.
      (3)   Any planned unit development.
      (4)   As otherwise required by this Code.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.133 EXEMPTIONS.
   Site plan review shall not be required for a single- or two-family dwelling
on a lot on which there exists no other building or use, or for any home
occupation or accessory building in a residential district. However, a zoning
permit, in accordance with §
155.151, shall be required.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.134 APPLICATION AND REVIEW.
   The process of reviewing a site plan shall be as follows:
   (A)   Level "A" reviews shall be performed by the Zoning Administrator as
follows:
      (1)   Five copies of a complete site plan and an electronic version, in a
format specified by the city, shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
along with an application for that purpose and a fee, as established by the
City Council.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the site plan for
completeness, and shall obtain comments from city departments or other relevant
review agencies or consultants.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall consider the site plan, any comments
received, and the applicable standards of this Code, and shall either approve
the site plan as submitted, if all applicable requirements and standards have
been met; approve the site plan with conditions; or deny approval of the site
plan, if applicable requirements and standards have not been met.
      (4)   The reasons for the Zoning Administrator's action, along with any
conditions that may be attached, shall be stated in writing and provided to the
applicant.
      (5)   If approved, two copies of the site plan shall be signed and dated
by the Zoning Administrator and the applicant. One copy shall be kept on file
with the city and one copy shall be returned to the applicant or his/her
designated representative. If the plan is approved with conditions, two copies
of the revised site plan shall be submitted reflecting those conditions and
shall be signed and dated by the applicant and Zoning Administrator, one copy
shall be kept on file with the city and one copy shall be returned to the
applicant or his/her designated representative, prior to issuance of any
permits.
   (B)   Level "B" reviews shall be performed by the Planning Commission as
follows:
      (1)   Ten copies of a complete site plan and an electronic version, in a
format specified by the city, shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator
along with an application for that purpose and a fee, as established by the
City Council.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review the site plan for
completeness, and shall obtain comments from the city departments or other
relevant review agencies or consultants.
      (3)   Once the Zoning Administrator determines that the site plan is
complete, the site plan shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission for
consideration at its next meeting. The Zoning Administrator shall not be
required to submit any site plan for review which was submitted less than 20
days prior to the next regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting.
Comments, if any, from city departments or others shall be transmitted to the
Planning Commission prior to its review of the site plan.
      (4)   The Planning Commission shall consider the site plan and shall
either approve the site plan, as submitted, if all applicable requirements and
standards have been met; approve the site plan with conditions; or deny
approval of the site plan if applicable requirements and standards have not
been met. The Planning Commission review shall be based on the requirements of
this chapter, comments received from city departments and others, and,
specifically, the review standards of §
155.136.
      (5)   If approved, two copies of the site plan shall be signed and dated
by the chairperson of the Planning Commission and the applicant. One copy shall
be kept on file with the city and one copy shall be returned to the applicant
or his designated representative. If the plan is approved with conditions, two
copies of the revised site plan shall be submitted reflecting those conditions
and shall be signed and dated by the applicant and the Planning Commission
chairperson, one copy shall be kept on file with the city and one copy shall be
returned to the applicant or his/her designated representative, prior to
issuance of any permits.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.135 SITE PLAN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required content. Each site plan submitted shall contain the following
information, as applicable:
Table 155.135 Required Site Plan Content
Required Information Level "A" Level "B"
Table 155.135 Required Site Plan Content
Required Information                                        Level "A" Level "B"
General Information
Date, north arrow, and scale                                X         X
Name and firm address of the professional individual        X         X
responsible for preparing site plan
Name and address of the property owner or petitioner        X         X
Location sketch                                             X         X
Legal description of the subject property                   X         X
Size of subject property in acres or square feet            X         X
Boundary survey                                             X         X
Preparer's professional seal                                          X
Existing Conditions
Existing zoning classification of subject property          X         X
Property lines and required setbacks (dimensioned)          X         X
Location, width and purpose of all existing easements       X         X
Location and dimension of all existing structures on the    X         X
subject property
Location of all existing driveways, parking areas and total X         X
number of existing parking spaces on subject property
Abutting street right-of-way width                          X         X
Location of all existing structures, driveways, and parking           X
areas within 300 feet of the subject property's boundary
Existing water bodies (rivers, creeks, wetlands, etc.)      X         X
Existing landscaping and vegetation on the subject property           X
Size and location of existing utilities                     X         X
Location of all existing surface water drainage facilities  X         X
Proposed Development
Location and dimensions of all proposed buildings           X         X
Location of all proposed drives (including dimensions and
radii), acceleration/deceleration lanes, sidewalks, walls,
fences, signs, exterior lighting, curbing, parking areas    X         X
(including dimensions of a typical parking space and the
total number of spaces to be provided), and loading and
unloading areas
Type and location of exterior mechanical equipment and      X         X
published operating noise level of the equipment.
Setbacks for all buildings and structures                   X         X
Recreation areas, common use areas, dedicated open space              X
and areas to be conveyed for public use
Flood plain areas and basement and finished floor                     X
elevations of all buildings
Landscape plan (showing location of proposed materials,               X
size and type)
Layout and typical dimensions of proposed parcels and lots            X
Number of proposed dwelling units (by type), including                X
typical floor plans for each type of unit
Number and location (by code, if necessary) of efficiency             X
and one, two and three or more bedroom units
All deed restrictions or covenants                                    X
Brief narrative description of the project including
proposed use, existing floor area (square feet), size of    X         X
proposed expansion (square X feet), and any change in the
number of parking spaces
Engineering
Proposed method of handling sanitary sewage and providing   X         X
potable water
Location and size of proposed utilities, including          X         X
connections to public sewer and water supply systems
Location and spacing of fire hydrants and fire department             X
connections
Location and type of all proposed surface water drainage    X         X
facilities
Grading plan at no more than two foot contour intervals               X
Proposed streets (including pavement width, materials, and            X
easement or right-of-way dimensions)
Building Details
Typical elevation views of all sides of each building type            X
Gross and net floor area                                    X         X
Elevation views of building additions                       X         X
Building height                                             X         X
Additional Information
Any other information required by the Zoning Administrator
or Planning Commission and/or Board of Zoning Appeals to    X         X
demonstrate compliance with other applicable provisions of
this chapter
 
   (B)   Information waiver. Specific requirements of either a Level "A" or "B"
site plan may be waived by the respective reviewer (Zoning Administrator or
Planning Commission) where it is determined that such information is not
applicable to the subject request.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.136 REVIEW STANDARDS.
   A site plan shall be approved only upon a finding of compliance with the
following standards:
   (A)   The site plan must comply with all standards of this chapter and all
applicable requirements of this Code and all other applicable laws and
regulations.
   (B)   The site must be designed in a manner that is harmonious, to the
greatest extent possible, with the character of the surrounding area.
   (C)   The site must be designed so as to minimize hazards to adjacent
property, and to reduce the negative effects of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes
and glare to the maximum extent possible.
   (D)   Unless a more specific design standard is required by the city through
a different code, all uses and structures subject to site plan review shall
comply with the following design standards:
      (1)   Traffic circulation. The number, location, size of access and entry
points, and internal vehicular and pedestrian circulation routes shall be
designed to promote safe and efficient access to and from the site, and
circulation within the site. In reviewing traffic features, the number,
spacing, and alignment of existing and proposed access points shall be
considered relative to their impact on traffic movement on abutting streets and
adjacent properties.
      (2)   Storm water. Storm water detention and drainage systems shall be
designed so that the removal of surface waters will not adversely affect
neighboring properties or public storm water drainage systems. Unless
impractical, storm water shall be removed from all roofs, canopies and paved
areas by underground surface drainage system. Low impact design solutions,
however, such as rain gardens and green roofs are encouraged.
      (3)   Landscaping. The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state,
insofar as practicable, by minimizing unnecessary tree and soil removal, and
any grade changes shall be in keeping with the general appearance of
neighboring developed areas. Provision or preservation of landscaping, buffers
or greenbelts may be required to ensure that the proposed uses will be
adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding property. Top soil
shall be left intact or stored on site, using best management practices, for
site restoration upon completion of the project.
      (4)   Screening. Where non-residential uses abut residential uses,
appropriate screening shall be provided, in accordance with Subchapter
155.14, so as to shield residential properties from noise, headlights, lighting
and glare.
      (5)   Lighting. Lighting shall be designed to minimize glare on adjacent
properties and public streets. As a condition of site plan approval, reduction
of lighting during non-business hours may be required.
      (6)   Utility service. All utility service shall be underground, unless
impractical.
      (7)   Exterior uses. Exposed storage areas, machinery, heating and
cooling units, service areas, loading areas, utility buildings and structures,
and similar accessory areas shall be located to have a minimum negative effect
on adjacent properties, and shall be visually and acoustically screened, if
reasonably necessary, to ensure compatibility with surrounding properties.
      (8)   Emergency access. All buildings and structures including any Fire
Department connections shall be readily accessible to emergency vehicles.
      (9)   Water and sewer. Water and sewer installations shall comply with
all city specifications and requirements.
      (10)   Signs. Permitted signs shall be allowed, in accordance with
Subchapter
155.12, and shall be located to avoid creating distractions, visual clutter and
obstructions for traffic entering or exiting a site.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.137 CONDITIONS.
   Conditions which are designed to ensure compliance with the intent of this
Code and other regulations of the City of Mt. Healthy may be imposed on site
plan approval.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.138 CHANGES TO AN APPROVED SITE PLAN.
   Changes to an approved site plan shall be permitted only under the following
circumstances:
   (A)   The holder of an approved site plan shall notify the Zoning
Administrator of any proposed change to an approved site plan.
   (B)   Changes to a Level "A" site plan may be approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (C)   Minor changes to a Level "B" site plan may be approved by the Zoning
Administrator upon determining that the proposed revision(s) will not alter the
basic design or any specified conditions imposed as part of the original
approval. Minor changes shall include the following:
      (1)   Reduction in building size or increase in building size up to 5% of
total approved floor area.
      (2)   Movement of buildings or other structures by no more than ten feet.
      (3)   Replacement of plant material specified in the landscape plan with
comparable materials of an equal or greater size.
      (4)   Changes in building materials to a comparable or higher quality.
      (5)   Changes in floor plans which do not alter the character of the use.
      (6)   Changes required or requested by the city or county, state, or
federal regulatory agency in order to conform to other laws or regulations.
   (D)   A proposed change to a Level "B" site plan, not determined by the
Zoning Administrator to be a minor change, shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission as a site plan amendment and shall be reviewed in the same manner as
the original application.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.139 EXPIRATION.
   Site plan approval shall expire 12 months after the date of approval, unless
substantial construction has been commenced and is continuing. The Zoning
Administrator, in the case of a Level "A" site plan, or the Planning
Commission, in the case of a Level "B" site plan, may grant one extension of up
to 12 additional months; provided the applicant requests, in writing, an
extension prior to the date of expiration of the site plan. The extension shall
be approved if the applicant presents reasonable evidence to the effect that
the development has encountered unforeseen difficulties beyond the control of
the applicant, and the project will proceed within the extension period. If the
above provisions are not fulfilled or the extension has expired prior to
construction, the site plan approval shall become null and void.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.14 LANDSCAPING
§ 155.141 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to require landscaping to minimize the
adverse effects of certain outdoor activities upon their surroundings and to
improve the appearance of parking areas and street frontages within the
community. It is further intended to preserve and enhance the aesthetic
qualities, character, privacy, and land values of property within the City of
Mt. Healthy.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.142 GREENBELTS AND PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   Greenbelts required. Greenbelts and landscaping shall be required in
the following situations, except for parking areas within the CBD, Central
Business District.
      (1)   Along the street frontage, between the right-of-way line and the
parking lot of any parking lot containing four or more spaces;
      (2)   Within any required parking setback area; and
      (3)   Within the interior of any parking lot containing ten spaces or
more.
   (B) Greenbelt standards for front setbacks. Greenbelts shall meet the
requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   At a minimum, a required greenbelt shall contain one canopy tree,
plus two additional canopy or understory trees for each 50 feet of road
frontage.
      (2)   Trees within a required greenbelt may be clustered to create more
visual impact and appeal, rather than uniformly spaced along the street.
      (3)   The minimum width of a required greenbelt shall correspond to the
parking setback requirements prescribed for the district, but shall not be less
than ten feet.
      (4)   Landscaping shall be located so it does not obstruct the vision of
drivers entering or leaving a site.
      (5)   Storm water detention/retention areas shall be permitted within
required greenbelts; provided, they shall not hamper the screening intent of
the greenbelt or jeopardize the survival of plants.
   (C)   Parking lot landscaping. Where landscaping is required within parking
lots, it shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   One tree for every ten parking spaces shall be planted within the
parking lot. Trees shall be canopy species. While drought tolerant native
species are preferred, other species may be planted within parking areas if
approved by the Zoning Administrator or Planning Commission, as applicable.
      (2)   Parking lots shall contain landscape islands. Each island shall be
a minimum of ten feet wide, although islands may be combined to ensure a better
environment for tree and plant growth. Each island shall be planted with a
minimum of two trees to provide shade and to break up the visual monotony of
large paved parking lots. Trees shall be planted at least three feet from the
edge of the island to avoid contact with vehicles.
      (3)   Landscaping shall be arranged so as not to obscure traffic signs or
fire hydrants, or obstruct drivers' sight distance within the parking area and
at driveway entrances.
      (4)   All landscape areas shall be protected by raised curbs, parking
blocks or other similar methods to prevent damage. Notwithstanding this
requirement, alternative low impact design solutions shall be encouraged.
      (5)   Landscaping required for front yards which abut parking areas may
apply toward up to 50% of the required parking lot landscaping.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.143 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All required landscaping and greenbelts shall comply with the following
requirements, in addition to all other applicable requirements of this chapter:
   (A)   Minimum plant material standards.
      (1)   All plant materials shall be hardy, free of disease and insects,
and indigenous to Hamilton County.
      (2)   Artificial plant material shall not be used within any required
landscaped area. This shall not preclude the use of stone, shredded bark, wood
chips, lava rock or similar accent materials within planting beds.
      (3)   All plant material shall be installed in a manner that does not
alter drainage patterns on site or adjacent properties, or obstruct vision for
safety of ingress or egress.
      (4)   No substitution of plant species or sizes shall be allowed unless
approved by the Zoning Administrator in writing.
      (5)   All plant material shall be planted in a manner that will not cause
damage to utility lines (above and below ground) and public roadways.
      (6)   Existing plant material which complies with the standards and
intent of this chapter may be credited toward meeting the landscape
requirements.
      (7)   The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than 33% of any
one plant species.
      (8)   Plant material shall not be placed closer than four feet to any
fence or property line.
      (9)   Where trees are placed in two or more rows, planting shall be
staggered in rows.
   (B)   Minimum standards for berms.
      (1)   If berms are constructed, they shall be constructed to maintain a
side slope not to exceed a one foot rise to a three foot run ratio. When
topography or other site conditions prevent construction of berms at this
ratio, retaining walls or terracing may be permitted. If a berm is constructed
with a retaining wall or by terracing, the earthen slope shall face the
exterior of the site.
      (2)   Bermed areas not containing planting beds shall be covered with
grass or other living ground cover maintained in a healthy condition.
      (3)   Berms shall be constructed so drainage patterns on site or toward
adjacent properties will not be altered and vision will not be obstructed for
safety of ingress and egress.
      (4)   If berms are used for any part of a screen or greenbelt, all
required plant material shall be placed on the top and side slope facing the
exterior property line.
   (C)   Rain gardens. Rain gardens are encouraged as part of a site
development and may be approved within a required greenbelt. If provided, rain
gardens shall be prepared according to the following guidelines:
      (1)   The purpose of the rain garden is to absorb rain water and to
improve the attractiveness of the site.
      (2)   The size of the rain garden shall be appropriate for the soils
located on the site.
      (3)   Soils used in the rain garden shall be appropriately prepared and
amended following any compaction that may have occurred during construction.
      (4)   The rain garden shall be graded to assure that rain water entering
the garden will spread out over a large flat area and will soak into the soil.
      (5)   To minimize hazards to pedestrians, the rain garden shall be graded
so that at its deepest it is approximately six inches.
      (6)   The rain garden is planted with native perennial flowers, grasses
and sedges.
      (7)   The rain garden shall be maintained with minimal or no fertilizers;
no herbicides or pesticides will be used.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.15 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 155.151 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A zoning permit shall be required and shall be obtained from the
Zoning Administrator by the property owner or his or her agent:
      (1)   Prior to the construction, occupancy or use of any proposed
structure or addition to an existing structure, or prerequisite to the
continued occupancy of a newly altered, reconstructed, enlarged or relocated
structure;
      (2)   Prior to any change of use of any building or land, even if the
changed use is of the same general type as its predecessor;
      (3)   Prior to the reoccupation or reuse of any nonresidential lot or
structure.
   (B)   Any proposed use or construction outlined in division (A) of this
section, that requires review and approval for planned unit development,
conditional use or site plan review shall be approved according to Subchapter
155.06, 155.10 or
155.13, as applicable, prior to issuance of a zoning permit.
   (C)   No building permit or other permit required to allow construction and
no certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any of the above, unless a
zoning permit has been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
   (D)   The zoning permit shall state that the plans for the proposed
improvement, addition, relocation, change of use or reoccupancy/reuse have been
inspected by the Zoning Administrator, have been approved according to the
procedures outlined in this Zoning Code and are in compliance with the
provisions of this Code and other applicable regulations.
   (E)   Upon written request from the owner or tenant, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a zoning permit for any building, structure or
premises existing on the effective date of this Zoning Code that certifies,
after inspection, the extent and kind of use made of the building, structure or
premises and whether the use conforms to the provisions of this Code.
   (F)   A zoning permit shall not be required for the following:
      (1)   An accessory structure on a lot zoned or used for residential
purposes that is less than 144 square feet in ground floor area and no higher
than ten feet that meets applicable zoning setbacks for accessory structures;
      (2)   A swing set or similar child's play structure;
      (3)   Cosmetic (non-structural) changes to any structure, including the
replacement of windows in existing openings, re-roofing, installation of siding
material and repainting;
      (4)   Resurfacing of existing parking lots without increasing the number
of spaces;
      (5)   Residential TV towers, satellite dishes and similar structures; and
      (6)   Modifications to comply with accessibility requirements, unless
proposed to encroach in a public right-of-way.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.152 ZONING PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   In the case of a proposed planned unit development or conditional use,
or for a site plan review, the application materials shall be as required by
the applicable subchapter (Subchapter
155.06, 155.10 or
155.13).
   (B)   For all other requests, application shall be made on a form approved
by the city, along with the fee adopted by resolution of the City Council.
   (C)   The application shall be accompanied by a scale drawing of the site
exhibiting existing and proposed improvements, as follows:
      (1)   All exterior lot lines, with dimensions based upon an actual
survey.
      (2)   Dimensions of existing and proposed buildings and structures.
      (3)   Setback of all existing and proposed structures from property
lines.
      (4)   Required setback distances, according to the zoning district.
      (5)   Height of existing and proposed buildings and structures.
      (6)   Location of off-street parking, including dimensions of parking
spaces and access aisles, and distance of parking areas from property lines.
      (7)   Any other information deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator
to determine compliance with this Code.
   (D)   The Zoning Administrator may require that the proposed location of
buildings and improvements be staked upon the lot prior to zoning permit
approval, in order to determine compliance with this Code.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.153 ZONING PERMIT APPROVAL; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   If the zoning permit is approved, the Zoning Administrator shall
certify a copy of the approved plans as approved and return it to the
applicant, along with the approved permit. A true copy of the approved plans
shall be retained by the Zoning Administrator.
   (B)   For the purposes of obtaining a building permit, a zoning permit shall
be valid for 12 months from the date of issuance. If a building permit is not
obtained within that period, the zoning permit shall lapse and a new zoning
permit request and approval is required before a building permit may be issued.
   (C)   A building permit shall be obtained, and substantial progress made
within one year of issuance of the zoning permit, unless a different time
period is specified elsewhere in this Zoning Code. If the project is not
substantially complete within two years of issuance of the zoning permit, the
zoning permit shall expire. The approving body for the original application
(the Zoning Administrator, Planning Commission or City Council, as applicable)
may grant extensions of up to one year if the applicant can show that delays in
completion of the project are due to circumstances not under control of the
applicant (e.g., weather, delays in receiving materials, etc.).
   (D)   Any permit or license issued in conflict with this Zoning Code shall
be null and void.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.154 FEES; PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Fees. All applications and reviews subject to this Zoning Code shall
be accompanied by a fee, according to a fee schedule adopted by resolution of
the City Council. Actions initiated by city staff, the Planning Commission or
City Council shall not be subject to the fee.
   (B)   Performance guarantees. The Planning Commission, Board of Zoning
Appeals or City Council, as applicable, may require an applicant to deposit a
performance guarantee to ensure compliance with this Code, the completion of
improvements and to protect natural resources and the health, safety and
welfare of city residents and the future users or inhabitants of the project.
      (1)   A "performance guarantee" shall mean a cash deposit, certified
check, letter of credit or other legal surety approved by the city in an amount
equal to the estimated cost for any improvements to be made, as determined by
the applicant and confirmed and verified by a representative of the city.
      (2)   The performance guarantee shall be deposited with the city before
any building permits can be issued. The treasurer shall retain the performance
guarantee, in accordance with this section.
      (3)   When a performance guarantee is required as a condition of
approval, the approving body shall also specify when the related improvement
must be completed.
      (4)   As the project is constructed, the city may rebate money to the
applicant based on a reasonable proportion of the completed work, provided that
at least 10% shall be retained for each related element until the entire
project has been satisfactorily completed. The city may solicit the opinion of
a civil engineer or other licensed professional in the State of Ohio to
determine the value of the completed work.
      (5)   Once a project has been satisfactorily completed, as determined by
the Zoning Administrator, and all the landscaping (if required) has been
established, the treasurer shall return any remaining funds to the applicant.
The city may retain up to 10% of the performance guarantee to cover any
administrative or consultant costs directly associated with reviewing and/or
inspecting any improvements.
      (6)   In the event an applicant does not make the improvements for which
the performance guarantee was required within the established time period, or
if improvements are not constructed in accordance with this Zoning Code and/or
any required conditions and attempts to attain compliance are unsuccessful, the
city may enter the subject property and complete the improvements using the
performance guarantee to cover costs.
      (7)   In the event an applicant does not make or complete the
improvements and the performance guarantee is insufficient to allow the city to
complete them, the applicant shall be required to pay the city an amount
necessary to complete the improvements, plus any administrative or legal fees.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.155 ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalties. Any owner, person or entity that is found to be in
violation or assists in the violation of this Zoning Code shall, for each
violation or noncompliance, be guilty of a fourth degree misdemeanor and be
subject to a fine of up to $2,000. Each day during which a violation occurs
shall be a separate offense.
   (B)   Enforcement process. The Zoning Administrator, along with such other
person or persons necessary, shall enforce the provisions of the Zoning Code.
The following process shall be followed in the enforcement of this Code:
      (1)   Upon complaint and/or credible information of a possible Zoning
Code violation, based upon personal knowledge or other information, the Zoning
Administrator will investigate the matter and submit a written report
(including relevant photos of the violation, map of the property or other
attachments) to the City Manager.
      (2)   If the Zoning Administrator believes there is probable cause that a
violation has or is occurring, then he or she shall take one or more of the
following actions to resolve the violation:
         (a)   The Zoning Administrator may speak to the property owner and
attempt to resolve the matter through discussion and/or request that the
property owner work with the city through the city mediation program. If
discussion and/or mediation resolves the matter, the Zoning Administrator shall
inspect the property for compliance as soon as practical. If the Zoning
Administrator does not believe that the mediation process is resolving or would
resolve the matter, he/she does not have to engage in or continue with
mediation.
         (b)   In addition to, or in lieu of the mediation procedure, the
Zoning Administrator may also send a certified letter to the property owner(s).
Below the return address on the envelope, the words "Address Service Requested"
will appear. Alternatively, the letter may be personally served in the same
manner as a civil complaint. The letter shall cite the section number of the
ordinance and the offense and explain what must be done to bring the property
into compliance with the ordinance. The property owner will be given 30 days to
bring the property into compliance. The property address and parcel
identification number shall be referenced in the letter and any photos of the
violation as it existed on the date of investigation shall also be included.
The letter will be signed by the Zoning Administrator or other city official
who has direct knowledge of the violations.
         (c)   The property will be inspected on or as soon as possible after
the specified compliance date.
         (d)   If the property owner(s) has not complied, the matter will be
referred to the municipal prosecutor.
   (C)   The city may bring legal action to address any violation of this
Zoning Code, any enforcement order of the Zoning Administrator, or any term or
condition of a planned unit development, conditional use, site plan approval,
variance or other entitlement issued under this Code, or to collect unpaid
fines.
   (D)   The penalties associated with a violation of this Zoning Code are in
addition to, not in lieu of, any other penalty applicable under Ohio law or any
legal remedy available to the city.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.16 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
§ 155.161 OFFICE ESTABLISHED.
   The City Manager or Manager's designee shall interpret, enforce and
administer this Code.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.162 DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator shall have the following duties:
   (A)   Strictly interpret the provisions of this Code, including the zoning
map. The Zoning Administrator shall interpret and apply the provisions of this
Code to be the minimum requirements necessary to promote or advance the public
health, safety, security and general welfare of the city.
   (B)   Receive and process applications for zoning permits where new
construction is to be carried out.
   (C)   Receive and process applications for zoning permits, according to §
155.151(E), where no new construction is to be carried out or where new
construction has just been completed.
   (D)   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to
determine compliance with this Code, and, in the case of any violation, notify
in writing the person or persons responsible, specifying the nature of the
violation and ordering appropriate corrective action.
   (E)   Enforcement of this Code including notification of any violation,
according to §
155.155.
   (F)   Maintain and keep the official zoning district map up to date, for
inspection by the public.
   (G)   Maintain permanent and current records required by this Code,
including zoning permits and such other official records as are not the
specific responsibility of the Clerk of Council, and prepare and submit any
reports that are necessary for communication of development data to official
city and outside agencies.
   (H)   Serve as technical staff to the Planning Commission and the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
   (I)   Provide information on planning and zoning matters to elected and
appointed officials and to the public.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.17 PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL
§ 155.171 PLANNING COMMISSION ESTABLISHED.
   The Planning Commission is established in accordance with R.C. Chapter 713
and Article VI of the Charter of the City of Mt. Healthy, and shall have the
duties and powers as provided by the Ohio Revised Code, the Charter and this
chapter.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.172 PLANNING COMMISSION POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In addition to the powers and duties granted in R.C. Chapter 713 and by the
City Charter, the Planning Commission shall have the following powers and
duties:
   (A)   The Planning Commission and city staff shall carry on a continuous
review of the effectiveness and appropriateness of this Code and recommend to
City Council any appropriate changes or amendments.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall hear and make recommendations to the
City Council regarding amendments to this Code, including rezoning requests,
following the procedure outlined in §
155.173.
   (C)   The Planning Commission shall render recommendations on conditional
use applications and site plans to City Council, unless otherwise specifically
provided.
   (D)   The Planning Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing
the action of the Commission and the vote of each member upon each question or,
if absent or failing to vote, indicating as such. The Commission shall act by
resolution. Minutes and the records of all official actions shall be filed with
the Clerk of Council and kept as a public record.
   (E)   The concurring vote of three Planning Commission members shall be
necessary to take any action authorized by the Code.
   (F)   Before a zoning application is approved, the Commission shall make an
affirmative finding that specific provisions of controlling sections of the
Code have been met or exceeded.
   (G)   The Planning Commission shall adopt rules and procedures governing its
activities, which shall be filed with the Clerk of Council.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.173 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CITY COUNCIL.
   With regard to this Zoning Code, the City Council shall have the following
powers and duties:
   (A)   Upon receipt of a recommendation by the Planning Commission, the City
Council shall decide upon amendments to this Code and amendments to the zoning
map (rezoning), according to the procedure in §
155.193. It shall decide on conditional use applications within 30 days of a
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.174 PROCEDURE ON APPEALS.
   Hamilton County District Court shall hear and decide upon appeals of the
decisions of the City Council in matters relating to the Planning Commission or
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.175 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment. There is established an Architectural Review Board
consisting of three members to be appointed by the Mayor.
   (B)   Intent. The Architectural Review Board shall assist and advise the
Planning Commission on the design, amenities, quality, relationships to natural
features, existing buildings and all other aspects of the site development plan
which relate to the appearance of an entire project, all of its parts and its
surroundings. All standards, regulations and criteria, contained in this Zoning
Code, shall be considered by the Board in its review.
   (C)   Terms and qualifications. Each member shall be appointed for a term of
two years. One member of the Architectural Review Board shall be a registered
architect and the second member shall be a landscape architect, architect or a
person skilled in the general field of aesthetics and design, and the third may
be any member of the community.
   (D)   Meetings. The Planning Commission shall determine and advise the
Architectural Review Board on the schedule of meetings in order that
applications can be process expeditiously.
   (E)   Conflict of interest. No person appointed to the Architectural Review
Board shall participate in the review of, or give advice upon, any work in
which he or she, his or her partner or professional associate or associates has
any direct or indirect interest.
   (F)   Compensation. Compensation shall be paid each member of the
Architectural Review Board as is fixed by Council. With the submission of each
application the Building and Zoning Official shall require a deposit to be made
by the developer to cover a review expense in such amount as Council shall
require.
   (G)   Review procedures of application. After receipt of a complete
submission of an application, the Planning Commission may refer all proposed
site development and building plans filled with it to the Architectural Review
Board for purposes of review and report:
      (1)   Submission of applications. All applications for building permits
with accompanying drawings, renderings, data and material samples to be used,
shall be submitted to the Building Official. After processing the same, he or
she shall submit such applications as provided in this section.
      (2)   Multi-family, institutional, business, commercial and industrial
buildings. The Architectural Review Board shall submit to the Secretary of the
Commission, all applications for multi-family, institutional, business,
commercial and industrial buildings for Commission review of the proposed use,
parking, setbacks and yard requirements for conformance with the provisions of
this Zoning Code and any supplementary rules and regulations which have been
adopted and published. This requirement shall affect both new construction and
alterations or additions to existing buildings of these types.
      (3)   Application review. Upon receipt of the application, the Secretary
of the Commission shall transmit a copy of such application of the Board for
its review, report and recommendations. The Board shall, within 30 days for
receiving such application, provide and furnish to the Commission its report
upon its respective jurisdiction. Within 60 days after an application has been
filed with the Secretary or such longer time as agreed upon by the developer
and Commission, the Commission shall evaluate the development proposal and
report of the Board, and shall make a finding either that the proposal complies
with regulations, standards and criteria prescribed by this chapter applicable
to the proposal, or a finding of any failure of such compliance and shall
approve, disapprove or modify such proposal.
      (4)   Approval. If the application for building permit is approved by the
Commission as required in this section, the Director shall issue a building
permit.
      (5)   Failure to act. If the Architectural Review Board fails to act
within 30 days after it has received the application for a building permit from
the Commission, the Commission shall consider the application as recommended
for approval by the Board.
   (H)   Report. Three copies of the report of the Architectural Review Board
shall be prepared. One shall be filed with the Planning Commission for its use,
one shall be filed with the Clerk of Council and shall be open to public
inspection and one copy shall be retained by the Board. The Board shall
complete its report and recommendation within 30 days after referral of an
application by the Commission.
   (I)   Standards and criteria. The following standards and criteria are
established to guide the Architectural Review Board in its review of
development proposals.
      (1)   Materials. Materials shall be appropriate for the use of building,
for weathering and for relationships to other materials including those used on
adjacent buildings.
      (2)   Colors and textures. Colors and textures shall be appropriate for
the size and scale of the building, weathering and for relationships to the
site and adjacent buildings.
      (3)   Architectural details and ornaments. Architectural details and
ornaments shall be meaningful to the overall design and appropriate for the
size and scale of the building and for weathering.
      (4)   Mechanical equipment. Mechanical equipment shall be considered as
it affects rooftop appearance, sidewall openings, sound levels, smoke and other
nuisance aspects. Also, mechanical
equipment shall be considered as it relates overhead wires, gas and electric
meter stations, and any other visible appurtenances.
      (5)   Approaches, drives and parking areas. Approaches, drives and
parking areas shall be considered as they affect the appearance from the street
and from the site as well. The relationship of paving to the building shall be
appropriate considering factors such as safety, drainage and landscaping.
      (6)   Landscaping. Landscaping shall be appropriate for the size and use
of the area, and for its relationship to building, street, parking areas, walks
and adjacent buildings.
      (7)   Lighting. Lighting shall be considered for the appropriateness of
nighttime illumination of the grounds, drives, walks, parking areas, the
building and its affect upon surrounding areas.
      (8)   Signs. Signs shall be considered for appropriateness of size,
scale, shape, color and illumination in relation to building site.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.18 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
§ 155.181 APPOINTMENT, MEETINGS AND QUORUM.
   (A)   A Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five members and shall be
appointed in accordance with Article VI, Section
6.04 of the City Charter. Members of the Board at the date of passage of this
Zoning Code may continue to serve the full terms of their original
appointments.
   (B)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall adopt rules and regulations for the
conduct of its business, consistent with this Code.
   (C)   Meetings of the Board shall be held at such times as the Board may
determine. All meetings shall be open to the public.
   (D)   Requirements for meetings.
      (1)   The presence of three members shall constitute a quorum.
      (2)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings that record each
action of the Board and the vote of each member upon each question or, if
absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact.
      (3)   Minutes and the records of all official actions shall be filed with
the Clerk of Council and kept as a public record.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.182 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   In addition to any powers and duties granted the Board in the City Charter,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   The Board shall hear administrative appeals from any affected or
aggrieved person where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error or
misinterpretation in any order, requirement, decision, grant or refusal made by
an administrative official or body charged with the enforcement and
administration of this Zoning Code.
   (B)   Where there are practical difficulties preventing a property owner
from conforming with the strict requirements of this Code, the Board shall hear
requests for area variances to the Code's requirements.
   (C)   The Board may approve the reconstruction of a nonconforming use or
expansion of a nonconforming structure, according to §
155.203.
   (D)   The Board shall not have the authority to grant a variance to permit
the establishment of any use which is not otherwise permitted in a zoning
district.
   (E)   The Board shall have such other powers and duties as specified
elsewhere within this Code, or as
directed by the City Council, in accordance with the intent and purpose of this
Code.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.183 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   All applications made to the Board shall be on a form approved by the
Board and filed with the Zoning Administrator. The hearing shall be scheduled
within a reasonable time, allowing for all required notifications. The
application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount determined by resolution
of the City Council and the following:
      (1)   An application for an administrative appeal may be filed by any
affected property owner, tenant, governmental officer, department, board or
bureau and shall refer to the specific administrative decision being appealed
and include the appellant's reasoning in support of the appeal. The Zoning
Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals the application for
the administrative appeal, together with all documentation constituting the
record upon which the appealed action was taken.
      (2)   An application for a variance shall describe the details of the
variance, including the specific requirement of this Code from which a variance
is sought. The applicant shall specifically address and answer each of the
variance standards, as identified in §
155.184(A). The application shall also be accompanied by a plan, which shall
include at minimum the following:
         (a)   Legal description of the property;
         (b)   The boundaries and dimensions of the lot;
         (c)   The size and location of existing and proposed structures and
off-street parking and loading spaces;
         (d)   Existing and proposed use of all parts of the lot and
structures;
         (e)   Any other information that the Board of Zoning Appeals deems
necessary to make a decision on the application.
         (f)   The Board may require drawings to be based upon a survey that is
no more than ten years old, completed by a licensed surveyor.
   (B)   A notice stating the time, place and object of the hearing shall be
served personally or by mail at least ten days prior to the day of the hearing
to the applicant or appellant and to all other persons specified in the Board
of Zoning Appeals rules of procedure. The notices, if served by mail, shall be
sent to the last known address of the respective property owners as appearing
on the Hamilton County Auditor's current tax list. The Zoning Administrator
shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published on the city's website
with the purpose of the meeting. Any party may appear at the hearing in person
or by agent or attorney.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.184 VARIANCES.
   The Board's power to grant variances from the dimensional provisions of the
Zoning Code, including by way of example, lot size, width, setbacks, parking
requirements and height, shall be in harmony with the intent and purposes of
the Code, as provided below.
   (A)   Variance standards. Variances from the terms of the Code shall be
granted only where the applicant shows that the strict application of a zoning
requirement causes practical difficulties in the use of the property. The
factors to be considered and weighed by the Board in determining whether a
property owner has encountered practical difficulties in the use of the
property include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Whether the property in question will yield a reasonable return or
whether there can be any beneficial use of the property without the variance;
      (2)   Whether the variance is substantial;
      (3)   Whether the essential character of the neighborhood would be
substantially altered or whether adjoining properties would suffer a
substantial detriment as a result of the variance;
      (4)   Whether the variance would adversely affect the delivery of
governmental services such as water distribution, sanitary sewer collection,
electric distribution, storm water collection, or refuse collection;
      (5)   Whether the property owner purchased the property with knowledge of
the zoning restriction;
      (6)   Whether the property owner's predicament feasibly can be obviated
through some method other than a variance;
      (7)   Whether the existing conditions from which a variance is being
sought were self-created; and
      (8)   Whether the spirit and intent behind the zoning requirement would
be observed and substantial justice done by granting the variance.
   (B)   The Board shall determine, after weighing the factors described above
and any other factors the Board deems relevant, whether the property owner has
shown practical difficulties so inequitable as to justify granting a variance
to the property owner.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.185 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL.
   (A)   An administrative appeal of an order, requirement, decision or
determination by the Zoning Administrator or body charged with enforcement and
administration of this Code must be submitted no more than 20 calendar days
after the action or decision has been made that is being appealed.
   (B)   A submitted application for an administrative appeal stays all
proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning
Administrator certifies to City Council, after the notice of appeal is filed,
that by reason of facts stated in the application, a stay would cause imminent
peril to life and property. In such case, and upon concurrence by the Council,
proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be
granted by a court of record.
   (C)   In deciding the appeal, the Board shall determine whether or not the
decision that was made was done so using the proper requirements and standards
in this Code. The decision of the Board is limited to the information that was
available to the administrative official or body who made the decision being
appealed.
   (D)   Decision. After the Board of Zoning Appeals public hearing and review,
the Board of Zoning Appeals may determine to reverse or affirm, wholly or in
part, or may modify the administrative decision. When the Board reverses the
administrative decision, the Board shall have all powers of the Zoning
Administrator or administrative body from whom the appeal is taken.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.186 DECISIONS OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   The Board shall decide all applications and appeals within 30 days
after the completion of a hearing unless appellant agrees to a longer period.
The decision shall be binding upon the Zoning Administrator. The terms of the
Board's decision, including any conditions imposed, shall be incorporated in
subsequent permits and official authorizations pertaining to the subject site.
   (B)   The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be necessary
to reverse an order, requirement, decision or determination of the Zoning
Administrator or body charged with enforcement and administration of this Code,
to grant a variance from the requirements of this Code, or to decide in favor
of the applicant on any other matter. Abstentions or recusals shall count as
votes concurring with the majority of those voting if a majority exists.
   (C)   Every variance granted by the Board shall expire and be of no force or
effect after 12 months from the date of granting by the Board, unless the
applicant has made substantial progress toward achieving the approved
construction.
   (D)   Decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals may be appealed to Hamilton
County District Court.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.19 AMENDMENTS AND REZONING
§ 155.191 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this Zoning Code and the official zoning map may be initiated
by:
   (A)   The City Council, upon approval of a motion;
   (B)   The Planning Commission, upon approval of a motion;
   (C)   Any citizen, person, firm or corporation with an interest in property
within the city who submits an application in the proper form, along with
required fees, may request a rezoning of property in which case the applicant
shall show proof of ownership or other legal interest in the property in
question. A citizen, person, firm or corporation may request the Planning
Commission or City Council to initiate a text amendment.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.192 REVIEW GUIDELINES.
   In making a decision on proposed text or map amendments to the Zoning Code,
the following guidelines may be considered by the Planning Commission and City
Council:
   (A)   Text amendment. The proposed amendment would:
      (1)   Clarify the intent of the Code;
      (2)   Correct an error in the Code;
      (3)   Address changes to state legislation, recent case law or opinions
from the Attorney General of the State of Ohio;
      (4)   Affect the implementation of the Mt. Healthy Comprehensive Plan and
the Healthy Hilltops document;
      (5)   Promote compliance with changes in other county, state or federal
regulations;
      (6)   In the event the amendment would add a use to a district, that use
would be fully consistent with the purpose of the district and the character of
the range of uses provided for within the district;
      (7)   Not create incompatible land uses within a zoning district;
      (8)   Be supported by the findings of reports, studies, or other
documentation on functional requirements, contemporary building practices,
environmental requirements and similar technical items;
      (9)   If applicable, be consistent with the city's ability to provide
adequate public facilities and services; and
      (10)   Be consistent with the city's desire to promote the public health,
safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare of the community.
   (B)   Zoning map amendment (rezoning). The rezoning and the uses permitted
in the proposed district:
      (1)   Are consistent with the goals, policies and future land use map of
the Mt. Healthy Comprehensive Development Plan and the Healthy Hilltops
document; or, if conditions have changed significantly since the plan was
adopted, is consistent with recent development trends in the area;
      (2)   Are compatible with the site's physical, geological, hydrological
and other environmental features;
      (3)   Are compatible with surrounding uses in terms of land suitability,
impacts on the community, density, potential influence on property values and
traffic impacts;
      (4)   Can be accommodated on the subject property, considering existing
or planned infrastructure including roads, sanitary sewers, storm sewer, water,
sidewalks, and road lighting; and
      (5)   Do not result in a spot zone.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.193 AMENDMENT PROCESS.
   (A)   All petitions for amendments to this Zoning Code shall be in
accordance with §
155.191(C), filed with the Zoning Administrator in writing, signed and
accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the City Council.
   (B)   At all times during the process, the text of proposed changes and
associated maps and reports from the Planning Commission, shall be open for
inspection in the office of the Clerk of Council or in some officially
designated location
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall forward the application to the Planning
Commission upon a determination that the application is complete. Incomplete
applications shall be returned to the applicant and shall not be processed
further until fully completed.
   (D)   All petitions for amendments and rezoning, without limiting the right
to file additional material, shall contain the following:
      (1)   The petitioner's name, address and interest in the petition as well
as the name, address and interest of every person, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the land.
      (2)   The nature and effect of the proposed amendment.
      (3)   If an individual property or several adjacent properties are
proposed for rezoning, a location map, showing the location of the properties
generally in the city, a legal description of the land(s) proposed for
rezoning, the present zoning classification(s), the zoning classification of
all abutting properties, and all public and private rights-of-way and easements
bounding and intersecting the land under consideration.
      (4)   Any changed or changing conditions in the area of the proposed
rezoning or in the city which make the proposed amendment reasonable and
necessary to the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort,
prosperity and general welfare.
      (5)   All other circumstances, factors and reasons which the applicant
offers in support of the proposed amendment.
   (E)   Public hearing and notice; Planning Commission action.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall make a recommendation upon an
application for amendment or rezoning within 30 days after the public hearing
is closed.
      (2)    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any
amendment or rezoning, notice of which shall be posted on the city's website at
least ten days prior to the hearing. All notices of public hearing shall state
the time, date, place and purpose of the public hearing. A notice for a
rezoning shall also include a map of the affected area.
      (3)   If the application is for rezoning ten or fewer parcels, the same
notice shall be mailed no less than 20 days prior to the date of the hearing,
to all property owners abutting and across the street from the subject parcel.
Notices shall be sent to the last known address of the respective property
owners as appearing on the Hamilton County Auditor's current tax list.
      (4)   At least ten days prior to the scheduled public hearing for a
rezoning, a temporary sign approximately six square feet in area shall be
posted by the city on the property subject to the rezoning request. The sign
shall be removed within three days following the public hearing at which the
request was heard. The sign shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The specific request being made,
         (b)   Date of the public hearing,
         (c)   Location of the public hearing, and
         (d)   Location where additional information may be obtained regarding
the request.
      (5)   At the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall consider the
merits of the case, as well as public testimony, and make a recommendation to
approve or deny the amendment in question, following the review guidelines of §
155.192. The Commission shall submit its recommendation to the City Council no
more than 30 days after the public hearing has closed unless the applicant
agrees to a longer period.
   (F)   City Council action. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the
Planning Commission, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the
amendment, after publication and notice in accordance with the process outlined
in division (E) of this section.
   (G)   Modification. The City Council may modify and subsequently adopt the
proposed amendment, adopt it as presented by the Planning Commission or deny
the amendment. The Council may refer any proposed modifications back to the
Planning Commission for additional review and recommendation.
   (H)   Ordinance. All amendment and rezoning approvals shall be by ordinance.
      (1)   It is recognized that there exist within zoning districts certain
uses, buildings, structures and lots that were lawful before this Code was
passed or amended, but are now prohibited, regulated or restricted under the
terms of this Code. It is the intent to permit these legal nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their continuance.
      (2)   Nonconforming uses, buildings, structures and lots are declared by
this Zoning Code to be incompatible with the provisions of the districts in
which they are located. It is the intent of this Code that these
nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, or extended, except as
otherwise permitted in this chapter, nor be used as grounds for adding other
buildings, structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the district.
      (3)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the
plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Code and upon which actual building construction has been
diligently conducted.
      (4)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for,
or approval of, the continuance of the use of a structure or premises in
violation of any regulation in effect at the time of the adoption of this Code.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.20 NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND LOTS
§ 155.201 PURPOSE.
   (A)   It is recognized that there exist within zoning districts certain
uses, buildings, structures and lots that were lawful before this Code was
passed or amended, but are now prohibited, regulated or restricted under the
terms of this Code. It is the intent to permit these legal nonconformities to
continue until they are removed, but not to encourage their continuance.
   (B)   Nonconforming uses, buildings, structures and lots are declared by
this Zoning Code to be incompatible with the provisions of the districts in
which they are located. It is the intent of this Code that these
nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, or extended, except as
otherwise permitted in this chapter, nor be used as grounds for adding other
buildings, structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the district.
   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the
plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual
construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Code and upon which actual building construction has been
diligently conducted.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted as authorization for, or
approval of, the continuance of the use of a structure or premises in violation
of any regulation in effect at the time of the adoption of this Code.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.202 NON-REVERSION.
   Any nonconforming use or structure that is changed, in whole or in part, for
any reason to a conforming use or structure, or to a use or structure that is
closer to conformity than it was prior to the change, shall to that extent
thereafter continue to be used or arranged for a conforming use or more
conforming use, or shall continue to be a conforming or more conforming
structure, and shall not revert to its prior nonconforming status, or to a less
conforming use or structure, at any time in the future.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.203 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or increased, nor extended
to occupy a greater area of land or building than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code.
   (B)   No part of any nonconforming use shall be moved unless that movement
eliminates or reduces the nonconformity.
   (C)   If a nonconforming use is abandoned for any reason for a period of
more than one year, any subsequent use shall conform to the requirements of
this Code. A nonconforming use shall be determined to be abandoned if one or
more of the following conditions exists, which shall be deemed to constitute an
intent on the part of the property owner to abandon the nonconforming use:
      (1)   Utilities, such as water, gas and electricity to the property, have
been disconnected;
      (2)   The property, buildings, and grounds, have fallen into disrepair;
      (3)   Signs or other indications of the existence of the nonconforming
use have been removed;
      (4)   Equipment or fixtures necessary for the operation of the
nonconforming use have been removed;
      (5)   Other actions which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator,
constitute an intention on the part of the property owner or lessee to abandon
the nonconforming use.
   (D)   A building or structure containing a nonconforming use, other than a
single-family detached dwelling, which is damaged by explosion, fire, flood,
wind or other Act of God to the extent of 50% or more of its replacement value
immediately prior to damage, shall not be reestablished except in conformance
with the requirements of this Zoning Code, unless an exception is granted by
the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with division (E) of this section. In
the event that the Zoning Administrator's estimate of the extent of damage or
replacement value is not acceptable to the property owner or applicant for a
zoning permit to repair or reconstruct the building or structure, the applicant
may appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (E)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may permit a building containing a
nonconforming use to be enlarged, provided that the Board finds that all of the
following are true:
      (1)   The enlargement is necessary and incidental to the existing use of
the building.
      (2)   The enlargement conforms to the height, yard and area requirements
of the zoning district in which it is located.
      (3)   The enlargement does not prevent the future use of the structure
for a conforming use.
      (4)   The enlargement is not detrimental to present and potential
surrounding uses, will be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
this Zoning Code and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
city.
   (F)   A detached single-family residential dwelling that is nonconforming
because it is in a business, industrial or other district where it is now
disallowed shall be considered conditionally permitted, and it may be enlarged,
extended or structurally altered, provided that it meets the requirements for a
single-family dwelling in the C District. If the dwelling is damaged by
explosion, fire, flood, wind or other Act of God to the extent of 50% or more
of its replacement value immediately prior to damage, it may be reconstructed,
provided that no nonconformity is increased and no new nonconformity is
created.
   (G)   Any change to a nonconforming use may only be toward bringing the use
into conformance; however, a nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use provided all of the following determinations are made by the
Board of Zoning Appeals:
      (1)   The proposed use shall be as compatible, or more compatible, with
the surrounding
neighborhood than the previous nonconforming use, considering factors such as
hours of operation, traffic, noise and similar external impacts.
      (2)   The proposed nonconforming use shall not be enlarged or increased,
nor extended to occupy a greater area of land or building area than the
previous nonconforming use.
      (3)   That appropriate conditions and safeguards are provided that will
ensure compliance with the intent and purpose of this Zoning Code.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.204 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Where a lawful nonconforming building or structure exists at the
effective date of this Zoning Code, or an amendment thereto, that does not
comply with the requirements of this Code because of restrictions such as floor
area, lot coverage, width, height, or setbacks, that building or structure may
continue to be occupied and used as long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
      (1)    Nononconforming building or structure may be enlarged or altered
in a way that increases its nonconformity, except in cases in which the setback
of a building or structure is nonconforming by 50% or less of the distance
required by this Code. Only in these cases may the nonconforming setback be
extended along the same plane as the existing nonconforming setback, provided
that in so doing, the setback itself is not further reduced.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7445.png]
 
      (2)   In the event that a nonconforming building or structure is
destroyed to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement value, exclusive of
the foundation, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the
provisions of this Code; provided that the Board of Zoning Appeals may, upon
application, permit the reconstruction of the nonconforming building or
structure if all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The prior nonconforming condition(s) shall not be increased.
         (b)   The new building or structure shall be placed on the original
foundation, unless the building or structure could be so located as to reduce
the extent of its nonconformity on the lot.
         (c)   The application to reconstruct the nonconforming building or
structure shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator within six months of the
event in which the building or structure was damaged or destroyed.
         (d)   The reconstruction of the building or structure shall not be
detrimental to adjacent property and the surrounding neighborhood.
      (3)   If a nonconforming building or structure is moved for any reason
and for any distance, it shall be moved to a location which complies with the
requirements of this Code.
   (B)   None of the provisions of this section are meant to preclude normal
repairs and maintenance on any nonconforming building or structure, nor
intended to prevent strengthening or correcting any unsafe condition.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.205 NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.
   A lot of record that exists at the time of adoption or amendment of this
Code that does not meet the minimum requirements for lot width or lot area may
be used for any permitted use in the district in which the lot is located,
provided that any building or structure constructed on the lot complies with
all other requirements of the zoning district. The nonconforming lot may also
be used for conditional uses, if it meets all applicable requirements for those
uses.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.206 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   The burden of establishing that any use or structure is lawfully non-
conforming under the provisions of the Zoning Code of Mt. Healthy, shall, in
all cases, be upon the owner of such nonconformity and not upon the city.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.207 ZONING CERTIFICATES FOR LEGAL NON-CONFORMITIES.
   (A)   The owner of any non-conforming use, structure, or lot shall apply to
the Building and Zoning Department for a zoning certificate of non-conformance
to establish the legality of such non-conformity as of a specified date or
shall apply if the owner asserts any non-conforming use, structure, or lot as a
defense to an alleged zoning violation.
   (B)   If, upon reviewing the application for a zoning certificate of non-
conformance, the head of the Building and Zoning Department determines that the
use, structure, or lot in question was lawfully existing at the time of the
effective date of the provision creating the nonconformity in question, and
remains lawfully existing subject only to such non-conformity at the time of
such application, and that any required affidavit is in order, the head of the
Building and Zoning Department shall issue a zoning certificate of non-
conformance, evidencing such facts and setting forth the nature and extent of
the non-conformity. Otherwise, the head of the Building and Zoning Department
shall refuse to issue such certificate and shall declare such use, structure,
or lot to be in violation of the Zoning Code of Mt. Healthy.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.208 FEES.
   Any application for zoning certificate of non-conformance or other request
for action pursuant to the regulations of this chapter shall be subject to and
accompanied by a fee as established by the City Council. Such fees shall be
collected in advance of any application review, inspection, or issuance of any
certificate or approval.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
155.21 DEFINITIONS
§ 155.211 INTERPRETATION.
   Words used in the Code shall have their customary meaning, unless
specifically defined here.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.212 DEFINITIONS: A-B.
   ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT. A second dwelling unit subordinate to the principal
dwelling that shares ownership and utility connections with the principal unit
on a single family zoned lot.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A detached subordinate structure, the use of which is
incidental to, customarily associated with, and related to the principal
structure or use of the land and which is located on the same lot as the
principal structure or use.
   ACCESSORY USE. A use incidental to, and on the same lot as, a principal use.
   ADDITION. Any construction which increases the size of a building or
facility in terms of site coverage, height, length, width or gross floor area,
such as a porch, attached garage or carport, or a new room or wing.
   AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling available to low income households
earning 80% or less of area median income as defined by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development, for which total housing costs are 30% or less of
the household's total monthly gross income.
   AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT, PERMANENTLY. A dwelling unit in which a legal
mechanism such as a ground lease, enforceable deed restriction, and/or 501(c)3
nonprofit organization's policy ensures affordability, as defined by HUD, to
low income households for some extended time period, usually ending with the
durable life of the unit(s).
   AGRIBUSINESS. A business and/or commercial use operated primarily for the
support of agricultural needs. It may consist of products, materials, and
equipment servicing and sales; storage and/or processing of agricultural
products and/or animals (but not including slaughtering, rendering or tanning);
veterinarian and/or technical support facilities.
   AGRICULTURAL. The use of land for farming, dairying, pasturage, agriculture
and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing,
treating or storing the produce. Agricultural uses shall not include the
commercial feeding of garbage or offal to swine and other animals.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way 30 feet or less in width, but not less than 12
feet, which affords only secondary means of access to abutting property.
   ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL. Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as walls, floors, columns, beams or girders.
   AQUIFER. A geological unit in which porous and permeable conditions exist
and are capable of yielding usable amounts of water.
   AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA. An area that has soils and geological features
conducive to allowing significant amounts of surface water to percolate into
ground water.
   AWNING. A roof-like structure, generally made of canvas or plastic, mounted
above a storefront, window or door and projects from the building wall as an
architectural detail and provides shelter from sun and rain.
   BAR. A lounge, tavern, beer parlor, night club or similar establishment
principally operated for the sale of alcoholic beverages to be served on the
premises.
   BASEMENT. A story, all or partly underground, having at least one-half of
its height below the average level of the adjoining ground.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7449.png]
 
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A house, or portion thereof, where short-term lodging
rooms and breakfast and light snacks are provided and where the operator lives
on the premises or in adjacent premises.
   BOARD. The Board of Zoning Appeals for the City of Mt. Healthy.
   BOARDING HOUSE, ROOMING HOUSE OR LODGING HOUSE. A building, or part thereof,
other than a hotel, motel or restaurant, for three or more unrelated persons,
not transients, where no meals are served and no cooking or dining facilities
are available in individual rooms.
   BUFFER. A strip of land which provides visual separation and aesthetic
relief between potentially incompatible uses through some combination of screen
and greenbelt.
   BUILDING. Any structure attached to the ground, which has a roof and walls
or rood supports and is designed or intended for the enclosure, shelter or
protection of persons, animals or property. This definition does not include
mobile homes.
   BUILDING ENVELOPE. The maximum three dimensional volume on a lot within
which a structure can be built, as permitted by applicable height and setback
requirements.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the proposed average finished
grade to the highest point of the roof for flat and shed roofs, the ridge for
hip and gable roofs and the deck line for mansard and gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building in which is conducted the main or principal
use of the lot on which said building is located.
   BUSINESS DISTRICTS. The CBD, and E Zoning Districts.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.213 DEFINITIONS: C-D.
   CANOPY. A rigid, permanent cover over a walkway, attached to a building (see
AWNING).
   CARPORT. An accessory structure or portion of a principal structure,
consisting of a roof and supporting members such as columns or beams,
unenclosed from the ground to the roof on at least two sides and designed or
used for the storage of motor vehicles.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A permit authorized and issued by the Zoning
Administrator certifying that the use of the building or land in question is in
conformity with this Code or that a legal variance has been approved.
   CHILD DAY CARE HOME (TYPE A FAMILY). A permanent residence of the
administrator in which child day care or publicly funded child day care is
provided for 7-12 children at one time or a permanent residence of the
administrator in which child day care is provided for 4-12 children at one time
if four or more children at one time are under two years of age. In counting
children for the purposes of this division, any children under six years of age
who are related to a licensee, administrator or employee and who are on the
premises of the Type A home shall be counted. Type A family day care home does
not include any child day camp.
   CHILD DAY CARE HOME (TYPE B FAMILY). A permanent residence of the provider
in which child day care is provided for 1-6 children at one time and in which
no more than three children are under two years of age at one time. In counting
children for the purposes of this division, any children under six years of age
who are related to a licensee, administrator or employee and who are on the
premises of the Type B home shall be counted. Type B family day care home does
not include any child day camp.
   CHURCH (PLACE OF WORSHIP). A building or structure or group of buildings or
structures that, by design and construction, are primarily intended for
conducting organized religious worship services. Associated accessory uses
include, but are not limited to, classrooms, meeting halls, indoor and outdoor
recreational facilities, day care, counseling and kitchens.
   CLINIC. An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and
treatment on an outpatient basis by one or more physicians, dentists, other
medical professionals, psychologists or social workers.
   CLUSTER HOUSING. An arrangement that allows detached dwelling units to be
grouped in such a way as to trade the open space usually surrounding individual
structures for common open space.
   CODE. The Zoning Code of the City of Mt. Healthy, Title Fifteen, Zoning, of
Part Five, the Planning and Zoning Code of the Mt. Healthy, Ohio Code of
Ordinances.
   COHOUSING. A type of intentionally developed community composed of private
dwellings, supplemented with shared facilities such as common open space,
parking, cooking, dining, recreation, gardening, child care, offices and
internet access. Decisions are generally made by consensus of the owners within
the cohousing community.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE.
      (1)   Vehicles, owned by and registered to a business or organization,
used to transport commercial goods or materials or used to provide a commercial
service;
      (2)   Tractor cabs used for hauling semi-trailers;
      (3)   All vehicles, including passenger vehicles, affixed with signs
advertising or identifying an establishment, product, service or activity;
      (4)   Mobile mechanized equipment, such as cranes, bulldozers, trenchers,
tractors, compressors and similar equipment.
   COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Mt. Healthy.
   COMMUNITY GARDEN. One or more plots of land gardened collectively by a group
of people.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The document adopted by the Planning Commission and/or
City
Council which establishes the goals, objectives and policies related to future
land use and the general location and extent of present and proposed community
facilities.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use generally compatible with other uses in a zoning
district. The use requires individual review and approval of its location,
design, configuration and density and intensity and may require imposition of
conditions to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location by
the Planning Commission.
   CONSERVATION AREA. An environmentally sensitive land protected from
activities that would significantly alter its ecological integrity, balance or
character.
   CONSERVATION EASEMENT. An easement granting the right or interest in real
property that is appropriate to retaining land or water areas predominantly in
their natural, scenic, open or wooded condition.
   CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY. A facility or complex of buildings and
structures designed for and occupied by persons 55 years or older and persons
with disabilities that provides a range of housing and lifestyle choices,
including independent living, assisted living and skilled nursing care in an
integrated system.
   COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Mt. Healthy.
   DAY CARE, FAMILY. A place in which child care is provided licensed by the
state for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day,
unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult
member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption.
   DAY CARE, GROUP. A place which provides community based programs designed to
meet the health, social and related needs of functionally impaired adults and
supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or
legal guardian, except adults related to an adult member of the family by
blood, marriage or adoption.
   DENSITY, GROSS. The number of dwelling units meeting the minimum area
requirements of the district to be located on a parcel of property, divided by
the total acreage of that property.
   DENSITY, NET. The dwelling unit density of a particular area measured by the
number of dwelling units meeting the minimum area requirements of the district
divided by the total number of acres, excluding public rights-of-way and
private easements.
   DORMITORY. A building used as group living quarters for a student body,
religious order or other group as an accessory use to a college, university,
boarding school, orphanage, convent or other similar use. Kitchen facilities
are not provided in each room/unit but there may be a group kitchen facility to
serve all residents.
   DRAIN. A watercourse, gully, dry stream, creek, ditch or pipe which carries
storm water runoff.
   DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THRU FACILITY. An accessory use for a business (such as a
bank, restaurant, dry cleaners or pharmacy) where the delivery of customer
services is done, usually from within the building via a service window while
patrons are in their motor vehicle.
   DWELLING UNIT. A permanent building or portion of a building, having cooking
and sanitary facilities, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy
by one family as a single housekeeping unit, but not including hotels/motels,
recreational vehicles, tents or portable buildings.
   DWELLING:
      (1)   DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY. A building designed for occupancy by
three or more families living independently of one another.
      (2)   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached building designed exclusively
for and occupied exclusively by one family.
      (3)   DWELLING, SINGLE- FAMILY ATTACHED. A multiple family building
containing at least three dwelling units; in which each unit has its own front
and rear access to the outside on the ground floor; and where units share one
or more common walls but not a common floor/ceiling
      (4)   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building consisting of two dwelling units
or designed for or used by two families or housekeeping units living
independently of one another. May also be referred to as a duplex.
      (5)   DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME. See MANUFACTURED HOME.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21; Am. Ord. 25- 2061, passed 2-4-25)
§ 155.214 DEFINITIONS: E-F-G.
   EASEMENT. The legal right for a person, government, agency or public utility
company to use public or private land owned by another for a specific purpose.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance,
by public utilities or municipal or other government agencies, of underground
gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution systems, or
collection, communication, supply or disposal systems or sites, including
poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, traffic signals, hydrants or other
similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith which are necessary
for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal or
other governmental agencies or for the public health or safety or general
welfare, but not including buildings or personal wireless service facilities.
   FAMILY. One or more persons living together as a single housekeeping unit,
in a dwelling, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house,
lodging house, short-term rental, dormitory, fraternity, sorority, motel or
hotel.
   FARM. Any parcel of land containing at least three acres which is used for
gain in the raising of agricultural products, livestock, poultry or dairy
products, including farm structures within the prescribed limits and the
storage of farm equipment. Riding stables, dog kennels, establishments for the
raising of fur-bearing animals and retail sales buildings offering products not
produced on the premises shall not be considered a farm.
   FARM ANIMAL. Any domestic species of cattle, sheep, swine, goats, llamas, or
horses, which are normally and have historically, been kept and raised on farms
and used or intended for use as food or fiber, or for improving animal
nutrition, breeding, management, or production efficiency, or for improving the
quality of food or fiber. This term also includes animals such as rabbits,
mink, and chinchilla, when they are used solely for purposes of meat or fur,
and animals such as horses and llamas when used solely as work and pack
animals.
   FARMING, SUSTAINABLE. A farm operation that employs practices to preserve or
enhance water, soil and air quality during production, including no use of
synthetic fertilizers, use of only pesticides and herbicides approved by the
USDA organic standards and animal access to pasture most of the year.
   FENCE. An enclosure or barrier, typically made of wood, masonry, stone,
metal or combination of those materials, the purpose of which is to physically
and/or visually contain certain uses or activities, prevent or control
entrance, mark a boundary or act as a screen.
   FLOOD (OR FLOODING). A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of
inland or tidal waters; and/or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source.
      (1)   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
      (2)   FLOOD, BASE. A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year (also be referred to as the 100-year flood).
      (3)   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. The area possibly threatened by periodic
flooding consisting of the floodplain, inclusive of the floodway and the
floodway fringe area.
      (4)   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP. The official map issued by FEMA where
the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as Zone A.
      (5)   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which FEMA has
delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
      (6)   FLOODPLAIN. The area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse or lake
subject to 100-year occurrence interval flood, as delineated by FEMA. The
floodplain includes the stream tributaries, the floodway and the floodway
fringe.
      (7)   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river, stream or other watercourse and
the land areas of the floodplain adjoining the channel that are reasonably
required to efficiently carry and discharge the flood water or flood flow of a
river or stream and must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
      (8)   FLOODWAY FRINGE. The portions of the floodplain lying outside the
floodway.
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the horizontal area of the several floors of a
building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7451.png]
 
   FLOOR AREA, RESIDENTIAL. For purposes of computing compliance with the
minimum floor area requirement s of a dwelling in a residential district, floor
area shall include the total area of all floors whose height is more than half
above finished grade, having a minimum floor to ceiling height of seven and a
half feet, located on a permanent foundation, wired for electrical service and
heated for year-round use.
   FLOOR AREA, USABLE. That area to be used for the sale of merchandise or
services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers, measured from the
interior faces of the exterior walls. Areas used principally for the storage or
processing of merchandise, for hallways, stairways and elevator shafts or for
utilities or sanitary facilities shall be excluded from this computation.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7453.png]
 
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A detached accessory building or portion of a principal
building for the parking or temporary storage of automobiles, recreational
vehicles and/or incidental personal property of the occupants of the premises.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A principal or accessory building, other than a private
garage, used for parking or temporary storage of passenger automobiles,
recreational vehicles and/or incidental personal property, and in which service
is provided for remuneration or barter.
   GRADE, AVERAGE. The mean or midway point between the highest and lowest
elevation of the ground abutting the existing or proposed location of each face
of a building, wall or other area being measured. The measurement of average
grade may include the following:
      (1)   GRADE, FINISHED. The final grade of a site after grading, filling
or excavating.
      (2)   GRADE, NATURAL. The grade of a site that exists or existed prior to
manmade alterations, such as grading, filling or excavating.
   GREEN BURIAL. This refers to the interment of the body of a dead person in
the soil in a manner that does not inhibit decomposition but allows the body to
recycle naturally without the use of embalming fluid or formaldehyde. It is
also referred to as natural burial.
   GREENBELT. A preserved linear landscaped area along one or more property
lines, providing a defined edge and/or screening.
   GROUP HOME, ADULT. A residential care facility licensed or authorized by the
State of Ohio, or under contract to the state or a political subdivision
thereof, which provides room and board, personal care and supervision for not
more than eight elderly or mentally or physically handicapped persons over 17
years of age.
   GROUP HOME, JUVENILE. A residential care facility licensed or authorized by
the State of Ohio, or under contract to the state or a political subdivision
thereof, which provides room and board, personal care and supervision for not
more than eight mentally or physically handicapped or delinquent juvenile
persons under 18 years of age.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.215 DEFINITIONS: H-I-J-K.
   HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES. Any substances or materials that, by reason of their
toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive or otherwise injurious properties, may be
detrimental to the health of any person handling or coming in contact with the
material that is regulated by a governmental agency.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either
by:
         (a)   An approved state program, as determined by the Secretary of the
Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession conducted, as an accessory use
in a dwelling or a detached accessory building on the same lot as a principal
dwelling, by a member or members of the resident family and which is clearly
accessory and incidental to the residential use of the lot. Also referred to as
a "home-based business."
   HOTEL/MOTEL. A building under single management that provides rooms or
suites intended primarily as sleeping accommodations for public rental on a
daily basis for registered guests. A hotel (as distinct from a motel) contains
a central interior lobby and provides daily room cleaning and linen changes.
Other supportive facilities may also be included such as, but not limited to,
meeting rooms, incidental retail sales, restaurants, lounges, swimming pools,
recreational and fitness facilities and similar facilities/services intended
principally to serve registered guests.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any material that substantially reduces or prevents the
infiltration of storm water into previously undeveloped land.
   JUNK. Any motor vehicles, machinery, appliances, products or merchandise
with parts missing; or scrap metals or materials that are damaged or
deteriorated; or vehicles or machines in a condition which precludes their use
for the purpose for which they were manufactured.
   JUNK YARD. An establishment or place of business which is maintained or
operated for the purpose of storing, keeping, buying or selling scrap or
salvageable materials, including dismantled vehicles, or for the maintenance or
operation of an automobile graveyard.
   KENNEL. Any premises used to board, house, breed, sell, train or treat more
than three dogs, cats or other domestic pets who are more than six months old.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.216 DEFINITIONS: L-M-N.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street portion of a parcel or lot designated for the
temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading materials
used, sold or made on the premises.
   LOT. A legally described and recorded parcel of land occupied or intended to
be occupied by a principal building or group of buildings and accessory
buildings, or utilized for a principal use and its accessory uses, together
with such yards and open spaces as are required by this Code.
      (1)   LOT, CORNER. A lot having contiguous frontage on two intersecting
streets if the interior angle at the intersection of the streets is less than
135°. Also, a lot located on a curved street or streets, if tangents of the
curve, at the point of beginning with the lot or the points of intersection of
the side lot lines with the street line, intersect at an interior angle of less
than 135°.
      (2)   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner or through lot.
      (3)   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two approximately parallel
streets or a water body and a street.
   LOT AREA. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot,
excluding any street right-of-way or easement dedicated for street purposes.
   LOT COVERAGE. The part of the lot occupied by buildings or structures,
expressed as a percentage, including accessory buildings or structures, but not
including parking lots.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7455.png]
 
   LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot, as defined below:
      (1)   LOT LINE, FRONT. In the case of an interior lot, the line
separating the lot from the street right-of-way or road easement. Through and
corner lots shall have two front lot lines.
      (2)   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line. On a corner lot, the rear lot line is opposite the shorter of
the two front lot lines. In the case of a triangular lot, the rear lot line
shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten
feet long, lying furthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. A
through lot has no rear lot line.
      (3)   LOT LINE, SIDE. The lot lines connecting the front and rear lot
lines of an interior or corner lot or connecting the front lot lines of a
through lot.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot that is separately described within an approved
subdivision or a parcel of land surveyed and legally recorded with the city and
county.
   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines,
measured at the two points where the front setback line intersects the side lot
lines. On a corner lot this line shall be between the designated side and
opposite front lot line of the lot.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including the
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such
enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable requirements specified
within the flood plain overlay district.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A factory-built, single-family structure, transportable
in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis in compliance
with the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (42 USC,
sec. 4301) and designed to be used as a single- family dwelling, with or
without a permanent foundation, when connected to utilities. The term
"manufactured home" includes "mobile home." Recreational vehicles and temporary
buildings are not included in this definition.
   MINI-WAREHOUSE OR SELF-STORAGE FACILITY. A building or group of buildings in
a controlled access and/or fenced compound that contains varying sizes of
individualized, compartmentalized and controlled access rooms, stalls or
lockers for the storage of customer's goods or wares.
   MIXED USE. Two or more principal uses within the same building through
superimposition or adjacency, or in multiple buildings by adjacency or at a
close proximity.
   NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. Any building or structure that was
legally established and in existence at the time this Code, or any amendment,
was adopted and which does not conform to the current regulations of the
district in which it is now located.
   NONCONFORMING LOT. Any lot of record that was legally established and in
existence at the time this Code, or any amendment, was adopted and which does
not conform to the current regulations of the district in which it is now
located.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any use of land, building or structure that was legally
established and operating at the time this Code, or any amendment, was adopted
and which is not permitted in the district in which it is now located.
   NURSING HOME. A facility licensed as a rest home, nursing home, convalescent
home, home for the aged, or similar use established and operated on a profit or
non-profit basis to provide lodging and/or meals and/or domiciliary care for
the aged, infirm, chronically ill, terminally ill, mentally incapacitated or
convalescent persons, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar
institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. The term does not
include facilities devoted to independent living units which include kitchen
facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or
all of their own meals or boarding facilities which do not provide personal
care.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.217 DEFINITIONS: O-P-Q.
   OPEN SPACE. An area of land unoccupied by buildings, structures, storage or
parking areas, except for recreational structures and which is generally for
the purpose of active or passive recreation, environmental protection,
preservation of scenic views or similar purposes. Open space does not include
street rights-of-way or easements, or required yards.
   OUTDOOR STORAGE. Storing equipment, supplies, material, goods, products,
inventory or other such items on property in a commercial or industrial
district. This shall not apply to storage or keeping of yard equipment,
firewood, play equipment or other items normally incidental to a residential
use on the same property.
   OVERLAY ZONE. A special purpose zoning district that encompasses all or a
portion of one or more underlying zones and imposes additional requirements
beyond those of the underlying zone(s).
   PARKING LOT. An area not within a building where motor vehicles may be
stored for the purpose of temporary, daily or overnight off-street parking.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An area of required size, exclusive of necessary
driveways, aisles or maneuvering areas suitable to accommodate one motor
vehicle and having direct unobstructed access to a street or alley, but located
totally outside of any street or alley right-of-way.
   PERMITTED USE. A use by right which is specifically authorized in a
particular zoning district.
   PERSON. A firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or
corporation, as well as an individual.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. An establishment or place of business primarily engaged
in the provision of frequent or recurrent needed services of a personal nature.
Typical uses include, but are not limited to, barber and beauty shops, watch
repair, tailors and shoe repair shops.
   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A lot or parcel of land, developed as a unit under
single ownership or unified control, that is unique and incorporates one or
more of the following: a variety of uses, varied density of development,
dedicated open space, preservation of significant natural features, reduced lot
sizes or similar attributes.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the City of Mt. Healthy.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The main or primary use of land or structures, as
distinguished from a secondary or accessory use.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipality, board or
commission duly authorized to furnish, under federal, state or municipal
regulations, to the public electricity, gas, steam, communications (excluding
wireless communications), telephone, transportation, sewer or water services;
provided that this definition shall not include any person, firm or corporation
engaged in radio or television broadcasting.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.218 DEFINITIONS: R-S.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Vehicles or equipment used primarily for recreational
or leisure purposes including, but not limited to, motor homes, camper
trailers, travel trailers, pop-up campers, boats, snowmobiles, motorcycles,
dune buggies and similar vehicles and the trailers used to transport them.
   RECYCLING CENTER. A facility or location in which used material is separated
and processed prior to shipment to others who will use the materials to
manufacture new products.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS. The A, B, C and D Districts.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment principally operated for the sale of food and
beverages to be served for consumption on the premises, which may also include
carry-out service or delivery of food through a drive-in and drive-thru
facility for consumption off the premises.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land dedicated for public use and occupied or
intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric
transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer
main or other essential services.
   SCREENING. The method by which a view of one site from another adjacent site
is shielded, concealed or hidden. Techniques include fences, hedges, walls,
berms or other such features.
   SCREEN. A visual barrier that surrounds a potentially offensive or
incompatible activity.
   SETBACK. The required minimum horizontal distance between the line at which
the building may be built and the related front, rear and side property lines.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Those businesses defined by
Chapter 119 of the City of Mt. Healthy Code of Ordinances.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL UNIT. A dwelling unit that is rented or leased to one
person, family or entity on a weekly or monthly basis, but typically less than
one year.
   SIGN. A device, structure, fixture or placard which may or may not use
graphics, symbols and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of
advertising or identifying an establishment, product, service or activity.
      (1)   SIGN, BALLOON. A non-porous bag of material, with or without
lettering on its surface, filled with air or gas and intended to draw attention
to a business or other use on the premises on which it is located.
      (2)   SIGN, BILLBOARD. A sign which advertises an establishment, product,
service or activity not available on the lot on which the sign is located.
      (3)   SIGN, BUSINESS CENTER. A sign advertising a shopping or business
center, strip center, mall or any multi-tenant commercial, industrial or office
use.
      (4)   SIGN, CANOPY. Any sign that is affixed to or printed on a canopy or
awning.
      (5)   SIGN, CHANGEABLE MESSAGE. A sign designed to permit immediate
change of copy, either manually or electronically.
      (6)   SIGN, COMMUNITY SPECIAL EVENT. A temporary sign calling attention
to special events of interest to the general public which are sponsored by
governmental agencies, schools or other non-profit charitable, philanthropic,
religious or benevolent organizations.
      (7)   SIGN, CONSTRUCTION. A sign which identifies the owners, lenders,
contractors, architects and engineers of a project under construction.
      (8)   SIGN, DIRECTIONAL. A sign used to direct motor vehicle, bicycle
and/or pedestrian traffic entering or leaving business establishments or
shopping centers.
      (9)   SIGN, FREESTANDING. Any sign not attached to a building or wall
which is supported by one or more poles or braces or which rests on the ground
or on a foundation resting on the ground.
      (10)   SIGN, GATEWAY. A sign placed at the street entrance to a single-
family subdivision, multiple family development, planned unit development,
industrial park or similar consolidated development, containing only the name
of the subdivision or development.
      (11)   SIGN, GROUND. A freestanding sign supported by a base which rests
directly on the ground. The width of the base shall be at least 50% of the
width of the sign to be considered a ground sign.
      (12)   SIGN, MARQUEE. A sign that is part of or attached to a permanent
roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending
from the building front.
      (13)   SIGN, POLE. A freestanding sign that is elevated above the ground
on poles or braces and not attached to any building or other structure.
      (14)   SIGN, POLITICAL. Any sign dealing with candidates or issues
appearing on a ballot in an election sanctioned by the Board of Elections.
      (15)   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign attached to a building or other
structure and extending in whole or in part more than 12 inches from such
structure.
      (16)   SIGN, PUBLIC SERVICE. Any sign whose purpose is solely to serve
the public and which does not advertise a business.
      (17)   SIGN, REAL ESTATE. A sign advertising the real estate upon which
the sign is located as being for sale, rent or lease.
      (18)   SIGN, ROOF. Any sign erected upon a building or structure which
extends above the roof line of the building or structure.
      (19)   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign that is not permanent or affixed to a
building or structure and, by its nature, may be or is intended to be moved
from one location to another, such as "A" frame signs or signs on a movable
trailer, whether rented or owned.
      (20)   SIGN, WALL. A sign painted, attached to or erected in a plane
parallel to a wall, extending no more than 12 inches from the exterior face of
the wall to which it is attached.
      (21)   SIGN, WINDOW. A sign affixed to the glass on the outside or inside
of a window, or erected within three feet of a window on the inside of a
building so as to be seen from the outside of the building.
   SITE PLAN. A drawing, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with
complete dimensioning, the boundaries of a site and the location of all
buildings, structures, uses and principal site development features proposed
for a specific land parcel.
   SKILLED NURSING CARE. Procedures that require technical skills and knowledge
beyond those of an untrained individual and commonly employed in providing for
the physical, mental and emotional needs of the ill or otherwise incapacitated.
   SPOT ZONE. Singling out of a lot or small area for discriminatory or
different treatment from that accorded surrounding land which is similar in
character.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the upper surface of any
floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, and also any portion of a
building used for human occupancy between the topmost floor and the roof.
   STREET. A public right-of-way 50 feet or more in width which provides a
public means of primary access to abutting property, or any such right-of-way
more than 30 and less than 50 feet in width, provided that it existed prior to
November 18, 1971. The term STREET includes avenue, drive, lane, circle, road,
parkway, boulevard, highway, thoroughfare or any other similar term.
   STREET CLASSIFICATION. A hierarchy of street types denoting their relative
function and traffic-carrying capability.
      (1)   ARTERIAL. A connected network of continuous routes serving intra-
and interstate travel, as well as interurban travel. Arterials accommodate high
traffic volumes generally at higher speeds. Access to abutting land is
subordinate to moving through traffic. The following streets are classified as
arterials:
         (a)   Hamilton Avenue
      (2)   COLLECTOR. Those streets which collect traffic from local streets
and channel it to arterial streets. Collector streets carry moderate traffic
volumes and primarily provide for local traffic movements with a minor amount
of through traffic. While traffic movement is an important function, collectors
also provide for a higher degree of land access than arterials. The following
streets are classified as collectors:
         (a)   Compton
      (3)   LOCAL. A street that provides direct access to adjacent land and
access to higher street classifications. All streets not otherwise classified
are local.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, erected or placed which requires location
on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground
including, but not limited to: buildings, accessory buildings, sheds, patios,
gazebos, tennis courts, swimming pools, radio and television towers, decks and
platforms; provided, however, that patios shall not be deemed structures if no
part is above the ground and if it is located outside the minimum front, side
and rear yard setback area. Lawful fences or walls, utility poles, basketball
goals, mailboxes, sidewalks, driveways, streets, parking areas or retaining
walls shall not be considered as structures for purposes of this Code.
   SUBDIVISION. Shall mean:
      (1)   The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as contiguous
units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels, sites or lots,
any one of which is less than five acres for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of transfer of ownership, provided, however, that the division or
partition of land into parcels more than five acres not involving any new
streets or easements of access, and the sale or exchange of parcels between
adjoining lot owners, where such sale or exchange does not create additional
building sites, shall not be considered a subdivision for purposes of this
Code; or
      (2)   The improvement of one or more parcels of land for residential,
commercial or industrial structures or groups of structures involving the
division or allocation of land for the opening, widening or extension of any
street or streets except private streets serving industrial structures, and the
division or allocation of land as open spaces for common use by owners,
occupants or lease holders, or as easements for the extension and maintenance
of public sanitary sewers, water lines, storm drainage or other public
features.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.219 DEFINITIONS: T-U.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE. A structure erected for a period of time not to exceed
18 months for such use as construction offices or storage buildings at a
construction site.
   USE. The specific purposes for which land or a building is designed,
arranged or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
§ 155.2191 DEFINITIONS: V-W.
   VARIANCE. A relaxation or modification of the requirements of this Code
permitted by the Board of Zoning Appeals on individual parcels of property as a
method of alleviating practical difficulty in meeting the minimum requirements
of the Code.
   VEHICLE REPAIR, MAJOR. The repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor
vehicles, engines, transmissions, or parts thereof, including collision
service, painting and steam cleaning.
   VEHICLE REPAIR, MINOR. A building or premises used primarily to provide
general maintenance on automobiles such as oil changes and lubrication;
servicing and repair of spark plugs, batteries, pumps, belts, hoses, air
filters, windshield wipers and distributors; replacement of mufflers and
exhaust systems, brakes and shock absorbers; radiator cleaning and flushing;
sale and installation of automobile accessories such as tires, radios and air
conditioners; wheel alignment and balancing; but, excluding tire recapping or
grooving or any major mechanical repairs, collision work or painting.
   VEHICLE SERVICE STATION. Any land and building used for the supply and sales
of gasoline, oil or other fuel for motor vehicle propulsion and may include
facilities for the sale of other retail products.
   VEHICLE WASH. A building or portion of a building with machine or hand-
operated facilities used
principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing or waxing of motor vehicles.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL OR CLINIC. A building where care and treatment of small
animals, including household pets, is provided.
   WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENT. A business that engages in the sale of goods,
merchandise and commodities for resale by the purchaser.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY. The plant, equipment and property
including, but not limited to, cables, wires, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
antennas, electronics and other appurtenances used or to be used to transmit,
receive, distribute, provide or offer wireless communications services.
   WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWER. Any structure, such as a mast, pole, monopole,
guyed tower or lattice tower that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21; Am. Ord. 25- 2061, passed 2-4-25)
§ 155.2192 DEFINITIONS: X-Y-Z.
   YARD. An unoccupied open space from the ground upward, between the building
wall and the adjoining lot lines.
      (1)   FRONT YARD. The space extending the full width of the lot between
the nearest edge of a building and the front lot line.
      (2)   REAR YARD. The space extending the full width of the lot between
the nearest edge of a building and the rear lot line.
      (3)   SIDE YARD. An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard between the nearest edge of a building and the nearest side lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/4a4f16652ae06fca347954dd5e24af06d977aca4/
IMAGES/0-0-0-7457.png]
 
   YARD, REQUIRED. That portion of the yard lying between the lot line and the
required building setback line.
   ZERO LOT LINE. A development method in which a building is sited along one
lot line with no side yard on that side to allow more flexibility in the site
design and to increase the amount of usable open space on the lot.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The City Manager or the Manager's designee in the
capacity as enforcer of the provisions of this Zoning Code.
   ZONING DISTRICT. A section of the city in which requirements for the use and
dimensions of the land and buildings are prescribed.
   ZONING PERMIT. A written authorization issued by the Zoning Administrator
verifying that proposed buildings, structures or uses are consistent with the
terms of this Zoning Code for the district in which the building, structure or
use will be located.
(Res. 21-1165, passed 7-20-21)
CHAPTER 156: VACANT FORECLOSED PROPERTY REGISTRATION
Section
   
156.01   Definitions
   
156.02   Registration of vacant property
   
156.021   Registration of foreclosed property
   
156.022   Appeal
   
156.03   Fees
   
156.04   Maintenance obligations of mortgagees
   
156.05   Point of sale inspections on vacant and/or foreclosed properties
   
156.06   Joint and several liability
 
   
156.99   Penalty
§ 156.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases shall have their
ordinary meaning unless defined below.
   CITY LAW DIRECTOR. The City Law Director of the City of Mt. Healthy or his
or her designee.
   CODE OFFICIAL. The property maintenance deputy of the Department of
Buildings and Inspections of the City of Mt. Healthy or his or her designee.
   FORECLOSED. A property upon which a mortgagee has filed an action in
foreclosure in order to recover monies pursuant to a mortgage agreement which
has been secured by a lien on property.
   FORECLOSED PROPERTY. Any property that is involved in a procedure or legal
action by which a party who has loaned money secured by a mortgage or deed or
trust on real property (or has an unpaid judgment), forces the sale of the real
property to recover the money due, unpaid interest, plus the cost of
foreclosure, after the debtor fails to make payment.
   MORTGAGEE. Any party to a mortgage agreement whose interest in that
agreement is secured by a lien on property who has filed an action in
foreclosure on the particular premises at issue. For the purposes of this
chapter, the party shall be considered the mortgagee until title to the
premises is transferred to a bona fide owner-occupant or unaffiliated third-
party.
   PERSON IN CONTROL. The person, persons, or entity holding title to the
freehold estate of the premises; a mortgagee or vendee in possession; a
receiver; an executor; a trustee; and any person, public or private entity,
lessee or holder of a lesser estate in the premises, and/or its duly authorized
agent(s), with the authority to bring a building or premises into compliance
with the provisions of this code, including, but not limited to any mortgagee
that has filed an action in foreclosure on the particular premises at issue,
until title to the premises is transferred to a third party.
   PMCE. The Property Maintenance Code Enforcement division of the Department
of Buildings and Inspections of the City of Mt. Healthy.
   PROPERTY. Parcel of land within the corporate limits of the city which
contains a dwelling or structure that provides living accommodations for
persons, or commercial/business operations.
   VACANT. Unoccupied or without authorized human inhabitants.
   VACANT BUILDING/PROPERTY. Any vacant building not involved in a foreclosure;
any vacant building that is in a standard condition; a vacant building that is
in a substandard condition, but is suitable for rehabilitation; or a building
that has been vacant for more than 120 days.
   VACANT, FORECLOSED PROPERTY REGISTRATION FORM. A form publicly available
from the PMCE division that mortgagees subject to the requirements of this
chapter must complete and submit as specified in this section.
(Ord. 16-1782, passed 6-21-16; Am. Ord. 24- 2046, passed 7-16-24)
§ 156.02 REGISTRATION OF VACANT PROPERTY.
   (A)   Within ten days of any property within the City of Mt. Healthy that
falls within the definition of a vacant building as defined in this chapter,
shall submit a vacant property registration form for the building/property to
the City of Mt. Healthy Building Department.
   (B)   The vacant property registration form shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   Description of the property, including, but not limited to, the
street address and parcel identification number;
      (2)   The name, street address, and telephone number of the authorized
agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of the
mortgagee.
      (3)   On an annual basis, the property owner shall pay the initial or
annual registration fee listed in §
156.03 as applicable.
      (4)   The property owner shall notify the City of Mt. Healthy Building
Department within ten days of any change of information on the vacant property
registration form. The property owner shall also be responsible to notify the
City of Mt. Healthy Building Department in writing when the property is
transferred to a bona fide owner- occupant or an unaffiliated third party, the
property is reoccupied, or the property is sold, so the property may be
promptly removed from the registry.
(Ord. 16-1782, passed 6-21-16; Am. Ord. 24- 2046, passed 7-16-24)
§ 156.021 REGISTRATION OF FORECLOSED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Within ten days of filing a foreclosure action on property located
within the City of Mt. Healthy that is vacant at the time of filing, the
mortgagee shall submit a foreclosed property registration form for the property
to the City of Mt. Healthy Building Department.
   (B)   A mortgagee is not required to submit a foreclosed registration form
on a property that is not vacant at the time of the filing of a foreclosure
action on the property. However, if the property becomes vacant at any point
during the foreclosure process, the mortgagee shall submit a foreclosed
property registration form regarding the property to the City of Mt. Healthy
Building Department within ten days.
   (C)   The vacant, foreclosed property registration form shall contain the
following information:
      (1)   Description of the property, including, but not limited to, the
street address and parcel identification number;
      (2)   The name, street address, and telephone number of the authorized
agent for receiving notices of code violations and for receiving process in any
court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding on behalf of the
mortgagee.
      (3)   On an annual basis, the mortgagee shall pay the initial or annual
registration fee listed in §
156.03 as applicable.
      (4)   The mortgagee shall notify the City of Mt. Healthy Building
Department within ten days of any change of information on the foreclosed
property registration form. The mortgagee shall also be responsible to notify
the City of Mt. Healthy Building Department in writing when the property is
transferred to a bona fide owner-occupant or an unaffiliated third party, the
property is reoccupied, or the property is sold, so the property may be
promptly removed from the registry.
(Ord. 24-2046, passed 7-16-24)
§ 156.022 APPEAL.
   (A)   An appeal may be taken to the Mt. Healthy City Council by any person
(s) aggrieved by any order, requirement, or decision made by the City of Mt.
Healthy Building Department with respect to the Vacant and/or Foreclosed
Property Registration program or process.
   (B)   Any appeal shall be made in writing and submitted by the party
aggrieved by the order, requirement, or decision made by the City of Mt.
Healthy Building Department within 15 days from receipt of any written notice
of violation (or any notice of the order, requirement, or decision at issue if
no written notice of violation has been issued).
   (C)   The appeal shall be heard by the City Council within 30 days from
submission of the written appeal unless the parties consent to another
agreeable date. City Council shall issue a decision within another 30 days
following completion and conclusion of the appeal hearing.
(Ord. 24-2046, passed 7-16-24)
§ 156.03 FEES.
   Mortgagees and/or property owners shall pay any required fees until the
foreclosure (if applicable) is dismissed or until the property is transferred
to a bona fide owner-occupant or an unaffiliated third-party. The fees for the
various requirements under this chapter are as follows:
 
Title of Fee             Fee Amount
Initial registration fee $500
Annual registration fee  $500
 
The fee is non-refundable and cannot be prorated.
(Ord. 16-1782, passed 6-21-16; Am. Ord. 24- 2046, passed 7-16-24)
§ 156.04 MAINTENANCE OBLIGATIONS OF MORTGAGEES.
   During the period that the property is registered, the mortgagee/owner shall
have the obligations set forth in this section.
   (A)   Vacant and/or foreclosed property shall be maintained free of all
outward appearances of foreclosure and vacancy during the registration period
including:
      (1)   No signs or placards on the exterior of the building or in the
windows indicating that the property is vacant or foreclosed;
      (2)   Grass shall be no higher than seven inches at any time and all
noxious weeds shall be removed;
      (3)   The premises shall be maintained free of debris and litter;
      (4)   The premises shall remain secure and locked. Broken windows and
doors which are visible from the right-of-way may be covered with plywood or
similar boarding material on an emergency basis, but for no more than ten days,
while arrangements are being made to replace broken glass or broken parts of
the existing window(s) and/or door(s).
      (5)   Handbills, circulars, and advertisements shall be removed from
porches and yards in a timely manner.
   (B)   The maintenance requirements and penalties in this chapter related to
vacant and/or foreclosed properties are in addition to, and shall not be
considered in conflict with any and all other property maintenance requirements
of the City of Mt. Healthy.
(Ord. 16-1782, passed 6-21-16; Am. Ord. 24- 2046, passed 7-16-24)
§ 156.05 POINT OF SALE INSPECTIONS ON VACANT AND/OR FORECLOSED PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Point of sale inspections are hereby authorized on all properties that
are subject to the vacant and/or foreclosed property registration. Mortgagees
and property owners shall arrange to have all properties subject to the
requirements of this chapter inspected by the code official within five
business days of filing for the property to be sold. If the mortgagee or
property owner fails to arrange an inspection, the property, with consent,
shall be inspected by the code official pursuant to R.C. § 2329.17(B) prior to
the property being sold or pursuant to a search warrant issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   If, as a result of the above inspection, the code official determines
that health code violations, property maintenance code violation, hazards, or
structural defects exist on the property; the code official shall notify the
City Administration of the conditions. The City Administration shall provide
written notice via certified mail to the property owner, mortgagee, or the
mortgagee's agent, as designated on the foreclosed and/or vacant property
registration form, the owner of record, and any equitable lien holders,
informing the parties of the following:
      (1)   The need to repair and correct the violations, hazards, or
structural defects prior to the sale;
      (2)   If the property is not brought into compliance within 30 days of
the issuance of the notice of violation(s), the code official may correct or
repair some or all of the violation(s);
      (3)   If the code official corrects or repairs some or all of the
violation(s), the City Administration may place a priority lien on the property
for the total cost of abating the violation(s). The City Administration shall
collect the priority lien from the proceeds of any sale of the property, or
upon any subsequent sale of the property, or by the methods provided in R.C. §
715.261. When notice is given as provided for in this section, the lien shall
be a priority over liens of prior record and the lien will be effective on the
date the city incurs the costs of repairs as provided in R.C. § 715.26(B).
   (C)   Property subject to the requirements of this chapter shall not be re-
occupied without a Certificate of Occupation from the Mt. Healthy Building
Department. The Certificate of Occupancy is included in the annual registration
fee.
   (D)   Where any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of the vacant
and/or foreclosed property fails or refuses to permit fee access and entry to
the vacant and/or foreclosed property or its premises under their control, or
any part there, the Mt. Healthy City Building Department, through an
appropriate officer, may apply to a judge or magistrate of a court of record,
pursuant to R.C. § 2933.21(F), for a warrant to conduct an inspection. A
warrant of record to conduct an inspection of a vacant and/or foreclosed
property shall be issued based upon probable cause to believe that conditions
exist upon such property which are or may become hazardous to public health,
safety or welfare. See R.C. § 2933.22(B).
(Ord. 16-1782, passed 6-21-16; Am. Ord. 24- 2046, passed 7-16-24)
§ 156.06 JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY.
   Any owner of property, person in control of property, or subsequent owner of
property for which a notice of violation is issued under this chapter and
Chapter 153 to correct health or building code violations shall be jointly and
severally liable for the costs incurred by the city for the abatement of
violations on the property. Joint and several liability shall be attributed to
each entity in the chain of title from the date of issuance of orders forward.
(Ord. 16-1782, passed 6-21-16)
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Each day that any person continues to violate
any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Registration fees, not paid by the property owner or mortgagee shall
be charged against the real estate upon which structure is located and shall be
a lien upon such property. The amount charged will include the registration fee
and any administration fee(s).
(Ord. 16-1782, passed 6-21-16; Am. Ord. 24- 2046, passed 7-16-24)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
         
I.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
         
II.   REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
         
III.   VACATIONS
         
IV.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
TABLE I: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date     Description
No.  Passed
601- 5-1-79   A mutual assistance agreement with other political subdivisions in Hamilton
A             County for additional police protection
612- 7-17-79  Purchase of lot at the corner of Hastings and Perry Streets
A
620- 11-6-79  Authorizing the housing of prisoners in the Community Correctional Institution
A
80-  4-1-80   Contract with the Hamilton County District Advisory Council
641
81-  2-3-81   Authorizing the housing of prisoners in the Community Correctional Institution
671
81-  3-17-81  Contract with District Advisory Council of Hamilton County, General Health
679           District to provide public health services
81-  11-3-81  An agreement of cooperation with Hamilton County pursuant to provisions of the
695           Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended
82-  4-6-82   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a state highway safety program project
662           agreement for a traffic-control study
82-  5-4-82   Contract with District Advisory Council of Hamilton County General Health
714           District
82-  8-3-82   Authorizing the Mayor and Safety-Service Director to contract with Hamilton
724           County for housing prisoners in Hamilton County correctional facilities
83-  7-5-83   Contract with the District Advisory Council of Hamilton County General Health
746           District to provide public health services
83-  8-2-83   Contract with American Legal Publishing for supplementation of code of
748           ordinances
83-  10-4-83  A mutual assistance agreement with other political subdivisions in Hamilton
753           County for additional fire protection
83-  12-6-83  Contract with District Advisory Council of Hamilton County General Health
754           District to provide public health services
84-  8-7-84   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to execute the cooperation agreement
775           with the Board of County Commissioners of Hamilton County
84-  10-2-84  Authorizing the Mayor to contract with the District Advisory Council of
778           Hamilton County General Health District to provide public health services
Res.          Authorizing contract with the First National Bank of Cincinnati and
85-  8-6-85   designating said bank as a depository of the active funds of the city
673
85-  2-5-85   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to solicit bids and contract for
786           garbage collection services
85-  2-5-85   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to solicit bids and contract for a new
787           roof for the city municipal building
85-  4-16-85  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to solicit bids and contract for an
791           addition to City Hall
85-  5-7-85   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to solicit bids and contract for the
793           repair and resurfacing of streets in the Winston Heights area
85-  5-21-85  Authorizing the Mayor to contract with the District Advisory Council of the
795           Hamilton County General Health District to provide health services to the city
85-  8-6-85   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to solicit bids and contract for the
797           purchase of general liability, fleet, and property insurance
85-           Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to contract with the Board of County
799  10-1-85  Commissioners for radio dispatching services for police, fire, and life squad
              services
86-  1-7-86   Authorizing the Safety-Service director to solicit bids and contract for a new
790           fire truck
86-           Authorizing contract with the District Advisory Council of the Hamilton County
793  4-1-86   General Health District to provide public health services for the city for the
              year 1987
86-  5-6-86   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a lease by way of
798           concession for the concession facilities at the Municipal Park
86-  5-6-86   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to solicit bids and contract for the
799           blacktopping of certain city streets
86-  5-6-86   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to solicit bids and contract for the
800           surface treating of certain city streets
86-  7-1-86   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to contract for emergency sewer
691           construction without formal bidding and advertising
86-  10-7-86  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to solicit bids and contract for fleet
807           insurance
86-  11-18-86 Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to contract for police professional
808           insurance
Res.          Authorizing the Mayor and Treasurer to enter into a contract with the First
87-  8-4-87   National Bank of Cincinnati as a depository of the active funds of the city
705
87-           Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to agree in the name of the city to be
813  3-3-87   bound by all contract terms and conditions as the Department of Administrative
              Services, Office of State Purchasing prescribes
87-  3-17-87  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to contract for the repair of
815           sidewalks
87-  3-17-87  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the
817           improvement of Adams Road
87-  3-17-87  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to contract for a new police car
819
87-  3-17-87  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to contract for a new pick-up contract
820
87-  6-2-87   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the
823           purchase of general liability insurance
87-  9-1-87   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract for water services
829
87-  9-15-87  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the
830           purchase of fleet insurance
87-  11-17-87 Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the
836           purchase of police professional insurance
Res.          Authorizing the deposit of funds with the First National Bank of Cincinnati
88-  1-5-88   and authorizing the Mayor to sign all orders for payment drawn upon such funds
708
Res.          Authorizing the deposit of funds with the First National Bank of Cincinnati
88-  1-5-88   and authorizing the Auditor and the Treasurer to sign all orders for payment
709           drawn upon such funds
88-  3-1-88   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to contract for bids for the sale of
841           two Ahrens-Fox fire trucks
88-  3-22-88  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to contract for a new ambulance
845
88-  3-22-88  Authorizing the Treasurer to contract for the purchase of a city computer
847           system, including all hardware and software
88-  6-7-88   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the
854           purchase of general liability insurance
88-  6-7-88   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the District Advisory
855           Council to provide public health services for the city for the year 1989
88-  6-7-88   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the
856           surface treating of various city streets and alleys
88-  6-7-88   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the use
857           of a rejuvenating agent on various city streets
88-           Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to contract for comprehensive
866  9-6-88   liability casualty insurance policies covering the city, its employees, and
              its various activities
88-  9-6-88   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to contract for the sale of the 1978
867           Chevrolet ambulance presently owned by the city
88-  9-21-88  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director or Mayor to enter into a contract for
869           the purchase of a computer system
Res.          Authorizing a contract with Star Bank as a repository of active funds of the
89-  8-1-89   city
721
89-  2-7-89   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director or Mayor to enter into a contract for
881           the purchase of a police cruiser
89-  5-16-89  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the sale
888           of a city-owned automobile
89-  7-11-89  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract with ADP,
892           Inc. for the provision of certain services relating to payroll
89-  7-11-89  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the
894           replacement of certain curbs
89-           Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the District Advisory
895  8-1-89   Council of the Hamilton County, Ohio, General Health District for the
              provision of public health services to the city
89-  9-5-89   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to advertise for and solicit bids for
897           commercial auto (fleet) insurance
89-  9-5-89   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into contracts for
898           Supplemental Police Services with surrounding jurisdictions
89-  11-7-89  Authorizing the Mayor to contract to purchase certain real estate commonly
902           known as 7608 Harrison Avenue
89-  10-27-89 Authorizing the Mayor to contract for the purchase of certain real estate
903           commonly known as 1370 Compton Road
90-  1-23-90  Authorizing the Mayor to execute a participation agreement with the Ohio
911           Municipal League Joint Self-Insurance Pool
90-  2-20-90  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement with the Mt. Healthy
915           Community Improvement Corp. for services
90-  4-17-90  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to solicit bids and contract with best
923           bidder for construction of a storm sewer
90-  6-6-90   Authorizing the Mayor to contract for the purchase of the Mt. Healthy Drive-In
933           property
90-  7-10-90  Authorizing the Mayor to contract with the District Advisory Council of
936           Hamilton County General Health District to provided public health services
90-  8-7-90   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to participate in the Ohio Department
938           of Transportation Cooperative Purchasing Program
90-  8-7-90   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to sell a police cruiser and salt
939           spreader at public auction
90-  8-7-90   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to sell by sealed bid property
940           commonly known as 7833 Harrison Avenue
90-  8-7-90   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to advertise and solicit bids for the
941           purchase of a new dump truck
90-  8-28-90  Approving the purchase and financing of real estate commonly known as 7608
942           Harrison Avenue as authorized in Ord. 89-902, passed 11-7-89
90-  9-4-90   Authorizing the Mayor to execute a project agreement with the Ohio Public
946           Works Commission
90-           Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract with the Hamilton County
957  11-20-90 Probation Department, the Hamilton County Municipal League, and the current
              provider of the Hamilton county Comprehensive Home Incarceration Program
91-  9-17-91  Approving the mutual aid agreement for Hamilton County law enforcement
734           agencies
91-  9-17-91  Authorizing participation in ODOT Cooperative Purchasing Program
737
91-  3-5-91   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the
971           improvement of Clovernook Avenue
91-  9-3-91   Approving the health services contract
987
91-  1-21-92  Amendment of the agreement with the Mt. Healthy Community Improvement
1004          Corporation, amending Ord. 90- 915, passed 2-20-90
Res.          Approving participation in the Hamilton County Local Government Mutual Aid
92-  9-1-92   Agreement for Law Enforcement
743
92-  - -      Authorizing an agreement relative to the improvement of Hamilton Avenue
1007          between the city and the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners.
92-  3-3-92   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into a contract for the
1012          improvement of Hamilton Ave.
92-  3-17-92  Approving the proposed contract between the city and the Mt. Healthy Clerical
1013          Workers
92-  3-17-92  Approving the proposed contract between the city and the Part-Time Substitute
1014          Patrolmen
92-  3-17-92  Approving the proposed contract between the city and the Mt. Healthy Police
1015          Association
92-  3-17-92  Approving proposed contract between the city and Mt. Healthy Maintenance
1016          Association
92-  6-9-92   Authorizing a contract for the lease and/or purchase of equipment
1032
92-  8-11-92  Authorizing the execution of contract for public health services
1041
93-  1-19-93  Authorizing the sale by sealed bid of the real property commonly known as 7833
1049          Harrison Ave.
93-  3-16-93  Authorizing the sale of real estate
1056
93-  3-16-93  Approving the proposed contract between the city and the Part-Time Substitute
1058          Patrolmen
Res.
93-  4-6-93   Authorizing the contract for electric monitoring of home incarceration
751
93-  5-18-93  Authorizing the agreement relative to the improvement of Compton Road
1066
93-  6-29-93  Agreement for participation in Hamilton County Community Development Program
1070
93-  9-7-93   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to sell at public auction certain
1077          items of city property
93-  12-7-93  Authorizing bids for a contract for health insurance
1083
94-  2-1-94   Authorizing a contract for health insurance
1087
Res.
94-  2-1-94   Approving participation in the public works mutual assistance contract
760
94-  5-17-94  Authorizing an agreement relative to the improvement of Hamilton Avenue
1102
94-  6-7-94   Authorizing a management consultant agreement
1105
94-  7-5-94   Authorizing the purchase of land for municipal parking lot
1108
94-  8-16-94  Authorizing the execution of contract for public health services
1113
95-  5-2-95   Approving proposed contract between the city and the part-time substitute
1145          patrolmen
95-  5-16-95  Authorizing purchase of a police cruiser without advertising
1147
95-           Authorizing an agreement relative to the improvement of Hamilton Avenue Phase
1148 5-16-95  II between the City of Mt. Healthy and the Board of Hamilton County
              Commissioners
95-  8-22-95  Authorizing a contract with Terry Construction, Inc. for micro-sealing and
1156          striping Hamilton Avenue
96-  1-16-96  Authorizing a contract with L.P. Cavett Company for the project known as
1181          Hamilton Avenue Improvements, Phase II
96-  3-19-96  Authorizing a public safety program agreement for implementation of a corridor
1185          safety improvement study for Hamilton Avenue
96-           Authorizing a risk allocation agreement pertaining to the use of specialized
1187 4-2-96   law enforcement services and personnel including, but not limited to SWAT
              operations
96-           Authorizing an agreement with Tilsley and Associates Architects to prepare
1188 5-7-96   construction documents for proposed modifications of the Mt. Healthy city
              building
96-           Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into an agreement of
1191 5-21-96  cooperation with Hamilton County, pursuant to provisions of the Housing and
              Community Development Act of 1974, as amended
96-  5-21-96  Authorizing an agreement relative to the improvement of Hamilton Avenue
1192          between the City of Mt. Healthy and the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners
96-  7-2-96   Authorizing a contract with Adleta Construction for the project known as St.
1197          Clair Construction
97-  1-7-97   Authorizing the purchase of a police cruiser without advertising
1205
97-  1-21-97  Authorizing a contract with John P. Tumlin & Sons for general construction
1212          services for the project known as remodeling the city building
97-  1-21-97  Authorizing a contract with Charles Randolph Co. Inc. for HVAC services for
1213          the project known as remodeling the city building
97-  1-21-97  Authorizing a contract with Trebor Inc. for electrical services for the
1214          project known as remodeling the city building
97-  1-21-97  Authorizing a contract with Queen City Mechanicals for plumbing services for
1215          the project known as remodeling the city building
97-  1-21-97  Authorizing a contract with Pierce Mfg. Inc. for purchasing a new fire truck
1216
97-  3-18-97  Authorizing a contract with Contemporary Exhaust Services for purchasing a new
1224          exhaust system for the city building
97-  8-19-97  Approving the proposed contract between the city and the part-time patrolmen
1227
97-  10-7-97  Authorizing a contract with Blust Motor Sales for a new 1998 dump truck with
1228          salt spreader and snow plow for the city building
98-  1-20-98  Authorizing a contract with Rumpke, Inc. for the removal of waste and
1236          recycling
98-  4-7-98   Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to enter into negotiations for the
1254          purchase of a certain parcel of real estate known as 1580 McMakin Avenue
98-  4-7-98   Authorizing purchase of a police cruiser for the Police Department and first
1255          responder vehicle for the Fire Department without advertising
98-  7-21-98  Authorizing a contract with American Legal Publishing Corp. for the
1269          recodification of the Code of Ordinances
99-  11-2-99  Authorizing a contract with Interstate Ford, Inc. for purchase of a police
1297          cruiser
99-  11-2-99  Authorizing contract with Brandstetter Carroll, Inc. for development of a
1298          master plan for the park and aquatic facility
00-  4-18-00  Authorizing contract with Interstate Ford, Inc. for the purchase of two police
1313          cruisers
00-  6-6-00   Agreement with the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners in connection with
1317          the improvement of Compton Road
00-  7-11-00  Authorizing contract with Hartman and Smith Construction for the Seward Avenue
1321          reconstruction project
00-  11-21-00 Authorizing contract with Heisler Truck Sales, Inc. for the purchase of a 2000
1332          Road Rescue Ambulance
00-  1-16-01  Authorizing equipment lease-purchase agreement dated as of January 22, 2001 by
1337          and between Firstar Bank, NA and the city
01-  2-6-01   Authorizing contract with the Hylant Group for general liability insurance
1350
01-  3-6-01   Authorizing contract with Brandstetter Carroll, Inc. for redeveloping acquatic
1354          facilities within the city
01-  7-17-01  Authorizing contract with Hartman & Smith for the Bernard Avenue
1364          reconstruction project
01-  9-4-01   Authorizing contract with Whalen Construction, Inc. for development of the
1367          park and pool facility
01-  9-4-01   Authorizing contract with Dricast Pipe for the development of the park and
1368          pool facility
01-  9-4-01   Authorizing contract with Ayer Electric for development of the park and pool
1369          facility
02-  2-5-02   Authorizing the execution of a linked deposit loan program agreement and
1383          related matters
02-  6-17-03  Authorizing contract with the Shelly Company for street improvements
1421
03-  12-2-03  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to solicit bids for Elizabeth Street
1439          improvements, Phase One
04-  3-16-04  Authorizing the Safety-Service Director to accept the bid from Adleta
1442          Construction for the Elizabeth Street Phase One Reconstruction Project
05-  12-21-05 Approving the contract agreement between the city and the city’s part-time
1473          patrolmen
06-  1-3-06   Approving the agreement between the city and the Mt. Healthy Police
1479          Association, representing the police sergeants
06-  6-20-06  Authorizing contract with McGill Smith Punshon, Inc., for the update of the
1485          Zoning, Sign and Land Use Plan
06-  8-29-06  Authorizing contract with Jeffery Allen Corp. for the park improvement project
1492
06-  10-3-06  Authorizing agreement with Cincinnati Auto Auction, Inc. to handle the sale of
1493          surplus property
06-  12-5-06  Authorizing a contract with the City of Cincinnati for water services valid
1494          until December 31, 2047
Res.          Approving the water tap fee agreement between the city and the Mt. Healthy
08-  4-1-08   City School District Board of Education
967
08-  5-20-08  Authorizing an agreement of cooperation with Hamilton County pursuant to
1530          provisions of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
Res.
08-  8-19-08  Adopting the Springfield Township JEED contract with the City of Mt. Healthy
973
08-  9-23-08  Authorizing a contract with Mt. Pleasant for the St. Clair Avenue resurfacing
1533
08-  9-23-08  Contract between the city and the Mt. Healthy part-time patrolmen
1535
Res.
08-  10-7-08  Authorizing the city to contract for public health services
975
08-  12-16-08 Contract between the city and the Mt. Healthy Police Association representing
1544          the Mt. Healthy police sergeants
Res.          Approving agreement between the city and the Mt. Healthy Maintenance
08-  12-16-08 Association
981
Res.          Authorizing the Safety Service Director to sign an amendment to the JEDD
09-  2-3-09   agreement
983
Res.          Authorizing the city to contract with the Homesteading and Urban Redevelopment
09-  5-5-09   Corporation, an Ohio Not For Profit Corporation
987
Res.          Approving an agreement with the office of the Auditor of the State of Ohio to
09-  12-1-09  provide limited professional services for fiscal years 2009 and 2010
1000
Res.
10-  8-17-10  Authorizing the city to contract for public health services
1014
Res.          Approving the proposed agreement between the city and the Mt. Healthy Police
10-  8-17-10  Association, representing the Mt. Healthy Police Officers
1015
10-  8-17-10  Authorizing the Safety Service Director to sign the cooperation agreement
1582          between the city and the Cincinnati Metropolitan Housing Authority
10-  10-5-10  Approving the contract agreement between the city and the Mt. Healthy part-
1584          time patrolmen
              Authorizing an agreement between the city and the Board of Hamilton County
11-  5-3-11   Commissioners relative to the improvement of Clovernook Avenue and Adams Road
1612          Improvements from Clovernook to Adams from Adams to Compton; Adams from
              Rambler to Clovernook
11-  6-15-11  Authorizing the Safety Service Director to enter into an agreement of
1614          cooperation with Hamilton County, Ohio
Res.
11-  7-19-11  Authorizing a contract for public health services
10
12-  2-21-12  Authorizing the Safety Service Director to sign an extension to the waste
1629          collection contract between the city and Rumpke.
12-           Authorizing the Safety Service Director to execute an agreement between the
1630 2-21-12  city and the Fraternal Order of Police, Ohio Labor Council, Inc., representing
              the Mt. Healthy Police Association
2-   2-21-12  Authorizing the Safety Service Director to execute a mutual aid agreement with
1631          other subdivisions in Hamilton County for additional police protection
12-           Authorizing the Safety Service Director to execute an agreement between the
1634 2-21-12  city and the Fraternal Order of Police, Ohio Labor Council, Inc., representing
              the Mt. Healthy Police Association Sergeants
12-           Approving the contract between the city and the Fraternal Order of Police,
1638 3-20-12  Ohio Labor Council, Inc., representing the Mt. Healthy part-time police
              officers
Res.          Approving the proposed agreement between the city and the Mt. Healthy
12-  3-20-12  Maintenance Association
1029
12-           Authorizing the Safety Service Director to execute an agreement, and an
1640 4-3-12   addendum to the agreement with Medicount Management Inc. for EMS billing
              services
12-  4-3-12   Authorizing the Safety Service Director to enter into an agreement regarding
1641          the sale of city-owned property at 1411 Compton Road
12-  9-4-12   Authorizing the Safety Service Director to purchase the real property at 7620
1647          Perry Street
13-  2-5-13   Authorizing the City Manager to sign contracts and agreements to sell city-
1663          owned real property to the Mt. Healthy Community Improvement Corporation (CIC)
13-           Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
1665 4-16-13  Hamilton County Storm Water District regarding the Seward Avenue Easement
              Project
13-           Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreeement between the city and the
1669 7-16-13  Mt. Healthy School District for the contracting of a School Resource Officer
              for the school year 2013-2014
13-  8-20-13  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a Waste Collection Billing Agreement
1670          between the city and the City of Cincinnati
13-  8-20-13  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
1671          Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA)
13-           Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
1677 11-19-13 Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc. representing a bargaining
              unit of city employees in the classification of Police Officer
13-  12-3-13  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the City of Mt.
1681          Healthy and the Ohio Department of Transportation PID No. 96973
13-  12-3-13  Repealing Ordinance No. 13-1679
1682
14-           Approving a contract with Springfield Township to designate the Springfield
1494 1-7-14   Township Joint Economic Development Zone I, directing the Clerk of Council to
              file a copy of this Ordinance with the Hamilton County Board of Elections
14-           Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the City of Mt.
1496 2-18-14  Healthy and the Ohio Department of Transportation PID No. 92566 County/Route/
              Section HAM U.S. 127 10.07
14-  2-18-14  Authorizing the City Manager to execute a Mutual Aid agreement
1697
Res.          Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the City of Mt.
14-  5-6-14   Healthy and the Board of County Commissioners, Hamilton County, Ohio
1056
14-           Authorizing the City Manager to enter into an agreement of cooperation with
1704 6-3-14   Hamilton County, Ohio pursuant to provisions of the Housing and Community
              Development Act of 1974, as amended
Res.          Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the City of Mt.
14-  6-17-14  Healthy and the Springfield Township Board of Trustees to purchase rock salt
1059
14-           Approving a contract with the Springfield Township Joint Economic Development
1707 7-1-14   Zone I Board of Directors for the administration, collection and enforcement
              of the JEDZ I Tax
14-           Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the City of Mt.
1711 7-15-14  Healthy and the Mt. Healthy School District for the contracting of a School
              Resource Officer for the school year 2014-2015
Res.          Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement between the City of Mt. Healthy
14-  10-21-14 and Springfield Township regarding additional police protection services
1066
14-           Authorizing the Mayor to execute a cooperative agreement between the City of
1724 10-21-14 North College Hill and the City of Mt. Healthy to share expense for the
              Laboiteaux/Park Avenue Project
14-           Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the City of Mt.
1728 12-16-14 Healthy and the Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc.,
              representing Police Department Clerks
14-           Authorizing the City Manager to sign an addendum to the cooperation agreement
1729 12-16-14 between the City of Mt. Healthy and the Cincinnati Metropolitan Housing
              Authority
15-  2-3-15   Authorizing the City Manager to execute a Mutual Aid Agreement for Fire and
1739          EMS Services
Res.          Approving the proposed agreement between the City of Mt. Healthy and the Mt.
15-  2-3-15   Healthy Maintenance Association
1069
15-  2-17-15  Authorizing the City Manager to sign contracts to purchase real property
1744          (Hamilton County Auditor Parcel Numbers 593-003-0004-00 and 593-0007-0050-00)
15-  3-17-15  Authorizing the City Manager to execute rental agreements for the City-owned
1746          property at 7508 Hamilton Ave.
Res.          Authorizing the City Manager to prepare and submit an application to
15-  4-7-15   participate in the State of Ohio Natureworks Grant Program and to execute
1071          contracts as required
Res.          Authorizing an amended agreement with the Center for Local Government Joint
15-  4-7-15   Self-Insurance Benefits Pool
1072
15-           Approving the contract agreement between the City of Mt. Healthy and the
1750 5-19-15  Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc., representing the Mt.
              Healthy Part-time Police Officers
15-  11-17-15 Directing the City Manager to extend the supply agreement with Interstate Gas
1761          Supply, Inc.
15-  12-15-15 Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and
1765          Rumpke
Res.          Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
16-  2-2-16   Springfield Township Board of Trustees
1084
16-  8-16-16  Authorizing an agreement between the city and the Board of Hamilton County
1787          Commissioners relative to the improvement of Compton Road
16-  1-3-17   Directing the City Manager to execute an electric supply agreement with
1808          Interstate Gas Supply, Inc. (IGS Energy)
Res.          Authorizing the City Manager to execute agreements between the city and
16-  1-3-17   Springfield Township Board of Trustees
1100
Res.          Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and
17-  4-4-17   Simple Recycling
1106
17-  12-19-17 Directing the City Manager to extend the supply agreement with Interstate Gas
1836          Supply, Inc.
17-  1-2-     Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
1842 18    Mt. Healthy Part-Time Firefighters, AFSCME, Ohio Council 8, AFT-CIO
18-  5-1-18   Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
1851          Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc.
18-  5-1-     Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
1852 18    Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc.
18-  5-1-     Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
1853 18    Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc.
18-  6-19-18  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and TEC
1855          Engineering, Inc.
Res. 9-4-     Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
18-  18    Ohio Department of Transportation
1120
19-  8-20-19  Authorizing an agreement between the city and the Board of Hamilton County
1887          Commissioners.
19-  12-17-19 Directing the City Manager to extend the supply agreement with Interstate Gas
1900          Supply, Inc.
19-  12-17-19 Directing the City Manager to execute an electric supply agreement with Dynegy
1901          Energy Services (East), LLC.
20-  1-5-21   Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and
1932          Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc.
20-  1-5-21   Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
1933          Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc.
20-  1-5-21   Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and the
1934          Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc.
21-  2-16-21  Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the city and
1940          Rumpke.
21-           Authorizing the City Manager to execute a collective bargaining agreement
1947 4-20-21  between the city and the Mt. Healthy Part-Time Firefighters, AFSCME, Ohio
              Council 8, AFL-CIO.
Res.          Authorizing the City Manager to enter into and execute contracts with the
21-  8-19-21  Director of Transportation which are necessary to develop plans for and to
1169          complete PID #108964; and to execute contracts with ODOT pre-qualified
              consultants for the preliminary engineering phase of the project.
21-  12-21-21 Authorizing an agreement between the city and the Board of Hamilton County
1982          Commissioners.
Res.          Authorizing the City Manager to enter into and execute the final contract with
22-  3-1-22   the State of Ohio Director of Transportation which is necessary to complete
1178          Project PID No. 108936.
23-  1-17-23  Executing a supply agreement with Energy Harbor.
2010
              Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the City of Mt.
23-  11-7-23  Healthy and the Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc.
2024          representing a bargaining unit of city employees in the classification of full
              time police officer.
              Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the City of Mt.
23-  11-7-23  Healthy and the Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc.
2025          representing a bargaining unit of city employees in the classification of
              sergeant.
              Authorizing the City Manager to perform all actions necessary to support
23-           continuation of a governmental natural gas aggregation program with opt-out
2029 12-19-23 provisions to R.C. § 4929.26, directing the City Manager to extend the supply
              agreement with Direct Energy Services, LLC to continue a natural gas
              aggregation program.
              Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the City of Mt.
24-  1-2-     Healthy and the Fraternal Order of Police Ohio Labor Council, Inc.
2040 24    representing a bargaining unit of city employees in the classification of part
              time police officers.
24-           Authorizing the City Manager to execute a collective bargaining agreement
2042 4-16-24  between the City of Mt. Healthy and the Mt. Healthy Part Time Fire Fighters,
              AFSCME, Ohio Council 8, AFL-CIO.
              Authorizing the City Manager to execute an agreement between the City of Mt.
24-  4-16-24  Healthy and the International Association of Fire Fighters #5403, representing
2043          a bargaining unit of city employees in the classification of full time fire
              fighter.
              Authorizing the City Manager to take all actions necessary and execute an
25-           agreement between the City of Mt. Healthy and Rumpke for collection,
2063 11-18-25 transportation and delivery for disposal or processing of solid waste and
              recyclable materials generated in and collected from residential units,
              residential unit equivalents, municipal facilities and during special events.
             
 
TABLE II: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
98-1274  9-15-98     Authorizing exchange of land with Hook SupeRx, Inc.
00-1315  5-16-00     Designating property at 7309 Bernard Avenue as park
                     property
01-1351  1-16-01     Authorizing purchase of a parcel known as 7868 Perry
                     Street
08-1521  3-18-08     Authorizing purchase of property at 7621 Perry Street
08-1523  4-15-08     Authorizing the purchase of property at 7613 Perry Street
08-1524  4-15-08     Authorizing the purchase of property at 1596 Compton Road
08-1525  4-15-08     Authorizing the purchase of property at 1351 Compton Road
08-1528  5-20-08     Authorizing purchase of property at 1597 McMakin Avenue
09-1550  5-5-09      Authorizing purchase of property at 7720 Perry Street
10-1557  9-16-09     Authorizing purchase of property known as Permanent Parcel
                     No. 593-0008-0498-00
09-1559  10-9-09     Authorizing purchase of property located at 7405, 7361 and
                     7349 Martin Street
09-1563  11-17-09    Authorizing purchase of property located at 7401 and 7353
                     Martin Street
10-1572  3-16-10     Authorizing purchase of property located at 7400 Martin
                     Street
10-1573  3-16-10     Authorizing purchase of property located at 7365 and 7373
                     Martin Street
10-1574  4-6-10      Authorizing purchase of Duvall Elementary School, located
                     at 1411 Compton Road
10-1577  4-20-10     Authorizing purchase of property located at 7350, 7366 and
                     7369 Martin Street
                     Transferring real estate owned by the city on South Martin
10-1583  8-17-10     Street to the Cincinnati Metropolitan Housing Authority
                     (CMHA)
                     Authorizing the City Manager to contract to purchase real
15-1741  2-3-15      property in an area commonly known as the Hamilton
                     Corridor within the City of Mt. Healthy for a price not to
                     exceed an amount totaling more than $400,000.00
15-1745  2-17-15     Authorizing the City Manager to purchase real property
                     (Hamilton County Auditor Parcel No. 593-0007-0006-00)
15-1768  12-15-15    Authorizing the City Manager to purchase real property
                     (Hamilton County Auditor Parcel No. 593-0004-0027-00)
16-1771  2-2-16      Authorizing the City Manager to purchase real property
                     (Hamilton County Auditor Parcel No. 593-0007-0008-00)
                     Authorizing the City Manager to sign contracts to purchase
18-1847  3-6-18      real property (Hamilton County Auditor Parcel Nos. 593-
                     0003-238-00 and 593-0003-0253-00)
                     Authorizing the City Manager to purchase real property
19-1879  2-19-19     (Hamilton County Auditor Parcel Nos. 593-0007-0236-00;
                     593-0004-0425; 593-0004-0329-00)
                     Authorizing the City Manager to sell city owned real
19-1882  3-19-19     estate commonly known as 7612 Hamilton Ave. to the Mt.
                     Healthy Community Improvement Corporation
21-1943  4-6-21      Authorizing the City Manager to purchase real property
                     located at 7348 Hamilton Ave.
21-1944  4-6-21      Authorizing the City Manager to purchase real estate
                     located at 7405 Hickman St.
21-1962  9-7-21      Authorizing the City Manager to purchase real property
                     located at 7504 Hamilton Ave.
21-1981  12-21-21    Authorizing the City Manager to sell city owned real
                     property located at 7405 Hickman St.
21-1983  12-21-21    Authorizing the City Manager to purchase real property
                     located at 7348 Hamilton Ave.
                    
 
 
TABLE III: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.     Date Passed Description
                         Vacating a 2 foot by 93 foot portion of an alley
96-1198      8-6-96      situated in Section 32, Town 3, Entire Range 1, Miami
                         Purchase, City of Mt. Healthy
                         Vacating a segment of the alley which runs north and
98-1270      8-18-98     south, parallel to and between Hamilton Avenue and
                         Perry Street, located in Section 27, Town 3, Entire
                         Range 1, Miami Purchase, City of Mt. Healthy
                         Vacating an 80-foot segment of a north-south alley
98-1278      11-17-98    which runs north of Adams Road and east of and
                         parallel to Hamilton Avenue
                         Vacating an alley commencing at the intersection of
02-1379      2-5-02      the east line of Hamilton Avenue and the south line of
                         Adams Road
                         Vacating the two 10-foot wide segments of the alley
03-1422      6-17-03     which runs from the eastern edge of Harrison Avenue to
                         a point approximately 142.13 feet to the east, between
                         the properties of 7712 and 7708 Harrison Avenue
05-1472      1-3-06      Vacating an alley located between 7404 Perry Street
                         and 7408 Perry Street
Res. 10-1018 11-2-10     Vacating a section of Martin Street
22-1992      9-20-22     Vacating an alley located between 7405 Perry Street
                         and 7409 Perry Street.
24-2041      4-16-24     Vacating an alley located between 7401 Bernard Avenue
                         and 7367 Bernard Avenue.
                        
 
TABLE IV: ZONING MAP CHANGES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
340- 11-21- Section 27, Town 3, Entire Range 1 zoned “B” Section 27, Town 3, Entire Range 1
A    67     zoned “E”
378- 8-4-70 Property in Section 27, rezoned from “B” and “F” to “E”
A
379- 4-20-  Rezoning from “C” to “E-1”
A    71
386- 7-6-71 Rezoning from “D” to light industrial
A
387- 8-1-71 Rezoning from “C” to “D”
A
392- 7-6-71 Rezoning from “B” to “E”
A
399- 8-17-  Rezoning from “B” to “F”
A    71
531- 5-17-  Property in Section 27, rezoned from “B” to “D”
A    77
579- 1-2-79 Property in Section 33, Town 3, Entire Range 1, rezoned from “B” to “D”
A
589- 4-3-79 Property in Section 27, Town 3, Entire Range 1, rezoned from “E” to “F”
A
80-  9-16-  Property in Section 33, Town 3, Entire Range 1, rezoned from “B” to “DD” [Rejected
653  80     by voters in general election, November, 1981]
82-  11-2-  Property in Section 32, Town 3, Entire Range 1, rezoned from “D” to “EE”
730  82
84-         Property in the northwest quarter of Section 32, Township 3, Entire Range 1,
770  - -    rezoned from “C” to “FF” subject to certain specifications, conditions, and
            limitations
86-  6-3-86 Property in Section 26, Town 3, Entire Range 1, rezoned from “C” to “E-1”
802
86-  6-3-86 Property in Section 26, Town 3, Entire Range 1, rezoned from “C” to “E-1”
803
90-  8-7-90 Property located at and commonly known as 7313 Hamilton Avenue and 7319 Hamilton
929         Avenue, rezoned from “D” to “E-1”
91-  2-5-91 Property known as the Mt. Healthy Drive-In, 1370 Compton Road, rezoned from “E” to
965         “FF”
99-  10-5-  Property commonly known as the Wurtzelbacher property located at 8028 Hamilton
1294 99     Avenue from "C/F" to "FF"
11-  2-15-  Changing the zoning for property on Martin Street and Elizabeth Street from C to DD
1600 11
11-  10-18- Changing the zoning for property at 7272 Hamilton Avenue from D to E-1
1620 11
13-  3-5-13 Changing the zoning for property at 1411 Compton Road from C to E-1 and D
1664
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Ohio Revised Code
References to 1974 Code
References to Ordinances
References to Resolutions
REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
Editor's note:
   This TSO lists those Ohio Revised Code sections which have been
substantially duplicated by corresponding Code of Ordinance sections. All
legislative history references to “(R.C. § xx.xx)” which appear at the end of
sections (or divisions of sections) in the city's Code of Ordinances have been
listed here. Example: to determine which section of the Code of Ordinances is
based on R.C. § 4511.19, scan down this TSO to the citation for “4511.19” and
examine the entry across from it: in this case, the corresponding Code of
Ordinances section is § 73.01, which means that § 73.01 (or a part thereof) is
based directly on R.C. § 4511.19.
R.C. Section Code Section
R.C. Section                           Code Section
1.01                                   10.02
1.14                                   10.03
1.15                                   10.03
1.23                                   10.05
1.42                                   10.03
1.43                                   10.03
1.45                                   10.03
1.50                                   10.07
1.55                                   10.05
1.57                                   10.04
1.58                                   10.04
1.59                                   10.02
128.01(A)                              136.20
128.32(F) - (H)                        136.20
128.99(A), (B)                         136.20
146.03(A)                              35.20
146.04                                 35.20
146.05                                 35.20
715.261                                95.05
715.30                                 95.05
                                       95.48,
715.47                                 95.76,
                                       95.77,
                                       95.79
715.67                                 130.99
718.06                                 39.999
719.012                                95.05
723.011                                97.11
723.012                                97.13
723.04                                 97.40
723.041                                97.45
723.05                                 97.41
723.06                                 97.42
723.07                                 97.43
723.08                                 97.44
729.01                                 97.25
729.02                                 97.26
729.03                                 97.27
729.04                                 97.28
729.05                                 97.29
729.07                                 97.30
729.08                                 97.30
729.09                                 97.30
729.10                                 97.30
729.12                                 97.12
731.01                                 31.02
731.02                                 31.03
731.51                                 95.61
731.52                                 95.62
731.53                                 95.63
731.56                                 33.03
733.03                                 32.020
733.40                                 32.110
733.85                                 39.105
737.11                                 34.05
737.23                                 35.02
737.29                                 34.36
737.31                                 34.37
742.31                                 35.09
901.51                                 131.21
901.99(A)                              131.21
925.62                                 90.34
925.99(B)                              90.34
951.10                                 90.01
951.11                                 90.03
951.12                                 90.04
951.13                                 90.05
951.99                                 90.01
955.011                                90.32
955.10                                 90.27
955.11                                 90.28
955.22                                 90.01
955.222                                90.01
955.24                                 90.30
955.25                                 90.31
955.26                                 90.06
955.28(A)                              90.09
955.39                                 90.06
955.43                                 90.32
955.50                                 90.33
955.54                                 90.36
955.99(A)                              90.28
                                       90.27,
955.99(B)                              90.30,
                                       90.31
955.99(C)                              90.06,
                                       90.33
955.99(D)                              90.32
955.99(E)                              90.01,
                                       90.29
955.99(F)                              90.01
955.99(G)                              90.01
955.99(H)                              90.01
955.99(J)                              90.01
955.99(L)                              90.01
955.99(M)                              90.01
955.99(N)                              90.01
955.99(O)                              90.36
955.99(P)                              90.01
955.99(Q)                              90.01
959.01                                 90.20
959.02                                 90.21
959.03                                 90.22
959.04                                 90.21,
                                       90.22
959.13                                 90.23
959.131                                90.23
959.15                                 90.24
959.17                                 90.25
959.21                                 90.37
959.99(E)(3)                           90.20
959.99(B)                              90.21
                                       90.22,
959.99(C)                              90.24,
                                       90.25
959.99(D)                              90.23,
                                       90.37
959.99(E)(7)                           90.37
959.99(I)                              90.24
1533.161                               90.35
1533.171(A)                            131.24,
                                       135.05
1533.171(B) – (E)                    131.24,
                                       135.05
1533.99(B)                             90.35
1533.99(C)                             131.24,
                                       135.05
1547.30                                97.99
1905.01                                32.023
1905.032                               32.008
1905.05                                32.022
1905.20                                32.020
1905.201                               73.01
1905.21                                32.021
1905.22                                32.007
1905.26                                32.004
1905.28                                32.005
1905.30                                32.095
1905.32                                32.006
2151.85                                135.11
2744.01                                36.01
2744.02                                36.02
2744.03                                36.03
2744.04                                36.04
2744.05                                36.05
2744.06                                36.06
2744.07                                36.07
2744.08                                36.08
2744.082                               36.08
2744.09                                36.09
2901.01                                130.02
2901.02                                130.03
2901.03                                130.04
2901.04                                130.05
2901.05                                130.13
2901.06                                130.14
2901.08                                130.15
2901.09                                130.20
2901.11                                130.16
2901.13                                130.06
2901.21                                130.07
2901.22                                130.08
2901.23                                130.09
2901.24                                130.10
2903.05                                135.02
2903.06                                135.03
2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E)-(G) 135.03
2903.09                                135.01
2903.10                                135.19
2903.13                                135.04
2903.14                                135.04
2903.16                                135.19
2903.211                               135.06
2903.216                               135.11
2903.22                                135.06
2903.31                                135.17
2903.311                               135.17
2903.33                                135.20
2903.34                                135.20
2903.341                               135.20
2903.35                                135.20
2903.36                                135.20
2905.03                                135.07
2905.12                                135.09
2907.01                                133.01
2907.04                                133.02
2907.05                                133.03
2907.06                                133.03
2907.071                               133.22
2907.08                                133.05
2907.09                                133.04
2907.10                                133.06
2907.23                                133.07
2907.231                               133.07
2907.24                                133.08
2907.241                               133.08
2907.25                                133.09
2907.26                                133.13
2907.31                                133.10,
                                       133.15
2907.311                               133.11
2907.33                                133.12
2907.35                                133.10
2907.36                                133.14
2907.37                                133.15
2907.38                                133.17
2907.39                                133.18
2907.40                                133.19
2909.01                                131.01
2909.03                                131.02
2909.06                                131.03
2909.07                                131.04
2909.08(A) - (E)                       131.05
2909.10                                131.34
2909.101                               131.34
2909.11(B) - (D)                       131.02
2909.31                                136.21
2911.21                                131.06
2911.211                               131.06
2911.23                                131.06
2911.32                                131.07
2913.01                                131.01
2913.02                                131.08
2913.03                                131.09
2913.04                                131.10
2913.07                                131.33
2913.11                                131.11
2913.21                                131.12
2913.31(B), (C)(1)                     131.26
2913.32                                131.27
2913.33                                131.13
2913.34                                131.29
2913.40                                131.23
2913.401                               131.23
2913.41                                131.14
2913.42                                131.15
2913.43                                131.16
2913.44                                131.28
2913.441                               132.11
2913.45                                131.17
2913.47                                131.23
2913.48                                131.23
2913.51                                131.18
2913.61(B) - (E)                       131.19
2913.71                                131.20
2913.72                                131.25
2913.73                                131.25
2915.01                                134.01
2915.02                                134.02
2915.03                                134.03
2915.04                                134.04
2915.05                                134.05
2915.06                                134.14
2915.061                               134.14
2915.09                                134.06
2915.091                               134.10
2915.092                               134.11
2915.093                               134.12
2915.094                               134.13
2915.10                                134.07
2915.11                                134.08
2915.12                                134.09
2915.13                                134.12
2915.14                                134.15
2917.01                                132.10
2917.03                                132.01
2917.031                               132.01
2917.04                                132.02
2917.05                                132.03
2917.11                                132.04
2917.12                                132.05
2917.13                                132.06
2917.14                                132.15
2917.21                                132.07
2917.211                               133.21
2917.31                                132.08
2917.32                                132.09
2917.40                                132.13
2917.41                                131.30
2919.01                                135.10
2919.21                                135.13
2919.22(A) -(E), (H)                   135.14
2919.224                               135.12
2919.23                                135.15
2919.231                               135.15
2919.24                                135.18
2919.25                                135.16
2919.27                                135.23
2921.01                                136.01
2921.04                                136.17
2921.13                                136.02
2921.14                                136.14
2921.15                                136.19
2921.21                                136.03
2921.22                                136.04
2921.23                                136.05
2921.24                                136.16
2921.25                                136.16
2921.29                                136.21
2921.31                                136.06
2921.32                                136.07
2921.321                               136.15
2921.33                                136.08
2921.331(A) - (C)                      70.02
2921.36                                136.13
2921.37                                136.13
2921.42                                136.09
2921.43                                136.10
2921.44                                136.11
2921.45                                136.12
2921.51                                132.12
2921.52(A) - (D)                       136.18
2923.02                                130.11
2923.03                                130.12
2923.11                                137.01
2923.12                                137.02
2923.122(C) - (G)                      137.11
2923.126                               137.13
2923.1211(B), (C)                      137.13
2923.1212                              137.13
2923.131                               137.12
2923.15                                137.03
2923.16                                137.04
2923.18                                137.10
2923.19                                137.06
2923.20                                137.07
2923.201                               137.14
2923.211                               137.08
2923.24                                137.05
2923.43                                95.03
2925.01                                138.01
2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)           138.06
2925.11                                138.03
2925.12                                138.04
2925.13                                138.05
2925.14                                138.13
2925.141                               138.13
2925.31                                138.07
2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G)        138.10
2925.33                                138.10
2925.34                                138.19
2925.36(A) - (D), (E)                  138.08
2925.37(A), (G)                        138.12
2925.50                                138.09
2925.51                                138.11
2925.511                               138.11
2925.55                                138.18
2925.56                                138.18
2925.57                                138.18
2925.58                                138.18
2925.62                                138.20
2927.01                                135.28
2927.02                                135.25
2927.021                               135.25
2927.022                               135.25
2927.023                               135.25
2927.024                               135.25
2927.03                                135.21
2927.11                                131.35
2927.12                                135.22
2927.15                                135.29
2927.17                                133.20
2929.21                                130.99
2929.22                                130.18
                                       10.18,
2929.23                                70.99,
                                       130.99,
                                       133.99
2929.24                                130.99
2929.25                                130.99
2929.26                                130.99
2929.27                                130.99
2929.28                                130.99,
                                       131.02
2929.31                                130.99
2929.41                                130.19
2929.51                                32.096
2935.03                                32.035,
                                       131.22
2935.03(A), (C)                        32.035
2935.03(B)(1)                          32.035
2935.041                               131.22
2935.05                                32.036
2935.06                                32.037
2935.07                                32.038
2935.08                                32.039
2935.09                                32.040
2935.10                                32.041
2935.11                                32.042
2935.12                                32.043
2935.13                                32.044
2935.15                                32.046
2935.16                                32.047,
                                       32.999
2935.18                                32.048
2935.19                                32.049
2935.20                                32.045,
                                       32.999
2935.28                                70.08
2937.02                                32.060
2937.03                                32.061
2937.04                                32.062
2937.05                                32.062
2937.06                                32.063
2937.07                                32.063
2937.08                                32.063
2938.02                                32.075
2938.03                                32.076
2938.04                                32.077
2938.07                                32.078
2938.08                                32.079
2938.09                                32.080
2938.10                                32.081
2938.11                                32.082
2938.12                                32.083
2938.13                                32.084
2938.15                                32.085
2945.17                                32.003
2949.092                               32.009
2951.02                                32.096
2981.07                                131.30
2981.11                                130.17
2981.12                                130.17
2981.13(A)                             130.17
3701.81                                135.27
3701.82                                92.41
3701.99(B)                             92.41
3701.99(C)                             135.27
3715.05                                138.18
3715.06                                138.18
3716.11                                135.24
3716.99(C)                             135.24
3719.08(A), (E)                        138.14
3719.172                               138.15
3719.19                                138.09
3719.99(C)                             138.14
3719.99(E)                             138.15
3735.69                                154.05
3737.51(A)                             92.37
3737.61                                92.38
3737.62                                92.39
3737.63                                92.40
3737.99(B)                             92.37
3737.99(C)                             92.38
3737.99(D)                             92.39
3737.99(E)                             92.40
3743.01                                92.01
3743.25                                92.10
3743.45                                92.02
3743.54                                92.03
3743.60(E) - (L)                       92.04
3743.61(E) - (L)                       92.04
3743.63                                92.05
3743.64(C) - (G)                       92.06
3743.65(A) - (E), (G), (H)             92.02
3743.66                                92.07
3743.68                                92.09
3743.80                                92.08
3743.99(C), (D), (F) - (H)             92.99
3767.01                                95.02
3767.02                                95.03
3767.07                                95.03
3767.13                                95.04
3767.16                                95.43
3767.18                                95.44
3767.20                                95.08
3767.201                               70.09
3767.21                                95.08
3767.29                                95.46
3767.32                                95.47
3767.99(A)                             95.03
3767.99(B)                             95.46
3767.99(C)                             95.04,
                                       95.47
                                       70.09,
3767.99(D)                             95.43,
                                       95.44
3773.06                                137.09
3780.36                                138.02
3780.99                                138.02
3781.55                                133.04
3781.107                               92.35
3781.108(A), (B)                       92.36
3791.02                                92.35,
                                       92.36
3791.03                                92.36
3791.031                               135.26
4301.01                                94.01
4301.20                                94.02
4301.21                                94.03
4301.22                                94.04
4301.244                               94.01
4301.58                                94.05
4301.60                                94.06
4301.61                                94.28
4301.62                                94.07
4301.63                                94.08
4301.631                               94.09
4301.633                               94.11
4301.634                               94.12
4301.637                               94.14
4301.638                               94.04,
                                       94.13
4301.639(A), (C)                       94.15
4301.64                                94.16
4301.65                                94.10
4301.66                                94.18
4301.67                                94.19
4301.68                                94.20
4301.69                                94.13
4301.70                                94.99
4301.74                                94.27
4301.99(A)                             94.07,
                                       94.10
                                       94.04,
4301.99(B)                             94.09,
                                       94.16,
                                       94.19
                                       94.03,
                                       94.05,
                                       94.06,
                                       94.10,
4301.99(C)                             94.11,
                                       94.13,
                                       94.18,
                                       94.20,
                                       94.27
4301.99(D)                             94.13
4301.99(D), (H)                        94.04
4301.99(E)                             94.08,
                                       94.09
4301.99(F)                             94.12
4301.99(I)                             94.13
4301.99(J)                             94.10
4303.202(D)(2)                         94.17
4303.208(C)                            94.17
4303.25                                94.05
4303.40                                94.26
4303.99(D)                             94.17
4399.09                                94.21
4399.10                                94.22
4399.15                                94.24
4399.16                                94.25
4399.99(A)                             94.25
4399.99(B)                             94.21
4399.99(C)                             94.22
4399.99(D)                             94.23
4399.99(E)                             94.24
4501.01(LL)                            70.01
4501.01(TT)                            72.41
4503.05                                71.02
4503.11(A), (D)                        71.01
4503.111(A) - (C)                      71.01
4503.12(A)                             71.01
4503.21                                71.01
4503.236                               71.03
4505.18                                71.04
4506.01                                71.25
4506.011                               71.26
4506.03                                71.28
4506.04                                71.27
4506.05(A) - (D)                       71.28
4506.10(A)                             71.29
4506.12(I), (J)                        71.27
4506.15                                71.30
4506.17(H), (N)                        71.30
4506.19                                71.31
4506.20                                71.32
4506.23                                71.30
4506.99                                71.99
4507.02(A)                             71.12
4507.03                                71.12
4507.04                                71.12
4507.05(F), (I)                        71.11
4507.071(B) - (I)                      71.11
4507.213                               71.12
4507.30                                71.10
4507.31                                71.11
4507.321                               71.13,
                                       116.09
4507.35                                71.16
4507.36                                71.17
4507.99                                71.99
4509.74                                73.23
4509.102                               136.02
4510.037(J)                            71.18
                                       71.18,
4510.04                                71.20,
                                       71.21,
                                       71.22
4510.05                                71.15
4510.11                                71.18
4510.111                               71.18
4510.12                                71.19
4510.14                                71.20
4510.15                                71.15
4510.16                                71.21
4510.21                                71.22
4510.44                                73.03
4511.01                                70.01
4511.03                                70.03
4511.031                               70.29
4511.04                                70.04
4511.041                               70.04
4511.042                               70.05
4511.05                                70.05
4511.051                               70.06
4511.08                                70.07
4511.12                                70.20
4511.121                               70.20
4511.13                                70.21
4511.131                               70.22
4511.132                               70.23
4511.14                                70.24
4511.15                                70.30
4511.16                                70.26
4511.17                                70.27
4511.18                                70.28
4511.181                               73.01
4511.19(A) - (K)                       73.01
4511.191(A), (G)                       73.011
4511.192                               73.011
4511.194                               73.012
4511.20                                73.05
4511.201                               73.06
4511.202                               73.07
4511.203                               71.14
4511.204                               72.69
4511.205                               72.70
4511.21(A) - (G), (O), (P)             73.10
4511.211(A) - (E), (F)                 73.10
4511.213                               72.60
4511.214                               73.04
4511.215                               73.04
4511.216                               73.04
4511.22                                73.11
4511.23                                73.14
4511.24                                73.12
4511.25                                72.01
4511.251                               73.13
4511.26                                72.03
4511.27                                72.04
4511.28                                72.05
4511.29                                72.06
4511.30                                72.07
4511.31                                72.08
4511.32                                72.09
4511.33                                72.11
4511.34                                72.11
4511.35                                72.12
4511.36                                72.13
4511.37                                72.14
4511.38                                72.15
4511.39                                72.16
4511.40                                72.17
4511.41                                72.20
4511.42                                72.21
4511.43                                72.22
4511.431                               72.23
4511.432                               72.23
4511.44                                72.24
4511.441                               72.25
4511.45                                72.26
4511.451                               72.27
4511.452                               72.28
4511.454                               72.26
4511.46                                72.29
4511.47                                72.30
4511.48                                72.31
4511.481                               72.40
4511.49                                72.35
4511.50                                72.36
4511.51                                72.37
4511.511                               72.38
4511.512                               72.41
4511.513                               72.42
4511.514                               72.43
4511.52                                75.01
4511.521                               75.02
4511.522                               75.07
4511.53                                75.03
4511.54                                75.04
4511.55                                75.05
4511.56                                75.06
4511.60                                72.02
4511.61                                72.45
4511.62                                72.46
4511.63                                72.47
4511.64                                72.48
4511.65                                70.10
4511.66                                76.01
4511.661                               76.03
4511.67                                76.03
4511.68                                76.04
4511.681                               76.06
4511.69                                76.05
4511.70                                72.55
4511.701                               72.56
4511.71(A), (B)                        72.57
4511.711                               72.58
4511.712                               72.59
4511.713                               72.58
4511.714(A) - (D)                      72.57
4511.72                                72.60
4511.73                                72.61
4511.74                                72.62
4511.75                                72.80
4511.751                               72.81
4511.76(C), (H)(2), (I)                72.82
4511.761                               72.83
4511.762                               72.84
4511.763                               72.85
4511.764                               72.86
4511.77                                72.87
4511.771                               72.88
4511.772                               72.89
4511.79                                73.02
4511.81                                72.63
4511.82                                72.62
4511.84                                72.66
4511.85                                72.67
4511.99                                70.99
4511.991                               70.99
4513.02(A), (H)                        74.01
4513.021                               74.02
4513.03                                74.03
4513.04                                74.04
4513.05                                74.05
4513.06                                74.06
4513.07                                74.07
4513.071                               74.08
4513.08                                74.09
4513.09                                74.10
4513.10                                74.11
4513.11                                74.12
4513.111                               74.12
4513.112                               74.12
4513.113                               74.12
4513.114                               74.12
4513.115                               74.12
4513.12                                74.13
4513.13                                74.14
4513.14                                74.15
4513.15                                74.16
4513.16                                74.17
4513.17                                74.18
4513.171                               74.18
4513.18                                74.19
4513.181                               74.20
4513.182                               74.21
4513.19                                74.22
4513.20                                74.23
4513.201                               74.24
4513.202                               74.25
4513.21                                74.26
4513.22                                74.27
4513.23                                74.28
4513.24                                74.29
4513.241(C) - (K)                      74.31
4513.25                                74.30
4513.26                                74.31
4513.261                               74.32
4513.262                               74.33
4513.263                               72.64
4513.27                                74.34
4513.28                                74.35
4513.29                                74.36
4513.30                                74.41
4513.31                                74.42
4513.32                                74.43
4513.33                                74.44
4513.34                                74.40
4513.35                                32.110
4513.36                                73.15
4513.361                               73.16
4513.50                                74.38
4513.51(A), (B), (D)                   74.38
4513.60                                98.01
4513.601                               98.01
4513.61                                98.02
4513.62                                98.03
4513.63                                98.04
4513.64                                98.05
4513.65                                98.06
4513.66                                70.12
4513.68                                70.12
                                       74.10,
                                       74.21,
                                       74.23,
                                       74.24,
                                       74.25,
                                       74.30,
4513.99                                74.31,
                                       74.34,
                                       74.36,
                                       74.40,
                                       74.41,
                                       74.42,
                                       74.43
4519.01                                75.25
4519.02                                75.34
4519.04(B)                             75.35
4519.20                                75.26
4519.22                                75.26
4519.40                                75.27
4519.41                                75.28
4519.44                                75.29
4519.45                                75.30
4519.46                                75.31
4519.47                                75.32
4519.48                                75.33
4519.66                                75.36
4549.02                                73.20
4549.021                               73.21
4549.03                                73.22
4549.05                                70.11
4549.08                                71.06
4549.08(B), (C)                        70.20
4549.10                                71.07
4549.11                                71.01
4549.12                                71.01
4549.18                                71.05
4549.20                                74.39
Ch. 4729                               137.10
4731.481                               138.17
4731.99(F)                             138.17
4734.161                               138.17
4734.99(B)                             138.17
5321.05                                95.20
5503.04                                32.111
5577.02                                74.45
5577.03                                74.46
5577.04                                74.46
5577.041                               74.46
5577.042                               74.51
5577.043                               74.51
5577.044                               74.51
5577.045                               74.51
5577.05                                74.47
5577.06                                74.47
5577.10                                74.48
5577.11                                74.49
5577.12                                74.50
5577.15                                74.43
5577.99(A)                             74.45
5577.99(C)                             74.46,
                                       74.48
5577.99(D)                             74.48
5577.99(E)                             74.49
5589.01                                97.09
5589.02                                97.14
5589.08                                72.68
5589.081                               74.37
5589.12                                131.10
5589.99(A)                             97.09
                                       72.68,
5589.99(B)                             74.37,
                                       97.14,
                                       131.10
                                       
 
REFERENCES TO 1974 CODE
1974 Code Section Code Section
1974 Code Section   Code Section
10.13               10.18
30.01               31.01
30.02               31.02
30.03               31.03
30.20               38.01
30.21               38.03
30.22               38.04
30.23               38.05
30.24               38.06
30.25               38.02
31.07               30.02
31.10               96.01
31.15               30.06
31.16               30.07
31.17               30.08
31.18               30.09
32.01               32.001
32.02               32.002
32.03               32.020
32.04               32.021
32.041              32.022
32.05               32.023
32.06               32.003
32.08               32.035
32.09               32.036
32.10               32.037
32.11               32.038
32.12               32.039
32.13               32.040
32.14               32.041
32.15               32.042
32.16               32.043
32.17               32.044
32.18               32.045,
                    32.999
32.19               32.046
32.20               32.047,
                    32.999
32.21               32.048
32.22               32.049
32.25               32.060
32.26               32.061
32.27               32.062
32.28               32.062
32.29               32.063
32.30               32.063
32.31               32.063
32.35               32.075
32.36               32.076
32.38               32.078
32.39               32.079
32.40               32.080
32.41               32.081
32.42               32.082
32.43               32.083
32.44               32.084
32.45               32.085
32.50               32.095
32.53               32.096
32.60               32.110
32.62               32.110
32.65               32.004
32.67               32.005
32.68               32.006
32.70               32.007
32.71               32.008
32.72               32.009
33.04               34.03
33.05               34.04
33.06               34.06
33.10               34.20
33.11               34.21
33.12               34.22
33.16               34.35
33.17               34.36
33.18               34.36
33.19               34.37
34.01               35.01
34.02               35.02
34.03               35.03
34.04               35.04
34.05               35.05
34.06               35.06
34.07               35.01
34.08               35.01
34.09               35.07
34.10               35.08
34.11               35.09
34.25               35.20
34.26               35.21
34.27               35.22
35.12               30.10
35.20               37.03
35.21               37.04
35.22               37.05
35.23               37.06
35.25               37.07
35.26               37.08
35.27               37.01
36.01               36.01
36.02               36.02
36.03               36.03
36.04               36.04
36.05               36.06
36.06               36.07
36.07               36.08
36.08               36.09
50.01               97.01
50.02               97.02
50.03               97.03
50.04               97.04
50.05               97.05
50.06               97.06
50.07               97.07
50.08               97.08
50.09               97.09
50.10               97.10
50.11               97.11
50.16               150.025
50.17               95.50
70.08               72.18
76.06               76.07
76.07               76.08
76.08               76.09
76.09               76.10
76.10               76.11
76.11               76.12
76.12               76.13
76.14               76.15
76.15               76.16
76.16               76.17
Ch. 77, Sched. I    Ch. 77, Sched. I
Ch. 77, Sched. II   Ch. 77, Sched. II
Ch. 77, Sched. III  Ch. 77, Sched. III
Ch. 77, Sched. IV   Ch. 77, Sched. IV
Ch. 77, Sched. V    Ch. 77, Sched. V
Ch. 77, Sched. VI   Ch. 77, Sched. VI
Ch. 77, Sched. VII  Ch. 77, Sched. VII
Ch. 77, Sched. VIII Ch. 77, Sched. VIII
Ch. 77, Sched. IX   Ch. 77, Sched. IX
83.75               39.041
90.01               90.01
90.02               90.23
90.03               90.10
90.04               90.26
90.06               90.07
90.07               90.22
90.08               90.08
91.01               95.01
91.05               95.20
91.06               95.21
91.07               95.22
91.08               95.23
91.09               95.24
91.10               95.25
91.11               95.26
91.15               95.40
91.16               95.41
91.17               95.42
91.18               95.43
91.19               95.45
91.20               95.49
91.25               95.75
91.26               95.75
91.27               95.76
91.28               95.76
91.29               95.77
91.30               95.78
91.31               95.79
91.45               95.06
91.46               95.07
91.48               95.08
91.49               95.04
92.01               93.01
92.05               93.15
92.06               93.16
92.07               93.17
92.08               93.18
92.09               93.19
92.10               93.20
92.15               93.02
92.20               50.01
92.21               50.02
92.22               50.02
92.23               50.02
92.24               50.03
92.25               50.04
92.26               50.05
92.27               50.06
92.28               50.07
92.99               50.99
93.01               39.001
93.02               39.002
93.03               39.003,
                    39.999
93.04               39.003,
                    39.999
93.05               39.020
93.06               39.021
93.07               39.022
93.08               39.023
93.09               39.024
93.10               39.025
93.20               39.035
93.21               39.036
93.23               39.038
93.24               39.039
93.30               39.055
93.31               39.056
93.32               39.057
93.33               39.058
93.34               39.059
93.40               39.070
93.41               39.071
93.42               39.072
93.43               39.073
93.44               39.074
93.50               39.085
93.51               39.086
93.52               39.087
93.53               39.088
93.54               39.089
93.60               39.090
93.61               39.090
93.62               39.090
93.63               39.090
93.64               39.091,
                    39.999
93.70               39.040
93.71               39.040
93.75               39.042
93.80               39.105
93.81               39.106
93.82               39.107
93.90               39.004
93.91               39.005
93.98               39.006
93.99               39.999
94.01               111.01
94.02               111.02
94.03               111.03
94.04               111.04
96.01               96.02
96.02               96.04
96.03               96.03
96.04               96.04
96.06               96.04
96.10               96.15
96.11               96.16
96.12               96.17
96.13               96.18
96.14               96.19
96.15               96.20
96.16               96.21
96.17               96.22
96.18               96.23
96.20               96.24
96.21               96.25
96.22               96.26
96.23               96.27
96.24               96.28
96.25               96.29
96.26               96.30
96.27               96.33
96.28               96.34
97.01               91.01
97.02               150.022,
                    150.023
98.02               92.42
111.01              110.01
111.02              110.02
111.03              110.03
111.04              110.04
111.05              110.05
111.06              110.06
111.07              110.07
111.08              110.08
113.01              113.01
113.02              113.02
113.03              113.02
113.05              113.03
113.07              113.05
114.01              94.05
114.02              94.20
114.03              94.07
114.04              94.16
114.05              94.04
114.06              94.04
114.07(A)           94.08
114.07(B)           94.10
114.07(C)           94.11
114.07(D)           94.12
114.07(E)           94.12
114.08              94.19
118.01              114.01
118.02              114.02
118.03              114.03
118.04              114.04
118.05              114.05
118.06              114.06
118.07              114.07
118.08              114.08
118.09              114.09
118.10              114.10
118.11              114.11
132.20              40.01
132.21              40.02
132.22              40.03
132.23              40.04
132.24              40.05
132.35              132.25
132.36              132.26
132.37              132.27
132.38              132.28
132.39              132.29
132.40              132.30
132.41              132.31
132.42              132.32
132.55              132.40
132.56              132.41
132.57              132.42
132.58              132.43
132.99(B)           132.33
132.99(C)           132.44
150.01              150.001
150.02              150.002
150.03              150.003
150.04              150.003
150.05              150.004
150.06              150.020
150.07              150.005
150.08              150.006
150.09              150.021
150.10              150.100
150.12              150.100
150.13              150.100
150.14              150.101
150.145             150.102
150.15              150.035
150.16              150.037
150.17              150.036
150.18              150.037
150.19              150.037
150.20              150.038
150.22              150.038
150.23              150.037
150.24              150.039
150.25              150.040
150.26              150.041
150.27              150.042
150.28              150.043
150.29              150.041
150.30              150.044
150.31              150.048
150.32              150.048
150.33              150.045
150.34              150.047
150.35              150.046
150.36              150.060
150.37              150.061
150.38              150.062
150.39              150.063
150.40              150.064
150.41              150.065
150.42              150.066
150.43              150.066
150.44              150.067
150.45              150.068
150.46              150.024
150.47              150.024
150.48              150.103
150.49              150.104
150.50              150.104
150.51              150.080
150.52              150.081
150.53              150.081
150.54              150.082
150.55              150.082
150.56              150.083
150.57              150.087
150.58              150.084
150.59              150.085
150.60              150.086
150.61              150.105
150.62              150.105
150.63              150.105
150.64(A)           150.105
150.64(B)           150.106
150.65              150.068
150.66              150.009
150.67              150.009
150.68              150.007
150.69              150.008
150.70              150.107
150.71              150.108
150.72              150.007
153.01              152.01
153.02              152.02
153.03              152.03
153.04              152.04
153.05              152.05
153.06              152.06
153.07              152.07
153.08              152.08
153.20              152.20
153.21              152.21
153.22              152.22
153.23              152.23
153.24              152.24
153.35              152.35
153.36              152.36
153.37              152.37
153.99              152.99
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
77A      1-15-52     31.01
147-A    6-19-56     96.02
163-A    10-15-57    35.20
192-A    5-5-59      96.03
                     50.01,
197-A    10-20-59    50.02 -
                     50.06
238-A    5-15-61     76.12
243-A    8-1-61      91.01
255-A    6-19-62     34.20
256-A    9-4-62      34.04
297-A    5-18-65     96.04
318-A    5-17-66     96.04
340-A    11-21-67    T.S.O. IV
347-A    5-21-68     76.11
351-A    7-16-68     40.01 -
                     40.05
361-A    7-3-69      50.07
363-A    11-4-69     150.025
378-A    8-4-70      T.S.O. IV
379-A    4-20-71     T.S.O. IV
                     39.001,
                     39.002,
                     39.004 -
                     39.006,
                     39.020 -
                     39.025,
                     39.035,
                     39.036,
                     39.038 -
                     39.041,
384-A    4-1-71      39.055 -
                     39.059,
                     39.070 -
                     39.074,
                     39.085 -
                     39.088,
                     39.090,
                     39.091,
                     39.105 -
                     39.107,
                     39.999
386-A    7-6-71      T.S.O. IV
387-A    8-1-71      T.S.O. IV
388-A    5-18-71     33.03
392-A    7-6-71      T.S.O. IV
395-A    9-7-71      34.06
399-A    8-17-71     T.S.O. IV
400-A    11-16-76    35.21
402-A    11-16-71    34.03
403-A    1-4-72      30.02
404-A    1-4-72      35.22
407-A    2-28-72     96.01
425-A    12-19-72    35.21
434-A    6-5-73      76.12
455-A    2-5-74      34.21
496-A    5-6-75      39.003,
                     39.999
504-A    10-7-75     76.13
510-A    - -76       38.01 -
                     38.06
517-A    5-4-76      96.04
531-A    5-17-77     T.S.O. IV
547-A    3-21-78     76.11
548-A    3-21-78     76.13
562-A    6-20-78     39.020
564-A    7-18-78     76.07
567-A    7-18-78     30.06
578-A    12-19-78    76.13
579-A    1-2-79      T.S.O. IV
585-A    2-20-79     96.01
587-A    2-20-79     95.50
589-A    4-3-79      T.S.O. IV
590-A    3-6-79      150.082,
                     150.084
601-A    5-1-79      T.S.O. I
606-A    7-3-79      150.005,
                     150.006
612-A    7-17-79     T.S.O. I
616-A    11-6-79     114.01 -
                     114.11
620-A    11-6-79     T.S.O. I
80-641   4-1-80      T.S.O. I
80-642   5-6-80      35.21,
                     35.22
80-644   4-15-80     96.04
80-648   5-20-80     96.01
80-653   9-16-80     T.S.O. IV
81-662   1-6-81      39.085,
                     39.089
81-667   1-20-81     30.07
81-671   2-3-81      T.S.O. I
81-679   3-17-81     T.S.O. I
-        5-5-81      35.07,
                     35.08
81-681   8-4-81      150.022
81-682   ----        35.08
                     35.01,
81-682   5-5-81      35.03,
                     35.04,
                     35.06
                     96.15 -
81-685   5-19-81     96.30,
                     96.33,
                     96.34
81-693   10-6-81     92.42
81-695   11-3-81     T.S.O. I
82-662   4-6-82      T.S.O. I
82-702   1-19-82     150.108
82-714   5-4-82      T.S.O. I
82-720   7-6-82      96.25
82-724   8-3-82      T.S.O. I
82-730   11-2-82     T.S.O. IV
83-746   7-5-83      T.S.O. I
83-748   8-2-83      T.S.O. I
83-753   10-4-83     T.S.O. I
83-754   12-6-83     T.S.O. I
                     39.006,
83-756   12-6-83     39.020,
                     39.058,
                     39.999
83-757   1-3-84      76.15
84-762   2-7-84      34.21
84-769   4-17-84     96.04
84-770   - -         T.S.O. IV
84-771   8-7-84      150.023
84-774   7-3-84      37.07
84-775   8-7-84      T.S.O. I
84-777   10-2-84     96.01
84-778   10-2-84     T.S.O. I
84-780   10-16-84    Ch. 77, Sched. IX
84-781   12-4-84     32.020
85-786   2-5-85      T.S.O. I
85-787   2-5-85      T.S.O. I
85-791   4-16-85     T.S.O. I
85-793   5-7-85      T.S.O. I
85-795   5-21-85     T.S.O. I
85-797   8-6-85      T.S.O. I
85-799   10-1-85     T.S.O. I
86-691   7-1-86      T.S.O. I
86-790   1-7-86      T.S.O. I
86-792   4-1-86      96.04
86-793   4-1-86      T.S.O. I
86-798   5-6-86      T.S.O. I
86-799   5-6-86      T.S.O. I
86-800   5-6-86      T.S.O. I
86-802   6-3-86      T.S.O. IV
86-803   6-3-86      T.S.O. IV
86-807   10-7-86     T.S.O. I
86-808   11-18-86    T.S.O. I
87-813   3-3-87      T.S.O. I
87-815   3-17-87     T.S.O. I
87-817   3-17-87     T.S.O. I
87-819   3-17-87     T.S.O. I
87-820   3-17-87     T.S.O. I
87-823   6-2-87      T.S.O. I
87-825   8-4-87      Ch. 77, Sched. I
87-826   8-4-87      150.022
87-829   9-1-87      T.S.O. I
87-830   9-15-87     T.S.O. I
87-836   11-17-87    T.S.O. I
87-837   12-1-87     Ch. 77, Sched. VII
88-841   3-1-88      T.S.O. I
88-845   3-22-88     T.S.O. I
88-846   4-5-88      Ch. 77, Sched. IX
88-847   3-22-88     T.S.O. I
88-854   6-7-88      T.S.O. I
88-855   6-7-88      T.S.O. I
88-856   6-7-88      T.S.O. I
88-857   6-7-88      T.S.O. I
88-866   9-6-88      T.S.O. I
88-867   9-6-88      T.S.O. I
88-869   9-21-88     T.S.O. I
88-873   12-20-88    34.21,
                     35.09
88-874   12-20-88    37.08
88-877   12-20-88    30.08
89-881   2-7-89      T.S.O. I
89-888   5-16-89     T.S.O. I
89-892   7-11-89     T.S.O. I
89-894   7-11-89     T.S.O. I
89-895   8-1-89      T.S.O. I
89-897   9-5-89      T.S.O. I
89-898   9-5-89      T.S.O. I
89-900   10-3-89     30.10
89-902   11-7-89     T.S.O. I
89-903   10-27-89    T.S.O. I
89-904   10-24-89    37.08
89-905   10-24-89    34.22,
                     35.09
90-911   1-23-90     T.S.O. I
                     39.002,
                     39.006,
90-914   2-20-90     39.020,
                     39.022,
                     39.038,
                     39.072
90-915   2-20-90     T.S.O. I
90-921   4-17-90     96.04
90-923   4-17-90     T.S.O. I
90-929   8-7-90      T.S.O. IV
90-931   6-5-90      76.16
90-933   6-6-90      T.S.O. I
90-936   7-10-90     T.S.O. I
90-938   8-7-90      T.S.O. I
90-939   8-7-90      T.S.O. I
90-940   8-7-90      T.S.O. I
90-941   8-7-90      T.S.O. I
90-942   8-28-90     T.S.O. I
90-946   9-4-90      T.S.O. I
90-948   9-4-90      90.01
90-952   11-6-90     30.09
90-957   11-20-90    T.S.O. I,
                     10.18
91-734   9-17-91     T.S.O. I
91-735   9-3-90      34.35
91-737   9-17-91     T.S.O. I
                     50.01,
91-935   10-2-90     50.02,
                     50.05,
                     50.99
91-965   2-5-91      T.S.O. IV
91-971   3-5-91      T.S.O. I
91-981   5-21-91     76.17
91-987   9-3-91      T.S.O. I
91-1001  1-21-92     150.103
91-1002  1-21-92     76.12
91-1004  1-21-92     T.S.O. I
92-1002  1-21-92     76.12
92-1007  - -         T.S.O. I
92-1012  3-3-92      T.S.O. I
92-1013  3-17-92     T.S.O. I
92-1014  3-17-92     T.S.O. I
92-1015  3-17-92     T.S.O. I
92-1016  3-17-92     T.S.O. I
92-1021  4-7-92      96.22
92-1030  6-2-92      50.08
92-1032  6-9-92      T.S.O. I
92-1037  8-4-92      96.22
92-1041  8-11-92     T.S.O. I
92-1047  12-15-92    50.08
93-1049  1-19-93     T.S.O. I
                     152.01 -
                     152.08,
                     152.20 -
93-1055  2-23-93     152.24,
                     152.35 -
                     152.37,
                     152.99
93-1056  3-16-93     T.S.O. I
93-1058  3-16-93     T.S.O. I
93-1059  3-16-93     30.10
93-1063  5-18-93     34.21
93-1066  5-18-93     T.S.O. I
93-1070  6-29-93     T.S.O. I
93-1077  9-7-93      T.S.O. I
93-1078  9-7-93      34.06
93-1083  12-7-93     T.S.O. I
94-1084  1-4-94      111.01 -
                     111.04
94-1087  2-1-94      T.S.O. I
94-1089  3-15-94     Ch. 77, Sched. I
94-1094  3-15-94     30.10
94-1102  5-17-94     T.S.O. I
94-1103  7-5-94      Ch. 77, Sched. II
94-1105  6-7-94      T.S.O. I
94-1108  7-5-94      T.S.O. I
94-1113  8-16-94     T.S.O. I
94-1121  10-4-94     132.40 -
                     132.44
94-1123  11-1-94     150.005,
                     150.006
94-1124  11-1-94     37.01
94-1126  12-6-94     Ch. 77, Sched. II
95-1134  1-3-95      30.10
95-1141  3-21-95     Ch. 77, Scheds. III,
                     VII
95-1145  5-2-95      T.S.O. I
95-1146  5-16-95     132.25 -
                     132.33
95-1147  5-16-95     T.S.O. I
95-1148  5-16-95     T.S.O. I
95-1149  5-16-95     96.25
95-1156  8-22-95     T.S.O. I
95-1161  10-3-95     150.006
95-1164  11-21-95    Ch. 77, Sched. VII
95-1165  11-7-95     Ch. 77, Sched. I
95-1179  12-19-95    37.01
95-1180  12-19-95    37.02
96-1181  1-16-96     T.S.O. I
96-1185  3-19-96     T.S.O. I
96-1186  4-16-96     37.01
96-1187  4-2-96      T.S.O. I
96-1188  5-7-96      T.S.O. I
96-1191  5-21-96     T.S.O. I
96-1192  5-21-96     T.S.O. I
96-1194  6-4-96      50.02
96-1196  7-2-96      50.08
96-1197  7-2-96      T.S.O. I
96-1198  8-6-96      T.S.O. III
96-1201  9-3-96      76.14
96-1202  10-1-96     76.14
97-1205  1-7-97      T.S.O. I
97-1212  1-21-97     T.S.O. I
97-1213  1-21-97     T.S.O. I
97-1214  1-21-97     T.S.O. I
97-1215  1-21-97     T.S.O. I
97-1216  1-21-97     T.S.O. I
97-1224  3-18-97     T.S.O. I
97-1226  5-20-97     135.25
97-1227  8-19-97     T.S.O. I
97-1228  10-7-97     T.S.O. I
97-1234  12-16-97    76.18,
                     Ch. 77, Sched. X
98-1236  1-20-98     T.S.O. I
98-1237  2-17-98     154.01 -
                     154.07
98-1245  3-17-98     50.08
98-1254  4-7-98      T.S.O. I
98-1255  4-7-98      T.S.O. I
98-1257  7-21-98     Ch. 77, Sched. II
98-1264  6-16-98     96.22
98-1269  7-21-98     T.S.O. I
98-1270  8-18-98     T.S.O. III
98-1272  9-1-98      133.16
98-1274  9-15-98     T.S.O. II
98-1278  11-17-98    T.S.O. III
99-1285  4-20-99     37.03 -
                     37.06
99-1294  10-5-99     T.S.O. IV
99-1297  11-2-99     T.S.O. I
99-1298  11-2-99     T.S.O. I
99-1299  11-16-99    41.01
99-1300  2-1-00      Adopting Ordinance
00-1309  4-4-00      37.03 -
                     37.06
00-1312  4-4-00      50.08
00-1313  4-18-00     T.S.O. I
00-1315  5-16-00     T.S.O. II
00-1316  5-16-00     Ch. 96
00-1317  6-6-00      T.S.O. I
00-1318  6-6-00      37.04
00-1320  7-11-00     34.21
00-1321  7-11-00     T.S.O. I
00-1332  11-21-00    T.S.O. I
00-1336  1-02-01     90.26
00-1337  1-16-01     T.S.O. I
00-1339  12-19-00    37.03 -
                     37.06
                     39.001 -
                     39.006,
                     39.020 -
                     39.024,
                     39.026,
                     39.035 -
                     39.041,
01-1348  1-16-01     39.055 -
                     39.059,
                     39.070 -
                     39.074,
                     39.085 -
                     39.091,
                     39.105 -
                     39.107,
                     39.999
01-1350  2-6-01      T.S.O. I
01-1351  1-16-01     T.S.O. II
01-1354  3-6-01      T.S.O. I
01-1364  7-17-01     T.S.O. I
01-1367  9-4-01      T.S.O. I
01-1368  9-4-01      T.S.O. I
01-1369  9-4-01      T.S.O. I
02-1379  2-5-02      T.S.O. III
02-1383  2-5-02      T.S.O. I
02-1385  3-19-02     34.21
02-1386  3-19-02     50.08
02-1394  5-21-02     150.103
03-1413  3-18-03     Ch. 77, Sched. II
03-1419  4-15-03     50.08
03-1421  6-17-03     T.S.O. I
03-1422  6-17-03     T.S.O. III
                     153.01,
                     153.02,
                     153.10 -
                     153.20,
                     153.25,
                     153.26,
                     153.30 -
                     153.37,
03-1429  10-7-03     153.40 -
                     153.43,
                     153.50 -
                     153.56,
                     153.60 -
                     153.66,
                     153.70,
                     153.73,
                     Appendix, Ch. 153
03-1435  10-7-03     Ch. 77, Sched. II
03-1439  12-2-03     T.S.O. I
04-1442  3-16-04     T.S.O. I
04-1445  4-20-04     35.30
04-1447  5-4-04      152.04
04-1451  8-17-04     34.07
04-1452  10-19-04    Adopting Ordinance
05-1463  5-17-05     37.01
05-1467  7-19-05     Ch. 77, Sched. II
05-1468  9-20-05     Adopting Ordinance
                     39.001 -
                     39.006,
                     39.020 -
                     39.026,
                     39.035 -
                     39.041,
                     39.055 -
05-1469  12-21-05    39.059,
                     39.070 -
                     39.074,
                     39.085 -
                     39.091,
                     39.105 -
                     39.107,
                     39.999
05-1472  1-3-06      T.S.O. III
05-1473  12-21-05    T.S.O. I
06-1478  2-7-06      30.10
06-1479  1-3-06      T.S.O. I
06-1482  4-18-06     96.22
06-1484  5-2-06      34.08
06-1485  6-20-06     T.S.O. I
06-1487  6-20-06     Ch. 77, Sch. IX
06-1488  8-29-06     Adopting Ordinance
06-1492  8-29-06     T.S.O. I
06-1493  10-3-06     T.S.O. I
06-1494  12-5-06     T.S.O. I
                     153.02,
                     153.15,
07-1507  6-19-07     153.26,
                     153.31,
                     153.33,
                     153.36
07-1514  11-20-07    92.30
08-1520  4-1-08      117.01 -
                     117.11
08-1521  3-18-08     T.S.O. II
08-1523  4-15-08     T.S.O. II
08-1524  4-15-08     T.S.O. II
08-1525  4-15-08     T.S.O. II
08-1528  5-20-08     T.S.O. II
08-1530  5-20-08     T.S.O. I
08-1533  9-23-08     T.S.O. I
08-1535  9-23-08     T.S.O. I
08-1536  11-4-08     138.03
08-1537  11-4-08     150.103
08-1544  12-16-08    T.S.O. I
08-1545  12-16-08    39.006
09-1547  2-3-09      150.103
09-1548  2-17-09     150.103
09-1550  5-5-09      T.S.O. II
09-1553  7-21-09     50.08
09-1557  9-16-09     T.S.O. II
09-1559  10-6-09     T.S.O. II
09-1562  12-1-09     74.391
09-1563  11-17-09    T.S.O. II
10-1570  4-6-10      118.01 -
                     118.15
10-1572  3-16-10     T.S.O. II
10-1573  3-16-10     T.S.O. II
10-1574  4-6-10      T.S.O. II
10-1575  4-6-10      119.01 -
                     119.25
10-1577  4-20-10     T.S.O. II
10-1582  8-17-10     T.S.O. I
10-1583  8-17-10     T.S.O. II
10-1584  10-5-10     T.S.O. I
10-1600  2-15-11     T.S.O. IV
10-1612  5-3-11      T.S.O. I
10-1614  6-15-11     T.S.O. I
11-1620  10-18-11    T.S.O. IV
11-1622  12-6-11     33.04
12-1629  2-21-12     T.S.O. I
12-1630  2-21-12     T.S.O. I
12-1631  2-21-12     T.S.O. I
12-1632  2-21-12     39.003,
                     39.006
12-1634  2-21-12     T.S.O. I
12-1638  3-20-12     T.S.O. I
12-1640  4-3-12      T.S.O. I
12-1641  4-3-12      T.S.O. I
12-1643  7-17-12     39.006
12-1647  9-4-12      T.S.O. I
13-1663  2-5-13      T.S.O. I
13-1664  3-5-13      T.S.O. IV
13-1665  4-16-13     T.S.O. I
13-1669  7-16-13     T.S.O. I
13-1670  8-20-13     T.S.O. I
13-1671  8-20-13     T.S.O. I
13-1677  11-19-13    T.S.O. I
13-1681  12-3-13     T.S.O. I
14-1692  1-7-14      50.08
14-1694  1-7-14      T.S.O. I
14-1696  2-18-14     T.S.O. I
14-1697  2-18-14     T.S.O. I
14-1702  6-3-14      Ch. 77, Sch. III
14-1704  6-3-14      T.S.O. I
14-1705  6-17-14     Adopting Ordinance
14-1707  7-1-14      T.S.O. I
14-1708  7-15-14     39.020
14-1711  7-15-14     T.S.O. I
14-1723  10-21-14    39.040
14-1724  10-21-14    T.S.O. I
14-1725  10-21-14    153.31
14-1728  12-16-14    T.S.O. I
14-1729  12-16-14    T.S.O. I
15-1739  2-3-15      T.S.O. I
15-1741  2-3-15      T.S.O. II
15-1742  2-17-15     T.S.O. I
15-1743  2-17-15     T.S.O. I
15-1744  2-17-15     T.S.O. I
15-1745  2-17-15     T.S.O. II
15-1746  3-17-15     T.S.O. I
15-1747  4-21-15     T.S.O. I
15-1750  5-19-15     T.S.O. I
                     39A.01 -
15-1759  11-3-15     39A.26,
                     39A.99
15-1761  11-17-15    T.S.O. I
15-1765  12-15-15    T.S.O. I
15-1766  12-15-15    Adopting Ordinance
15-1768  12-15-15    T.S.O. II
16-1771  2-2-16      T.S.O. II
16-1772  2-16-16     153.15
16-1776  3-1-16      153.33
                     156.01 -
16-1782  6-21-16     156.06,
                     156.99
16-1787  8-16-16     T.S.O. I
16-1800  11-1-16     41.02
16-1808  1-3-17      T.S.O. I
17-1812  2-21-17     96.35
17-1824  9-19-17     Ch. 77, Sch. I
17-1826  9-19-17     115.02
17-1831  11-21-17    33.03
17-1836  12-19-17    T.S.O. I
17-1840  12-19-17    90.29,
                     95.07
17-1842  1-2-18   T.S.O. I
18-1847  3-6-18   T.S.O. II
18-1851  5-1-18      T.S.O. I
18-1852  5-1-18   T.S.O. I
18-1853  5-1-18   T.S.O. I
18-1855  6-19-18     T.S.O. I
18-1856  6-19-18     34.21
18-1860  8-21-18     150.005,
                     150.006
18-1863  9-18-18     50.99
19-1877  2-5-19      76.13
19-1879  2-19-19     T.S.O. II
19-1882  3-19-19     T.S.O. II
19-1885  8-20-19     76.19
19-1887  8-20-19     T.S.O. I
19-1888  8-20-19     118.01 -
                     118.15
19-1898  12-17-19    Ch. 77, Sch. II
19-1900  12-17-19    T.S.O. I
19-1901  12-17-19    T.S.O. I
20-1909  5-19-20     95.64
20-1917  9-15-20     34.21
20-1921  10-6-20     35.10
20-1931  1-5-21      99.01 -
                     99.10
20-1932  1-5-21      T.S.O. I
20-1933  1-5-21      T.S.O. I
20-1934  1-5-21      T.S.O. I
21-1940  2-16-21     T.S.O. I
21-1943  4-6-21   T.S.O. II
21-1944  4-6-21      T.S.O. II
21-1945  4-20-21     76.04
21-1946  4-20-21     Ch. 77, Sch. I
21-1947  4-20-21     T.S.O. I
                     100.01 -
21-1950  5-18-21     100.09,
                     150.130 -
                     150.138
21-1951  6-15-21     Ch. 77, Sch. I
21-1956  9-7-21      150.103
21-1962  9-7-21      T.S.O. II
21-1969  11-2-21     110.09
21-1977  12-21-21    Adopting Ordinance
21-1981  12-21-21    T.S.O. II
21-1982  12-21-21    T.S.O. I
21-1983  12-21-21    T.S.O. II
22-1987  6-28-22     30.11
22-1989  8-16-22     153.31
22-1992  9-20-22     T.S.O. III
23-2009  1-17-23     34.21
23-2010  1-17-23     T.S.O. I
                     101.01,
23-2016  9-19-23     101.02,
                     101.99
23-2024  11-7-23     T.S.O. I
23-2025  11-7-23     T.S.O. I
23-2029  12-19-23    T.S.O. I
24-2040  1-2-24      T.S.O. I
24-2041  4-16-24     T.S.O. III
24-2042  4-16-24     T.S.O. I
24-2043  4-16-24     T.S.O. I
                     39A.02,
                     39A.03,
24-2044  5-21-24     39A.05,
                     39A.18,
                     39A.27
                     156.01—
24-2046  7-16-24     156.05,
                     156.99
24-2049  10-1-24     155.091
24-2052  10-15-24    110.09
24-2053  11-5-24     110.10
24-2057  12-17-24    155.032
24-2060  1-7-25      95.061
                     155.022,
                     155.032,
                     155.042,
25-2061  2-4-25      155.08,
                     155.128,
                     155.213,
                     155.2191
25-2062  3-3-25      76.041
25-2063  11-18-25    T.S.O. I
                    
 
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
580      6-3-75      150.102
85-673   8-6-85      T.S.O. I
87-705   8-4-87      T.S.O. I
88-708   1-5-88      T.S.O. I
89-721   8-1-89      T.S.O. I
92-743   9-1-92      T.S.O. I
93-751   4-6-93      T.S.O. I
94-760   2-1-94      T.S.O. I
08-967   4-1-08      T.S.O. I
08-973   8-19-08     T.S.O. I
08-975   10-7-08     T.S.O. I
08-981   12-16-08    T.S.O. I
09-983   2-3-09      T.S.O. I
09-987   5-5-09      T.S.O. I
09-1000  12-1-09     T.S.O. I
10-1003  3-16-10     150.120
10-1014  8-17-10     T.S.O. I
10-1015  8-17-10     T.S.O. I
10-1018  11-2-10     T.S.O. III
11-1023  7-19-11     T.S.O. I
12-1029  3-20-12     T.S.O. I
14-1056  5-6-14      T.S.O. I
14-1059  6-17-15     T.S.O. I
14-1066  10-21-14    T.S.O. I
15-1069  2-3-15      T.S.O. I
15-1071  4-7-15      T.S.O. I
15-1072  4-7-15      T.S.O. I
16-1084  2-2-16      T.S.O. I
16-1100  1-3-17      T.S.O. I
17-1106  4-4-17      T.S.O. I
18-1120  9-4-18      T.S.O. I
                     155.001 -
                     155.008,
                     155.011 -
                     155.016,
                     155.021 -
                     155.024,
                     155.031 -
                     155.034,
                     155.041 -
                     155.044,
                     155.051 -
                     155.054,
                     155.061 -
                     155.068,
                     155.08,
                     155.091 -
                     155.095,
                     155.101 -
                     155.108,
                     155.111 -
21-1165  7-20-21     155.114,
                     155.121 -
                     155.1299,
                     155.131 -
                     155.139,
                     155.141 -
                     155.143,
                     155.151 -
                     155.155,
                     155.161,
                     155.162,
                     155.171 -
                     155.175,
                     155.181 -
                     155.186,
                     155.191 -
                     155.193,
                     155.201 -
                     155.208,
                     155.211 -
                     155.2192
                    
 
 
