NEW FRANKLIN, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-1 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through December 30, 2020
State legislation current through 1-6-2023
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CITY OF NEW FRANKLIN, OHIO
CHARTER
Adopted November 2006
Amended November 24, 2014
Amended November 26, 2019
Article I: Name; Boundaries; Form of Government
   
1.01   Name and Boundary
   
1.02   Form of Government
Article II: Corporate Powers
   
2.01   Powers Granted
   
2.02   Exercise of Powers
   
2.03   Intergovernmental Relations
Article III: The Mayor
   
3.01   Election and Term of Office
   
3.02   Qualifications
   
3.03   Vacancy
   
3.04   Judicial Powers
   
3.05   Powers of the Mayor
   
3.06   Veto Powers
Article IV: Council
   
4.01   Election and Term of Office
   
4.02   Wards
   
4.03   Qualifications
   
4.04   President and Vice President
   
4.05   Vacancies
   
4.06   Powers of Council
   
4.07   Clerk of Council
   
4.08   Rules and Journal of Council
   
4.09   Organizational Meeting
   
4.10   Regular Council Meetings
   
4.11   Special Council Meetings
   
4.12   Executive Session
   
4.13   Quorum
   
4.14   Rights in Council of Executive Officers
   
4.15   Council Relationship to Administrative Officers
Article V: Legislative Procedure
   
5.01   Form of Action by Council
   
5.02   Introduction of Ordinances and Resolutions
   
5.03   Form of Ordinances and Resolutions
   
5.04   Reading Ordinances and Resolutions
   
5.05   Committee Deliberations
   
5.06   Vote Required for Passage
   
5.07   Content of Emergency Legislation
   
5.08   Effective Date of Legislation
   
5.09   Authentication
   
5.10   Recording Legislation
   
5.11   Amendment
   
5.12   Zoning Measures
   
5.13   Adoption of Technical Codes
   
5.14   Codification
   
5.15   Public Notice
Article VI: Administrative Departments
   
6.01   Establishment of Departments
   
6.02   General Provisions
   
6.03   Director of Finance
   
6.04   Director of Law
   
6.05   Director of Public Safety
   
6.06   Director of Public Service
Article VII: Boards and Commissions
   
7.01   Establishment
   
7.02   General Provisions
   
7.03   Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board
   
7.04   Parks and Recreation Board
   
7.05   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
7.06   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
7.07   Charter Review Commission
Article VIII: Finance and Taxation
   
8.01   General Provisions
   
8.02   Finance Department
   
8.03   Allocation of Income Tax Revenues
   
8.04   Limitation on Total Municipal Income Tax
Article IX: Nominations and Elections
   
9.01   Effect of State Law
   
9.02   Regular, Primary and Special Municipal Elections
   
9.03   Nominations
   
9.04   Nominating Petitions
Article X: General Provisions
   
10.01   Initiative
   
10.02   Referendum
   
10.03   Recall
   
10.04   Resignation
   
10.05   Removal
   
10.06   Conflicts of Interest, Ethics, Campaign Financing
   
10.07   Oath of Office
   
10.08   Separability
Article XI: Charter
   
11.01   Amendments to Charter
   
11.02   Effect of Charter Upon Existing Laws and Rights
Article XII: Eminent Domain
   
12.01   Public Use
Article XIII: Transitional Provisions
   
13.01   Effective Date
   
13.02   Creation of Wards
   
13.03   Initial Municipality Officers
   
13.04   Abolishment of Offices
   
13.05   First Election
   
13.06   Continuance of Present Employees
   
13.07   Continuance of Present Board and Commission Members
   
13.08   Continuation of Ordinances
   
13.09   Continuance of Contracts and Public Improvements
   
13.10   Pending Actions and Proceedings
   
13.11   Succession
   
13.12   Definition of Majority
A CHARTER FOR NEW FRANKLIN, OHIO
PREAMBLE
In order that we may have the benefits of municipal home rule and exercise all
of the powers of local self-government conferred under the Constitution and
Statutes of the State of Ohio, We, the citizens of the City of New Franklin,
Ohio, do hereby adopt this Charter for our municipality.
ARTICLE I: NAME; BOUNDARIES; FORM OF GOVERNMENT
1.01 NAME AND BOUNDARY.
The present municipality, known as the City of New Franklin, Ohio, shall
continue to be a body politic and corporate, under the name of the City of New
Franklin, as the population requires, and with the same boundaries, with powers
and authority to change its boundaries and annex other territory contiguous
thereto in the same manner authorized by the general laws of Ohio.
1.02 FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The municipal government provided for by this Charter shall be known as the
‘Mayor/Council Plan.’ The representative branch shall consist of the Mayor and
Council elected by the voters of the Municipality, and shall possess
respectively the judicial and legislative powers specified in this Charter.
ARTICLE II: CORPORATE POWERS
2.01 POWERS GRANTED.
The Municipality shall have all the powers that may now or hereafter lawfully
be possessed or exercised by municipal corporations under the Constitution and
laws of Ohio. Title to all real property shall be taken in the name of the
municipality.
2.02 EXERCISE OF POWERS.
All powers shall be exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter, or if
not so prescribed, in the manner provided by ordinance or resolution of
Council. When not prescribed in this Charter or by ordinance or resolution,
then the powers shall be exercised in the manner provided by the laws of Ohio
until Council provides a different manner of exercising the powers.
2.03 INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS.
The Municipality may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions
and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any state of the United States or any state civil
division or agency, or the United States or any of its agencies.
ARTICLE III: THE MAYOR
3.01 ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.
The Mayor, a full-time position, shall be elected at alternate regular
Municipal elections for a term of four years commencing on the first day of
January next following his or her election, and shall serve until his or her
successor is elected and qualified. The election shall be non-partisan.
The Mayor shall be deemed a full-time employee in the municipality commencing
January 1, 2010. The full-time salary for the position shall be established by
Council in accordance with Section 4.06 A 4.
The Mayor shall have all of the powers and duties provided by this Charter and
by the general laws of Ohio to the extent such laws are not inconsistent with
this Charter.
3.02 QUALIFICATIONS.
The Mayor shall be a qualified elector of the Municipality and shall have been
immediately prior to the date of election a continuous resident of the
Municipality for at least two (2) years. During the term of office, the Mayor
shall continue to be a continuous resident and a qualified elector.
The Mayor shall not, directly or indirectly, conduct any business with, nor be
otherwise employed by, the Municipality, or hold any other public office,
except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The Mayor may be a Notary Public
or a member of the State Militia or reserve Corps of the United States. The
Mayor shall have an office in the administration building of the Municipality
and shall be considered a full-time elected official to properly conduct the
business of the Municipality.
If the Mayor shall cease to possess any of the qualifications for such office,
the Mayor shall forfeit the office.
(Amended 11-26-2019)
3.03 VACANCY.
   (A)   Temporary Vacancy.
   When the Mayor is temporarily absent from the Municipality or is temporarily
unable for any reason to perform the duties of the office, the President of
Council shall act as Mayor, with all the duties, rights and powers of the Mayor
during the period of his/her absence or inability to perform his/her duties. If
both the Mayor and the President of Council are temporarily absent or unable to
perform their duties, the Vice President of Council shall act as Mayor. When
the President or Vice President of Council shall become Acting Mayor, in
accordance with the provisions of this section, he/she shall not cease to be a
member of Council.
   (B)   Permanent Vacancy.
   In the event of the death, disqualification, recall, removal, or resignation
of the Mayor, the President of Council shall thereupon become Mayor and shall
serve until a successor is elected and qualified. In the event the President of
Council shall decline the office of Mayor, he/she shall remain as President of
Council. The Council shall then appoint a member of Council to fill the vacancy
in the office of Mayor. Such appointment shall be made by an affirmative vote
of a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of Council. In this event the
President of Council or other Council member shall become Mayor, in accordance
with the provisions of this section. He/She shall not cease to be a member of
Council, and shall retain full voting privileges.
   (C)   Election to Fill A Permanent Vacancy.
   In the event of a permanent vacancy in the office of Mayor as set forth in
Section 3.03 B, Council shall schedule a special election to fill the vacancy,
provided that such election shall occur more than ninety (90) days subsequent
to the vacancy and at least ninety (90) days prior to the next regular
Municipal election following the vacancy. Council shall establish filing
deadlines at the time of setting the date for the election which shall provide
candidates no less than thirty (30) days to prepare and file petitions of
candidacy.
   (D)   Primary Election to Fill Permanent Vacancy.
   In the event that four (4) or more persons file petitions of candidacy to
fill the vacancy, Council shall schedule a special primary election at least
thirty (30) days prior to the date of election scheduled pursuant to Section
3.03 C. The two (2) persons receiving the highest vote totals in the special
primary election shall be designated candidates for such office.
   (E)   Term of Office.
   The person newly elected Mayor pursuant to Section 3.03 C and D. shall
assume office immediately upon certification of the results of the election by
the Summit County Board of Elections and shall serve as Mayor for the unexpired
term of the Mayor in whose office the vacancy occurred.
   (F)   Time Requirement.
   The employment time requirement in effect for the Mayor at the time of the
vacancy shall not apply to the member of Council who temporarily fills the
office of Mayor.
   (G)   Salary.
   The member of Council who fills the office of Mayor pursuant to Section 3.03
A or Section 3.03 B shall continue to be compensated in accordance with the
current rate for that person’s position on Council. Council shall have the
discretion to set additional compensation depending on the nature and extent of
the vacancy.
(Amended 11-26-2019)
3.04 JUDICIAL POWERS.
The Mayor shall have all the judicial powers now or hereafter granted by the
general laws of the State of Ohio to mayors and municipalities of the class of
this Municipality. The Mayor may delegate the judicial powers to a magistrate
as prescribed by State law.
3.05 POWERS OF THE MAYOR.
   (A)   All executive power of the Municipality shall be vested in the Mayor,
except as otherwise provided by this Charter and the Constitution of the State
of Ohio. Without limitation of the foregoing, the Mayor shall have and possess
the following powers:
      1)   The power to supervise the administration of all the affairs of the
Municipality and the conduct and administration of all departments and
divisions, except the Council, and as otherwise stated in this Charter.
      2)   To be the Chief conservator of the peace within the Municipality and
shall see that all laws, resolutions and ordinances are enforced, except as
otherwise stated in this Charter.
      3)   The power, unless otherwise provided by ordinance, to execute on
behalf of the Municipality all authorized contracts, conveyances, evidence of
indebtedness, and all other instruments to which the Municipality is a party;
and shall, where required, to attach thereto the official seal of the Mayor’s
office, which shall be the seal of the Municipality.
      4)   Pursuant to the general laws of the State of Ohio, the Mayor shall
submit and Council shall adopt, with or without revision, the tax budget,
annual and other appropriation measures at the times fixed by the general laws.
The operating and capital needs of the Municipality shall be considered in the
budget and appropriation measures. The Mayor shall cause such other reports to
be prepared as he/she shall determine to be necessary or as requested by
Council.
      5)   The Mayor shall keep the Council and Public advised of the condition
and needs of the Municipality and shall recommend to the Council such measures
as he or she may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the
Municipality.
      6)   The power to appoint or engage, pursuant to contract, persons who
shall serve as directors and division heads of the Municipality’s
administrative departments. All administrative directors shall be subject to
confirmation by a majority vote of the members of Council and shall serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor and Council. Such directors and division heads may be
removed by the Mayor upon approval by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of
Council. Subject to Sections
6.02 and
7.03C of this Charter, the Mayor shall appoint all employees of the
Municipality unless this Charter denies appointing power to the Mayor or grants
the appointing power to another office or body.
      7)   The power to appoint all members of Municipal Boards, Commissions
and other bodies, unless otherwise provided and subject to provisions in this
Charter.
      8)   Be the official and ceremonial head of the Municipality.
      9)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or
required by Council.
      10)   Shall attend or be represented at all meetings of Council with the
right to introduce ordinances, resolutions and motions and participate in
discussion, but without the right to vote.
3.06 VETO POWERS.
Every ordinance or resolution of the Council shall be presented to the Mayor
for consideration. The Mayor may approve or disapprove the whole of any
ordinance or resolution, or any item of an ordinance appropriating money.
Unless an ordinance or resolution is returned to the Clerk of Council either
signed or with written notice of disapproval within ten (10) days after
submission to the Mayor, it shall take effect as though the Mayor had signed
it. When the Mayor has disapproved an ordinance or resolution or any item of
it, as herein provided, the Council may within thirty (30) days thereafter,
reconsider it, and if such legislation shall be then approved by the
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) members of Council, it shall become
effective notwithstanding the veto of the Mayor.
ARTICLE IV: COUNCIL
4.01 ELECTION AND TERM OF OFFICE.
The Council shall be composed of seven (7) members elected to four (4) year
terms, three of whom shall be elected at large and four of whom shall be
elected from wards as provided herein. All elections shall be nonpartisan. The
members elected from wards shall be known as Ward Council members. The members
elected from the Municipality at large shall be known as Council members At
Large.
All members of Council shall assume office on the first day of January
following their election.
4.02 WARDS.
In accordance with the Ohio Revised Code, the Municipality shall be divided
into four (4) wards within one-hundred fifty (150) days of the effective date
of this charter, which shall be as nearly equal in population as is
practicable. In the absence of more restrictive case law to the contrary, the
population in the largest and the smallest among the wards shall not vary by
more than twenty percent (20%) of the population of the smallest ward. Each
ward shall be composed of contiguous and compact territory bounded by streets,
roads, streams, railroads, and/or census block lines.
Council shall have the power to change ward boundaries, but shall not have the
power to change the number of wards. After each recurring United States census,
but more often if Council finds it necessary because of population changes,
Council shall re-draw the boundaries of the four (4) wards subject to the
population requirement of this section.
4.03 QUALIFICATIONS.
Each Councilperson shall be a qualified elector of the Municipality and shall
have been immediately prior to the date of election a continuous resident of
the Municipality for at least two (2) years. Ward Councilpersons shall be
residents of the Ward they seek to represent at the time they circulate
nominating petitions and remain residents throughout any term as Councilperson
of that Ward. All Councilpersons shall continue to comply with the above
requirements throughout their term of office.
A Councilperson shall hold no other elective office. The Councilperson shall
not be otherwise employed by, directly or indirectly, nor hold any other office
in this Municipality except as provided in this Charter.
(Amended 11-26-2019)
4.04 PRESIDENT AND VICE PRESIDENT.
Within the first seven (7) days of January of each year, Council shall meet in
the Council Chambers for the purpose of organization. At such organization
meeting, Council shall, by a majority of the members elected and appointed to
Council, elect from its membership a President of Council and a Vice-President
of Council, each to serve for a term of one (1) year. The President of Council
shall have all the powers, duties, obligations and rights of any other member
of Council, including the right to vote, and shall appoint the various
committees of Council.
The President of Council, or in his or her absence, the Vice-President of
Council, shall preside at all meetings of Council. The President and Vice-
President of Council, neither by holding such offices, nor in performing the
duties of the acting Mayor as provided in Section 3.03 A and B of this Charter,
shall be deprived of their powers and rights or be relieved of their duties or
obligations as members of Council.
4.05 VACANCIES.
   (A)   Whenever the office of a Councilperson shall become vacant for any
reason, whether occurring by death, disqualification, recall, removal, or
resignation, the vacancy in the Council shall be filled by a majority vote of
the remaining members of the Council. If the vacancy occurs subsequent to
twenty (20) days before the date when candidates for the office of Council
member must file their nominating petitions or if two (2) years or less remain
in the term of the incumbent who created the vacancy, the person elected by the
Council shall serve for the unexpired term. If the vacancy occurs at least
twenty (20) days prior to the date when candidates for the office of Council
member must file their nominating petitions and more than two (2) years remain
in the term of the incumbent who created the vacancy, the person elected by the
Council shall serve until a successor is elected at the next regular municipal
election and qualified to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. The
person elected for the unexpired term at the next regular municipal election
shall take office immediately upon certification of the results by the Summit
County Board of Elections.
   (B)   If the Council shall fail to elect a person to fill a vacancy in the
Council under Division (A) of this Section within forty-five (45) days after
the occurrence of the vacancy, its power to do so shall lapse and the Mayor
shall appoint a person to serve for the time as provided in Division (A) of
this Section.
   (C)   If the vacancy is in an office of a Councilperson representing a ward,
such vacancy must be filled from that ward. If the vacancy occurs in the office
of a Council-at-large, such vacancy can be filled from any ward within the
Municipality.
   (D)   If the office of President of Council becomes vacant because of the
succession of the President of Council to the office of Mayor or for any other
reason, the Vice-President of Council shall become President of Council and
Council shall elect by a majority vote of the members elected and appointed to
Council a new Vice-President from its members. If the President of Council
declines to serve as Mayor, he or she may remain as President of Council and
Council shall then appoint one of its remaining members to the office of Mayor.
   (E)   The person elected or appointed to fill a vacancy on the Council shall
have the qualifications for the particular office as specified in Section 4.03
of this Charter.
4.06 POWERS OF COUNCIL.
   (A)   All legislative power of the Municipality shall be vested in the
Council, except as otherwise provided by this Charter and the Constitution of
the State of Ohio. Without limitation of the foregoing, the Council shall have
and possess the following powers:
      1)   The power to levy taxes and assessments and incur debts subject to
the limitations imposed thereon by this Charter and the Constitution of Ohio.
      2)   The power to adopt and to provide for the enforcement of local
police, fire, zoning, sanitary and other similar regulations, as are not in
conflict with the general laws.
      3)   The power to provide for the exercise of all powers of local self-
government granted to the Municipality by the Constitution of the State of Ohio
in a manner not inconsistent with this Charter or the Constitution of the State
of Ohio.
      4)   Council shall set by ordinance the compensation of the Mayor,
members of Council and each officer and employee, or member of any board or
commission, of the Municipality, whether elected or appointed, except as
specifically provided otherwise in this Charter. Not less than forty-five (45)
days prior to the final date for filing nominating petitions, Council shall set
the compensation of the Mayor and all members of Council for the term of office
commencing January 1 of the ensuing year, and such compensation shall not
thereafter be changed with respect to such period. The compensation of every
other officer, employee and member of any board or commission of the
Municipality, as set by Council, may at any time be changed by ordinance at the
discretion of Council. Council may authorize the payment or reimbursement of
expenses incurred by any officer, employee or member of any board or commission
of the Municipality, for traveling or other expenses incidental to the
authorized furtherance of the interests of the Municipality.
      5)   The power to require such bonds as in the opinion of the Council are
necessary for the faithful discharge of the duties of the officers and
employees of the Municipality. The premium for said bonds shall be paid by the
Municipality.
      6)   The power to establish, by ordinance or resolution, the rates or
charges made to consumers of all municipal utilities and services.
      7)   The power to acquire and to sell or otherwise convey interests in
real property; and to lease, as lessor or lessee, or otherwise grant or receive
interests in real property, in the manner authorized by ordinance or resolution
with or without competitive bidding.
      8)   The power to provide for an independent audit of the accounts and
records of the Municipality, which may be in addition to audits by state
offices and agencies as may be required under the general laws of Ohio.
      9)   To exercise all other powers granted to the Council by this Charter
and by the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio.
      10)   The power to approve all contracts entered into by the Municipality
which require expenditures in excess of $10,000.00.
4.07 CLERK OF COUNCIL.
The Clerk of Council shall be appointed by Council and shall serve at the
pleasure of Council. The Clerk of Council shall keep the Journal of Council, an
accurate and complete record of all proceedings of Council; authenticate by his
or her signature and have custody of all laws, ordinances, and resolutions of
Council; have custody of all official documents, reports, papers, and files of
Council; and perform other such duties as Council shall require.
The Clerk of Council may also hold another municipal appointive office within
the classified or unclassified service of the Municipality, but shall not hold
any municipal elective office while serving as Clerk of Council.
During the temporary absence or disability of the Clerk of Council, Council
shall by affirmative vote of a simple majority of its members appoint a like-
qualified individual to perform the duties of that office.
4.08 RULES AND JOURNAL OF COUNCIL.
Council shall adopt its own rules, regulations or by-laws, and shall keep a
journal of all its proceedings which shall be open for public inspection during
normal business hours. The voting upon any ordinance or resolution shall be by
roll call, and the vote of each Councilperson shall be recorded upon the
journal.
4.09 ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.
Within the first seven (7) days of January of each year, Council shall meet for
the purpose of organization. The Mayor, or a person appointed by the Mayor,
shall call this meeting and shall preside as temporary chairman only until the
President of Council shall be elected.
4.10 REGULAR COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Council shall meet at such times as may be prescribed by its rules,
regulations or by-laws, or by resolution or ordinance, except that it shall
hold regular meetings at least once during each calendar month. All regular
meetings of Council shall be held at the Council Chambers unless extraordinary
circumstances dictate otherwise.
   (B)   All meetings of the Council, its Committees and other Boards and
Commissions of the Municipality shall be held in accordance with the general
laws of Ohio pertaining to requirements for open meetings of public bodies.
4.11 SPECIAL COUNCIL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Special meetings of Council may be called as provided by its rules,
regulations or by-laws, or by resolution or ordinance. In the absence of any
such provision, special meetings may be called by the Clerk of Council upon the
written request of the Mayor, or the President of Council, or any four (4)
members of Council, and written notice of any such meeting shall be served
personally upon each Councilperson and the Mayor or left at the usual place of
residence at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such meeting. Service of
notice of any special meeting shall be deemed conclusively to have been waived
by the Mayor or by any Councilperson who shall be present at such meeting.
   (B)   All special meetings of Council shall be held at the Council Chambers
unless extraordinary circumstances dictate otherwise and in accordance with the
general laws of Ohio pertaining to requirements for open meetings of public
bodies.
4.12 EXECUTIVE SESSION.
Council may hold closed executive sessions in accordance with the laws of the
State of Ohio. The Mayor shall be permitted to attend all executive sessions of
Council.
4.13 QUORUM.
A majority of the members of Council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business at any meeting of Council, but a lesser number may
adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such
manner and under such penalties as may be provided by resolution or ordinance.
4.14 RIGHTS IN COUNCIL OF EXECUTIVE OFFICERS.
The Mayor and the directors of all departments established by this Charter or
that hereafter may be established by ordinance, shall be entitled to seats in
the Council. Neither the Mayor nor the directors of any department shall have a
vote in Council, but the Mayor shall have the right to recommend legislation
and take part in the discussion of all matters coming before the Council. The
directors of departments shall be entitled to take part in those discussions in
Council that relate to their respective departments.
4.15 COUNCIL RELATIONSHIP TO ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.
Neither Council, nor any of its committees, nor any of its several members,
shall in any manner take part in the discipline of, or give orders to, any
subordinates and employees in the administrative service of the Municipality
responsible to the Mayor, but must deal directly with the Mayor. Council may
inquire into the conduct of any office or department and into the performance
of any contract or any of the affairs of the Municipality.
ARTICLE V: LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE
5.01 FORM OF ACTION BY COUNCIL.
Action of Council shall be by ordinance, resolution or motion. Motion shall be
used to conduct the business of Council, in procedural matters, for elections
conducted among and appointments made by Council members, to provide directions
to and to make requests of administrative officers and employees and members of
Boards and Commissions, and as otherwise provided in this Charter. All other
action shall be taken by ordinance or resolution. No action of Council shall be
invalidated merely because the form thereof fails to comply with the provisions
of this Section.
5.02 INTRODUCTION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
Any member of Council or the Mayor may introduce any ordinance or resolution,
at a regular or special meeting, which shall be in written or printed form and
shall contain a concise title. Zoning ordinances or resolutions may be
introduced in the manner as Council may prescribe by ordinance or resolution.
5.03 FORM OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   (A)   The form and style of ordinances and resolutions shall be determined
by the rules of Council.
   (B)   Each ordinance or resolution shall contain only one subject, which
shall be expressed in its title, provided that appropriation ordinances may
contain the various subjects, accounts and amounts for which monies are
appropriated, and that ordinances and resolutions which are codified or
recodified are not subject to the limitation of containing one subject.
5.04 READING ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
Each ordinance and resolution shall be read by title only on three separate
days, unless this requirement is dispensed with by a vote of at least two-
thirds (2/3) of the members of the Council. readings shall be by title only,
unless a majority of the Council shall request that any ordinance or resolution
be read in full. Not less than one (1) copy of each ordinance and resolution
shall be available for public inspection at the meetings of the Council at
which the ordinance or resolution is considered.
5.05 COMMITTEE DELIBERATIONS.
All proposed ordinances and resolutions, except those of a purely ceremonial
nature, and those of a procedural nature, shall be referred by the President of
Council to one (1) or more of the standing committees of Council as appropriate
to the subject matter, unless this requirement is waived by a vote of two-
thirds (2/3) of the members of Council.
Said committee(s) shall consider the proposed legislative action separately
and/or jointly and shall report their recommendations to Council for final
disposition. Said committee(s) shall keep written minutes of all proceedings.
The recommendations reported by such committee(s) shall be given orally or in
writing and shall be accompanied by the original documents, if any, upon which
such report is based. Such report and supporting documentation shall be entered
or referred to upon the Journal of Council.
If any matter referred to committee has not been reported upon for one (1)
successive regular Council meetings, such matter may be brought before Council,
with or without an accompanying committee report, upon the vote of a two-thirds
(2/3) vote of the members of Council.
Nothing in this provision shall preclude any standing committee from proposing
an ordinance or resolution on their own initiative.
5.06 VOTE REQUIRED FOR PASSAGE.
The vote on the question of passage of each ordinance, resolution and motion
shall be taken by a roll call of members to be entered on the Journal, or other
record of proceedings of the Council, and none shall be passed without
concurrence of a majority of the members of Council. Each emergency ordinance
or resolution shall require the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3)
of the members of Council for its enactment. If an emergency ordinance or
resolution shall fail to receive the required two-thirds (2/3) affirmative
vote, but receives the necessary majority for passage as non-emergency
legislation, it shall become effective as non-emergency legislation.
5.07 CONTENT OF EMERGENCY LEGISLATION.
Each emergency ordinance or resolution shall determine that the ordinance or
resolution is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace,
health, safety or welfare, and shall contain a statement of the necessity for
the emergency.
No action of the Council authorizing the surrender of any of its powers or in
granting any franchise, or contracting for the supply to the Municipality or
its inhabitants of the product or service of any utility, whether Municipally
or privately-owned, or amending or repealing any zoning ordinance, or changing
any ward boundaries, or authorizing any change in the boundaries of the
Municipality, shall be taken as an emergency measure.
5.08 EFFECTIVE DATE OF LEGISLATION.
   (A)   The following ordinances or resolutions shall take effect upon passage
unless a later time is specified herein:
      1)   Appropriation of money.
      2)   An annual tax levy for current expenses.
      3)   Improvements petitioned for by owners of a majority of the front
footage of the area of the property benefited and to be assessed.
      4)   Submission of any question to the electorate of the determination to
proceed with an election.
      5)   Approval of a revision, codification, recodification, or
rearrangement of ordinances.
      6)   Any emergency ordinance or resolution.
   (B)   All other ordinances or resolutions shall go into effect thirty (30)
days after their passage by the Council.
5.09 AUTHENTICATION.
Each ordinance and resolution shall be authenticated by the signature of a
presiding officer of the Council and the Clerk of Council. The failure or
refusal to sign shall not invalidate an otherwise properly enacted ordinance or
resolution.
5.10 RECORDING LEGISLATION.
Each ordinance and resolution shall be recorded in a book or other record
prescribed by Council. The Clerk of Council or a duly authorized representative
of the Clerk shall, upon request of any person and upon the payment of a fee,
if established by Council, certify true copies of any ordinance or resolution,
which copies shall be admissible as evidence in any court.
5.11 AMENDMENT.
A pending ordinance or resolution may be amended at any time prior to its
passage by the Council by a majority vote of the members of the Council present
and voting on the amendment, and such amendment shall not require additional
readings of the ordinance or resolution.
Any ordinance or resolution, or the codified ordinances or resolutions of the
Municipality, may be amended by the passage of subsequent ordinances or
resolutions that: revise existing sections or parts thereof; enact new or
supplemental sections or parts thereto; or repeal existing sections or parts
thereof. This Division does not prevent repeals by implication.
5.12 ZONING MEASURES.
The Council may determine, by ordinance or resolution, all procedures to be
followed by the Council and the Planning and Zoning Commission with respect to
zoning within the Municipality and other land use regulations and matters,
including but not limited to: public hearings; notices to owners of land; and
notices to the general public. Otherwise, the Ohio Revised Code will apply.
A concurring vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the membership of Council
shall be necessary to pass any zoning ordinance or resolution which differs
from the written recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission, but in
no event shall an ordinance or resolution be considered as having passed unless
said amendment receives at least a majority vote of the members of Council.
5.13 ADOPTION OF TECHNICAL CODES.
Council may, by ordinance or resolution, adopt standard ordinances and codes
prepared by the State or any department, board or other agency or subdivision
of the State, or any standard or model ordinance or code prepared and
promulgated by a public or private organization, including but not limited to
codes and regulations pertaining to fire, fire hazards, fire prevention,
plumbing, heating, electrical, ventilation, air conditioning, refrigeration
machinery, state pressure piping, piping, boilers, buildings standards, housing
standards, traffic controls and such other matters as the Council may determine
to be appropriate for adoption by reference, by incorporation by reference.
The ordinance or resolution adopting any such standard ordinance or code shall
make reference to the date and source of such standard ordinance or code
without reproducing the same at length in the ordinance or resolution. In such
cases, publication of the standard ordinance or code shall not be required, but
at least one copy of such code shall be kept at all times in the office of the
Clerk of Council and available for reference by interested persons. If the
standard ordinance or code is amended after its adoption by reference by the
Council, it shall be deemed to have been adopted.
5.14 CODIFICATION.
By a majority vote of the members of Council, the Council may cause the
ordinances and resolutions of the Municipality to be revised, codified,
recodified, rearranged, or published in book form.
5.15 PUBLIC NOTICE.
Public notice as required by law, or by this Charter, or by ordinance, shall be
given to resolutions, ordinances, statements, measures, orders, proclamations
and reports in the manner determined by Council, including not less than five
(5) public places (one in each ward and the Administration Building) in the
Municipality shall be established for such public posting.
Council shall cause each resolution and ordinance to be given public notice,
commencing not later than seven days after its first reading in the event that
the rule requiring three readings is not suspended, and within seven days like
public notice shall be given each resolution and ordinance after its adoption
and approval by the Mayor, or upon the expiration of the time within which it
may be vetoed by the Mayor, or upon its passage after veto by the Mayor, as the
case may be.
ARTICLE VI: ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS
6.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENTS.
A Department of Finance, Department of Law, Department of Public Safety, and a
Department of Public Service are hereby created and established by this Charter
as administrative departments, and the Council shall provide by ordinance the
organization thereof.
The Mayor or Council may not abolish or combine the administrative departments
created by this Charter, but may consolidate, divide and reassign, or abolish
the operating divisions to various departments to assure operating and
management efficiency. Council may create, by ordinance or resolution,
additional administrative departments, boards or commissions as necessary.
6.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
The Law and Finance Director offices created by this Charter are part-time
positions until otherwise determined by the Mayor and Council. Each Director
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority vote of the
members of Council. The Public Safety and Public Service Director positions
shall be filled by the Mayor, until the Mayor and Council determine otherwise.
A Director need not be a resident of the municipality.
The qualifications, education, and experience of each Director appointee,
excepting that of the Director of Law, shall be certified by the Municipality’s
legal counsel. The qualifications, education, and experience of the Director of
Law shall be certified by the Mayor. No binding offer of employment may be made
to a Director appointee prior to such certification.
The Council shall have the responsibility for the development of job
descriptions for all Director positions created by this Charter, or established
by future action of Council. Such job descriptions shall indicate specific job
duties, organizational responsibilities, and limits of authority. Each Director
shall serve until removed by the Mayor. The dismissal of any Director shall
require the approval of a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of Council.
6.03 DIRECTOR OF FINANCE.
   (A)   Qualifications.
   The Director of Finance shall have knowledge of accounting, taxation,
budgets and financial control as demonstrated by experience, education or both.
   The Director of Finance shall not hold any other public office, except he/
she may hold office or delegate role in a political party, serve as a notary
public, serve as a member or officer in the military reserve of National Guard,
serve in an office position or capacity to further intergovernmental
cooperation, and may hold any office permitted by this Charter, ordinance or
resolution and the laws of Ohio.
   (B)   Powers and Duties.
   The Director of Finance shall be the head of the Finance Department and the
municipality’s fiscal officer. He/She shall be responsible for the collection,
disbursement, and custody of all funds and shall establish and maintain those
records and procedures necessary to perform his/her duties.
   He/She shall perform other duties performed by municipal auditors and
treasurers and municipal auditors under the general laws of the State of Ohio;
and perform such other functions relevant to the Finance Department, as may be
required by ordinance or resolution of Council, or as directed by the Mayor.
(Amended 11-24-2014)
6.04 DIRECTOR OF LAW.
   (A)   Qualifications.
   The Director of Law shall be an attorney who is licensed, during the term of
his/her appointment, to practice law in the State of Ohio. He/She shall have a
minimum of five (5) years of employment or public practice experience in
municipal and/or other governmental law.
   (B)   Powers and Duties.
   The Director of Law shall be the legal advisor on all legal matters coming
before the Municipality and shall represent or direct the representation of the
Municipality in all litigation, cases, or suits coming before the Municipality.
He/She shall prepare or review all contracts, ordinances, resolutions, and
other documents or instruments as required by the Mayor and Council. He/She
shall have other powers and duties performed by directors of law of general
statutory plan cities under the general laws of the State of Ohio.
   In addition, the Director of Law shall perform other duties specified by
municipal solicitors by the laws of the State of Ohio.
   Nothing in this Charter shall preclude Council from contracting for
additional legal services as may periodically be required.
6.05 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (A)   Mayor as Director.
   The Mayor shall serve as Director of Public Safety until such time as
Council provides, by ordinance, for the separation of the two (2) positions.
   (B)   Powers and Duties.
   The Director of Public Safety shall oversee all matters relating to public
safety, including police, fire, and emergency medical services.
   (C)   Qualifications.
   The Director of Public Safety, if separated from the office of the Mayor by
ordinance, shall have a minimum of five (5) years management or supervisory
experience in public safety or be a graduate of an accredited college with a
minimum of a bachelor’s degree in a pertinent field.
6.06 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC SERVICE.
   (A)   Mayor as Director.
   The Mayor shall serve as Director of Public Service until such time as
Council provides, by ordinance, for the separation of the two (2) positions.
   (B)   Powers and Duties.
   The Director of Public Service shall make all the necessary rules and
regulations for the governing of the Department of Public Service and the
operation of the divisions thereof. The Department shall include, but not be
limited to, Divisions of Cemeteries, Custodial Services, Health and
Environment, Highways, Parks and Recreation, Planning and Zoning.
   (C)   Qualifications.
   The Director of Public Service, if separated from the office of the Mayor by
ordinance, shall have a minimum of five (5) years management or supervisory
experience in a related field.
ARTICLE VII: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
7.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   The following boards and commissions are hereby created and established as
Municipality boards and commissions:
      1)    Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board
      2)   The Parks and Recreation Board
      3)   The Planning and Zoning Commission
      4)   The Board of Zoning Appeals
      5)   The Charter Review Commission
(Amended 11-26-2019)
7.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
All persons appointed to any Municipality board or commission must be qualified
electors of the Municipality. The appointing authority has the option to
appoint an alternate(s) to any board or commission as needed.
No voting member of a Municipality board or commission shall be an elected or
appointed official, officer, or employee of the Municipality.
Members of the Municipality boards and commissions shall serve without
compensation unless expressly provided for by other provisions of this Charter
or by ordinance of Council. Reimbursement for expenses incurred by the members
of Municipality boards and commissions in the performance of their duties shall
be permitted.
Members of each Municipality board or commission may serve multiple terms.
Each Municipality board or commission shall appoint a secretary who shall
prepare minutes of each meeting and shall provide copies of same to the Mayor
and President of Council and for public posting at the Municipality
administrative offices. Each Municipality board or commission shall adopt
written operating rules and regulations subject to approval or revision by a
simple majority vote of the members of Council, and shall keep a complete
journal of its proceedings.
At the first meeting of each year, each Municipality board or commission shall
select a Chairperson from its appointed members who shall serve for one (1)
year. A member may serve multiple terms as Chairperson.
A vacancy during the term of any Municipality board or commission member shall
be filled for the remaining unexpired term in the same manner as that vacated
member’s original appointment.
All Boards and Commissions meetings shall be open to the public. All notice of
Boards and Commission meetings shall be publicized as stated in Section 5.15.
7.03 PERSONNEL ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD.
   (A)   Composition and Terms.
   The Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board shall consist of three (3)
disinterested qualified electors of the Municipality not holding other public
office, to be appointed by Council. Each member shall serve, without
compensation, for a term of six (6) years. Each member shall have been a
resident of the Municipality or territory annexed thereto for a period of two
(2) years preceding the appointment and shall continue to remain a resident
during the member’s term. In the event of a vacancy, Council shall appoint a
qualified elector to complete the unexpired term. Members shall serve no more
than two (2) consecutive full six (6) year terms. Meetings of the Personnel
Advisory and Appeals Board shall be open to the public except as may be
provided by State law.
   (B)   Powers and Duties.
   As set forth below, the Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board shall have
jurisdiction over personnel matters for Municipal employees, other than the
Mayor and the Directors of Finance, Law, Service and Safety, except provisions
covered by collective bargaining agreements, and shall not be required to
extend its jurisdiction to any other city, or school district or political
subdivision of the State or their employees. Any employee, except for
Department Managers and other similarly situated employees as designated by
Council, shall have the right to appeal grievances involving dismissals or
suspensions for periods of longer than three (3) days or eligibility rulings,
to successively higher levels of the Municipal management until satisfied, or
until heard and decided by the Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board; provided,
however, that such aggrieved employee presents the grievance to the Board
within thirty (30) days of final determination of the grievance by the Mayor.
   Any Department Manager or similarly situated employee as designated by
Council aggrieved by the final determination of the Mayor may appeal grievances
involving dismissals or suspensions for periods of longer than three (3) days
or eligibility rulings to the Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board within
thirty (30) days of the final determination of the Mayor.
   (C)   Personnel Principles and Rules.
      (1)   All appointments and promotions of Municipal employees shall be
made solely on the basis of merit and fitness demonstrated by examination,
demonstrated job performance or other evidence of competence. Department
Managers, Division Heads, and other similarly situated employees as designated
by Council shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, subject to the City’s
standard performance evaluation process by the Mayor, with right of appeal as
provided in Section 7.03(B).
      (2)   The Mayor shall propose such personnel rules to the Personnel
Advisory and Appeals Board which assure compliance with the principles and
policies referenced above, as well as all constitutional and Federal/State
mandates. The Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board shall report to Council its
recommendations thereon, and Council may by ordinance adopt such rules and
amendments consistent herewith.
(Amended 11-26-2019)
7.04 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD.
   (A)   Composition and Term.
   The Parks and Recreation Board shall consist of five (5) members, appointed
for staggered terms of five (5) years, or until their successors have been
appointed.
   The members of the Parks and Recreation Board shall be appointed as follows.
Three (3) members shall be appointed by the Mayor, and two (2) shall be
appointed by Council. For the first appointments, the Mayor shall appoint those
members who will serve five (5), three (3) and one (1) year terms, and Council
shall appoint those members who will serve two (2) and four (4) year terms. The
Chairperson of the appropriate committee of Council shall serve as a non-voting
member of the Parks and Recreation Board.
   (B)   Powers and Duties.
   The Parks and Recreation Board shall advise with respect to the acquisition,
development, maintenance, and operation of the parks and recreational
facilities of the Municipality. The Board shall solicit input from, provide
assistance to and cooperate with civic, historical, governmental and youth
athletic organizations in providing these services and facilities.
   The Parks and Recreation Board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the
Mayor and Council. The Parks and Recreation Board shall develop a plan to
provide for the parks and recreational needs of the community and shall oversee
implementation of that plan.
   The Board has no power to commit the expenditure of public moneys except as
expressly provided for by Council. The authority to purchase, sell, lease,
dispose of, or accept as donations, any property or moneys resides in Council.
    The Finance Director shall be required to provide an estimate of moneys to
be appropriated for parks and recreation to the Board no later than November
15th of the year prior to the year for which moneys are to be appropriated. It
shall be the duty of the Parks and recreation Board to recommend an annual plan
to Council for the most effective and beneficial use of the moneys so
appropriated.
(Amended 11-26-2019)
7.05 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Composition and Term.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of five (5) members,
appointed for staggered terms of five (5) years, or until their successors have
been appointed.
   The five (5) members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor and approved by a majority vote of the members of
Council.
   (B)   Powers and Duties.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall be responsible for the planning of
orderly growth and development of the Municipality. The Commission shall
recommend to Council a long range plan for the Municipality growth and
development.
   The Commission shall conduct studies and make recommendations to Council
concerning any items which require legislative action.
   The Commission shall have those additional powers and duties as prescribed
by ordinance and resolution, and, to the extent not in conflict with this
Charter and the Municipality’s ordinances and resolutions, the Commission may
exercise those powers granted by the law.
   Any legislation to be considered by Council, concerning zoning shall be
brought to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its consideration and
recommendation.
   At least three-fourths (3/4) affirmative vote shall be required of the
Planning and Zoning Commission members to recommend changing any property zoned
residential to commercial, industrial or conditional-use classification.
   At least two-thirds (2/3) affirmative vote of Council shall be required for
passage of any ordinance or resolution that is contrary to a recommendation of
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
7.06 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   (A)   Composition and Term.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of five (5) members appointed to
staggered terms of five (5) years, or until their successors have been
appointed.
   The members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be appointed by the Mayor,
and approved by a majority vote of the members of Council.
   Members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be persons of recognized
competence in the areas of construction, architecture, real estate, or related
experience.
   (B)   Powers and Duties.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Zoning Appeals to hear and decide
appeals made for the exceptions to and variations from the application of
ordinances, orders and regulations of Municipality administrative officials or
agencies, governing building and zoning in the Municipality. Such appeals
decision shall be in conformity with the purpose and intent of such ordinances
and regulations. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have such other duties as
Council may designate.
7.07 CHARTER REVIEW COMMISSION.
In January, two (2) years after the effective date of this Charter, and in
January every five (5) years thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint with approval
of a simple majority vote of the members of Council, by January 14th, a Charter
Review Commission composed of seven (7) electors of the Municipality. The
appointees shall hold no other Municipality elective or appointive office, nor
be employed by the Municipality except on an advisory board.
All meetings of the Charter Review Commission shall be public. Such Commission
shall select its own Chairperson and Secretary and adopt its own rules for the
conduct of its business. The members of the Commission, unless otherwise
provided by Council, shall serve without compensation, and the term of the
Commission shall end on the day of the next regular Municipal or Ohio general
election occurring at least nine (9) months after their appointments.
The Charter Review Commission shall, on or before June 12th of the same year,
recommend to Council any alterations, revisions, or amendments to this Charter.
The Council shall publish recommendations of the Charter Review Commission in
at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation within the Municipality once
a week for two (2) consecutive weeks. The Council shall also cause the posting
of the Charter Review Commissions recommendations in not less than five (5)
public places (one in each Ward and the Administration Building) in the
Municipality. The Council shall hold a public hearing on such recommendations
within one (1) week after the second publication thereof.
The Council shall submit the amendments to the electors at the next regular
Municipal or Ohio general election, and succeeding elections, as necessary.
(Amended 11-26-2019)
ARTICLE VIII: FINANCE AND TAXATION
8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
The laws of the State of Ohio relating to budgets, appropriations, taxation,
debts, bonds, assessments, and other fiscal matters of the Municipality shall
be applicable to the Municipality, except as modified or necessarily
inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter, or when provision thereof is
made in the Constitution of the State of Ohio.
8.02 FINANCE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Powers and Duties.
      1)   Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under control of
the Municipality, or any office, department or agency thereof, and deposit or
invest all funds coming into his or her hands in such manner as required by
ordinance of Council.
      2)   Disburse moneys of the Municipality, provided that all warrants of
the Municipality shall be signed by the Director of Finance and the Mayor or
the President of Council.
      3)   Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills, claims, accounting
forms and systems of accounts to be used by all the offices, departments and
agencies of the Municipal government.
      4)   Examine and approve the financial aspects of all contracts, orders
and other documents by which the Municipal government incurs financial
obligations, having previously ascertained that sufficient monies have been
appropriated and allotted and will be available when the financial obligations
shall become due and payable.
      5)   Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls and
other evidences of claims, demands or charges against the government of the
Municipality and, with the advice of the Department of Law, determine the
regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges.
      6)   Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions
which may be maintained in any office, department or agency of the government
of the Municipality apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in the
Director of Finance’s office.
      7)   Perform all other duties that may now or hereafter be imposed upon
Municipality auditors or treasurers under the general laws of the State of
Ohio, unless otherwise provided by this Charter or by ordinance of Council, and
perform such other duties, consistent with the office, as may be required by
this Charter, by ordinance of Council or as directed by the Mayor.
   (B)   Transfers of Appropriations.
   The Director of Finance may, toward the end of the fiscal year, transfer an
unencumbered appropriation balance or portion thereof between general
classifications of expenditures within the various accounts for which a
specific fund was established by the original or revised appropriation, under
limits set by ordinance.
   (C)   Fiscal Year and Tax Budget.
   The fiscal budget and accounting year shall be the calendar year.
   On or before the 15th day of June in each calendar year, the Mayor shall
submit to Council a tax budget for the next succeeding fiscal year. Council
shall adopt and submit to the Summit County Budget Commission a tax budget for
the next succeeding fiscal year, in accordance with the provisions of the laws
of Ohio.
   (D)   Contracting Powers and Competitive Bidding Procedures.
   The Mayor shall be the contracting officer of the Municipality, shall award
and execute all contracts on behalf of the Municipality, and shall report all
expenditures to the Council.
   Any purchase of or contract for supplies, materials, labor, services or
equipment shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the general laws
of Ohio, including those relating to competitive bidding, to the extent not
inconsistent with this Charter and ordinances of the Council.
   The Mayor may, within the amounts and items appropriated by the Council,
make purchases and enter into contracts on behalf of the Municipality involving
expenditures not in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000).
   Any contract in excess of $10,000 requires legislative approval by Council.
The Mayor shall not be permitted to breakup a contract into two (2) or more
component parts for the sole purpose of avoiding the Council approval
requirement for expenditures in excess of $10,000.00.
   When any expenditure or contract is required to be a bid in accordance with
the Ohio Revised Code, work may be accomplished only after advertisement and
bidding, and such contract or expenditure shall first be authorized or directed
by an ordinance or resolution passed by the Council and shall be advertised
once a week for at least two (2) weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in
the Municipality; provided the Council, by an ordinance or resolution adopted
by a vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of its members, may authorize, without
advertising and competitive bidding, contracts and expenditures for any purpose
where the statutory or common law of Ohio does not require competitive bidding.
   (E)   Contracts.
   When it becomes necessary to make alterations or modifications in connection
with any work or improvements covered by contract, they shall be made only upon
approval by the Mayor and certification of available funding by the Director of
Finance. No such order shall be effective until the price to be paid for the
work or material, or both, under the altered or modified contract, shall have
been agreed upon in writing and signed by the contractor and the Mayor on
behalf of the Municipality. Modifications or alterations in contracts shall not
require advertising and competitive bidding.
   No contract, agreement or other contractual obligation involving the
expenditure of money shall be entered into or authorized unless the Director of
Finance or his or her duly authorized representative shall first certify:
      1)   That the money required for such contract, agreement, obligation or
expenditure is in the Municipality’s treasury or in the process of collection
thereto, and
      2)   That the money has been appropriated by Council for the purpose of
the contract, which may be included in a general description of purpose, and it
remains unencumbered.
   The certification as to the availability of funds and the appropriation of
funds shall be filed and recorded in the accounting records of the Municipality
and a copy furnished the vendor or contractor. Without the certification,
contractual obligations shall be unenforceable against the Municipality unless
subsequently authorized by the Council by a majority vote of its members.
   No contract, agreement or contractual obligation shall be entered into or
authorized by any municipal authority until the same has been approved as to
form by the Director of Law.
   (F)   Establishment of New Municipality Services.
   When a function of the Municipality is proposed to be performed for the
first time subsequent to the adoption of this Charter by officers and employees
of the Municipality rather than pursuant to contracts with other governments,
persons, or firms, and the cost of the annual operation and capital
requirements would exceed twenty percent (20%) of the Municipality’s revenues
in the prior fiscal year, which revenues were lawfully available for such
function, then Council shall place the question of whether such function shall
be performed by officers and employees of the Municipality rather than by
contract upon the ballot at the next general, primary, or regular Municipal
election to be held within the Municipality. The Council may cause such an
election to be held at a special election on any date upon a vote of three-
fourths (3/4) of the members of Council.
   This Section shall not apply where a three-fourths (3/4) majority of the
members of Council determines that the function must be established due to
State or national law, or where Council determines by a unanimous vote of its
members that such function cannot be provided by contract at a reasonable cost.
   This provision shall not include programs in effect as of the effective date
of this Charter, nor those programs established by this Charter.
   This provision shall not preclude Council from contracting with other
governmental or private entities to provide such services on a fee basis.
(Amended 11-26-2019)
8.03 ALLOCATION OF INCOME TAX REVENUES.
The funds collected under the provisions of any municipal income tax in the
Municipality shall be deposited in a special fund known as the Income Tax
Revenue Fund. Disbursements of moneys from this fund shall be made as follows:
   (A)   First, funds shall be allocated to defray all expenses of collection,
administration, and enforcement of the income tax and the provisions of the
ordinance.
   (B)   Second, a minimum of five percent (5%) of the tax revenues shall be
allocated and assigned to the Municipality parks and recreation program. Such
funds shall be appropriated to capital expenditures only, that is, the purchase
of property, building construction, or other improvements with a life of five
(5) years or longer. Any unused funds shall, on an annual basis, be assigned to
a fund for use only in support of the Municipality parks and recreation
program. This provision shall be reviewed by the Charter Review Commission as
specified in the time period mandated in Section
7.07.
   (C)   Third, funds shall be allocated to the General Fund of the
Municipality.
8.04 LIMITATION ON TOTAL MUNICIPAL INCOME TAX.
Where a resident of the Municipality is subject to a municipal income tax in
another municipality, such resident shall not pay total municipal income tax on
that same income that is greater than the tax imposed at the higher rate.
ARTICLE IX: NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
9.01 EFFECT OF STATE LAW.
All elections in the Municipality shall be non-partisan, without party
affiliation appearing on the ballot. Except as otherwise provided in this
Charter, the laws of the State of Ohio shall govern the nomination and election
of the elective officers of the Municipality. Elections shall be held and
conducted, and the results thereof ascertained and certified, as provided by
the general laws of the State of Ohio, and by the election authorities and
procedure provided by law.
9.02 REGULAR, PRIMARY AND SPECIAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
Municipal elections for the purpose of the election of officers provided for in
this Charter shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in
November in odd numbered years. Elections so held shall be known as regular
Municipal elections. An election conducted for the purpose of nominating
persons as candidates for elective office as provided in this Charter, to be
voted upon at the next regular Municipal election, shall be known as a primary
election. Other elections shall be held as may be required by law or provided
for in this Charter. Such other elections shall be known as special Municipal
elections. At any time, by resolution, the Council may order a special
Municipal election, the purpose of which shall be set forth in the resolution.
9.03 NOMINATIONS.
There shall be no primary election for Mayor, Ward Councilperson, or
Councilmember At Large (if only one office is available) unless four (4) or
more persons file nominating petitions for the respective position. There shall
be no primary election for Councilmember At Large (if there are three offices
available) unless eight (8) or more persons file nominating petitions. For
purposes of this provision affecting the necessity of a primary election, the
term “nominating petition” shall include only those petitions and nominating
papers which the Summit County Board of Elections shall have reviewed, examined
and certified as to their sufficiency and validity.
In the event it is necessary to hold a primary election, such non-partisan
primary election shall be held in the Municipality on the eighth Tuesday prior
to such Municipal election. Those persons receiving the highest vote totals,
and equal in number to twice the number of offices for which such election is
held, shall be designated candidates for such office, subject to applicable
provisions of this Charter.
Each candidate shall file a separate petition. Group petitions shall not be
used for any elective office in the Municipality.
Forms provided by the Summit County Board of Elections, if appropriate, or by
the Municipality, for the nomination of non-partisan candidates for such
office, shall be used and filed with the Summit County Board of Elections as
required by state law.
(Amended 11-26-2019)
9.04 NOMINATING PETITIONS.
Although a primary election may not be necessary, as provided by this Charter,
each person desiring to become a candidate for nomination for any Municipality
office shall, not later than 4:00 p.m. of the ninetieth (90th) day before the
date set by Section
9.02 of this Charter, file with the Summit County Board of Elections, a
nominating petition and a petition requiring signatures of registered electors
as follows: not less than fifty (50) nor more than one-hundred fifty (150) for
the office of Ward Councilmember; not less than seventy-five (75) nor more than
two-hundred twenty-five (225) for the office of Councilmember At Large; and,
not less than one-hundred fifty (150) nor more than three-hundred fifty (350)
for the office of Mayor.
Such petitions may contain the names and addresses of five (5) registered
electors of the Municipality designated in advance by the candidate as a
nominating committee. Such committee may fill vacancies caused by the death or
withdrawal of the candidate as set forth in this section of the Charter.
If a person nominated by petition, in accordance with this section of the
Charter, for the offices of Mayor or Councilmember, and who faces a nonpartisan
primary contest for nomination by the electorate, should die or withdraw due to
illness or loss of elector status not less than thirty-five (35) days before
the day of such primary election, the vacancy so created may be filled only by
the nominating committee designated in the nominating petition of such affected
candidate. If a person is either nominated in the primary election as a
candidate at the next regular Municipal election for one (1) of the offices
named in this section, or certified as a candidate for the next regular
Municipal election without the necessity of a primary election in accordance
with the provisions of this Article, and such candidate dies or withdraws due
to illness or loss of elector status not less than thirty-five (35) days before
such regular Municipal election, the vacancy so created may be filled only by
the nominating committee of five (5) persons designated in the nominating
petition filed by the affected candidate prior to the Primary Election.
To fill the vacancy created by the death or withdrawal of a candidate for any
of the offices named in this section, a majority of the members of the
nominating committee designated by the nominating petition of the affected
candidate shall file with the Summit County Board of Elections, not less than
thirty (30) days before either the primary election, or the regular Municipal
election, a sworn, notarized statement, signed by a minimum of three (3)
members of such committee, designating the person they select to fill such
vacancy. Such statement must be accompanied by the written acceptance of the
person so certified as their candidate choice.
ARTICLE X: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.01 INITIATIVE.
The electors of the Municipality shall have the power to propose ordinances and
other measures by initiative petition in accordance with provisions of the
Constitution and laws of Ohio now and hereafter in effect.
10.02 REFERENDUM.
The electors of the Municipality shall have the power to approve or reject at
the polls any ordinance or other measure enacted by Council in accordance with
the provisions of the Constitution and laws of Ohio now or hereafter in effect.
10.03 RECALL.
The electors of the Municipality shall have the power to remove from office by
a recall election any person holding an elective position of the Municipality.
If a person holding an elective position shall have served six months of a
term, a form of petition demanding removal may be filed with the Clerk of
Council, who shall note thereon the name and address of the person filing the
petition, and the date of such filing, and deliver to such person a receipt
therefore and attach a copy thereof to said petition. A petition in such form
may be circulated in separate parts, but the separate parts shall be bound
together and filed as one instrument. Each part shall contain the name and
address of the person whose removal is sought and a statement in not more than
two hundred (200) words on the ground(s) for the removal. Such petition shall
be signed by at least that number of electors which equals twenty-five percent
of the total number of electors voting at the last preceding regular Municipal
election for the office of the officer sought to be recalled. Except as
expressly modified herein, all such petitions in form, circulation, placement
and withdrawal of signatures, alterations and corrections, shall conform to the
laws of the State of Ohio applicable to the holding of any issue.
Within ten days after the day on which such petition shall have been filed, the
Clerk of Council shall determine whether or not it meets the requirements
hereof. If the Clerk of Council shall find the petition insufficient, the Clerk
shall promptly certify the particulars in which the petition is defective,
deliver a copy of the Clerk’s certificate to the person who filed the petition,
and make a record of such delivery. Such person shall be allowed a one-time
period of twenty days after the day on which delivery was made in which to make
the petition, and all parts thereof if so filed, sufficient. If the Clerk of
Council shall find the petition sufficient, the Clerk shall promptly so certify
to the Council, shall deliver a copy of such certificate to the officer whose
removal is sought, and make a record of such delivery.
If the person whose removal is sought shall not resign within five days after
the day on which the Clerk’s certificate shall have been delivered, Council
shall, by ordinance or resolution, fix a day for holding a recall election,
which date shall not be less than forty days nor more than sixty days after the
date of the Clerk’s certification of sufficiency to the Council, and shall
cause notice of such recall election to be published on the same day of each
week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the
City. At such recall election, this question shall be placed upon the ballot:
“Shall (naming the person whose removal is sought) be allowed to continue as
(naming the office),” with the provision on the ballot for voting affirmatively
or negatively. In the event of a majority of the vote is negative, such person
shall be removed, the office shall be vacant, and such vacancy shall be filled
as provided in this Charter. If the person is not removed at such recall
election, no further recall petitions shall be filed against him or her for a
period of one year following such election.
10.04 RESIGNATION.
No person holding an elective office of the Municipality who resigns from his
or her office shall be eligible for appointment to any elective position with
the Municipality during the term for which the person was elected.
10.05 REMOVAL.
Elected officials and members of Boards and Commissions shall be removed for
cause as provided in this Section of the Charter.
As used in this section of the Charter, the “charging official” shall mean: the
Mayor, except where the person accused of a ground(s) for removal is the person
holding the office of Mayor; or the President of Council where the person
sought to be removed for cause holds the office of Mayor.
The charging official, if he/she has reason to believe there is probable cause
(as such causes are defined in this section) for removal of an elected official
or member of a Municipality board or commission, shall give notice of the
alleged cause for removal and the time, date, and place of the commencement of
a hearing for removal, which shall not be earlier than ten (10) days after the
service of the notice to the accused person by personal service, certified mail
or by leaving a copy of such notice at the person’s last known place of
residence in the Municipality. At such time, date, and place and at any
adjourned meetings of such hearing, the Council shall hear the cause for
removal, shall provide an opportunity for the accused person to be heard and
present defenses, and shall determine whether the accused person shall be
removed from office.
   The Council may remove an official for any of the following causes by a two-
thirds (2/3) vote of the members of Council. Such person shall not vote on any
matter during the removal procedure, and shall not be counted in determining
required majorities. The following are grounds for the removal of elected
officials and members of Boards and Commissions:
      1)   Failure to possess or maintain the qualifications of office required
pursuant to the provisions in this Charter.
      2)   Has been adjudicated mentally incompetent.
      3)   Is guilty of gross misconduct, gross neglect of duty, misfeasance,
malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office.
      4)   Failure to take the required oath, or to give any bond required of
him/her within twenty (20) days after the effective date of his/her election or
appointment, or obligation to give a new or additional bond.
      5)   Has violated the oath of office.
      6)   Conviction of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude.
      7)   Gross failure of a member of Council or of a Municipality board or
commission to abide by the rules of Council or the Municipality board or
commission, as appropriate; or absence from three (3) consecutive regular
meetings of the Council or Municipality board or commission without being
excused by Council or the Municipality board or commission, as appropriate.
Upon the removal of an official from office pursuant to this Section, the
office of the offending person shall be declared vacant, subject to any appeal
to and review by an appropriate court, and the vacancy shall be filled as
provided in this Charter.
The removal of an official or the occurrence of any of the causes permitting
the removal shall not invalidate any action of the official or any body,
including Council, in which the member participated. The subsequent removal of
a person who fills a vacancy created pursuant to this section by reinstatement
by a court of a person previously removed by Council, shall not invalidate any
action of the person who filled the vacancy or any body, including Council, in
which such person who filled the vacancy participated.
Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of and of the grounds for
removal from office and shall conduct the proceedings relative to removal.
Council shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, and
require the production of evidence, either on its own motion or through the
process of any appropriate court or officer thereof. A person charged with
conduct constituting grounds for removal from office shall receive a public
hearing, and a record of the proceedings shall be made and preserved. A notice
of such hearing shall be published in at least any one (1) newspaper of general
circulation in the Municipality at least one (1) week in advance of the
hearing, and in such event, the President of Council, or other presiding
officer of Council, may reschedule the time, date, and place of the hearing to
accommodate the publication of the notice. If the hearing is rescheduled, the
President of Council, or other presiding officer, shall notify the accused
person of such fact. Decisions made by Council under this Section shall be
subject to review by the Courts on matters of law and whether Council acted
arbitrarily and without probative evidence to support the grounds for removal.
The Director of Law or special counsel engaged by the Director of Law, shall
prosecute the removal proceedings before Council and any review thereof by the
courts. If a person accused is not finally removed, the Municipality shall pay
the reasonable costs of the defense of such person and any compensation
withheld pending the appeal of the action of Council.
10.06 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST, ETHICS, CAMPAIGN FINANCING.
The laws of Ohio pertaining to conflicts of interest, criminal misbehavior,
ethics and financial disclosure by municipal officials and employees, and
campaign financing and other election practices of candidates for municipal
office shall apply under this Charter.
No officer, employee, or board and commission members of the Municipality shall
directly or indirectly solicit, contract for or receive any gift, profit or
emolument from or on account of, any contract, job, work, or service with or
for the Municipality, other than his or her compensation for expenses as fixed
by Council.
10.07 OATH OF OFFICE.
Every elected officer of the Municipality shall be required to subscribe to an
oath or affirmation, that the elected officer will in all respects faithfully
discharge the duties of his or her office, before entering upon the duties
thereof.
The following oath or affirmation, or some other suitable oath or affirmation,
shall be signed by each elected officer and filed with the Council.
City of New Franklin
Oath of Office
I, <state your name>, do solemnly and sincerely promise and swear or affirm
that I will conform to and uphold the Constitution of both the United States of
America and the State of Ohio, and will support the Charter and all ordinances
and resolutions of the City of New Franklin, Ohio;
I will be loyal and, with strict adherence, obey the duties of my office set
forth by law and the will of the citizens of the City of New Franklin, Ohio.
Failure to take the oath or affirmation or failure to sign the oath or
affirmation shall disqualify the official from holding his or her public office
within the Municipality.
10.08 SEPARABILITY.
If any section or part of a section of this Charter proves to be invalid or
unconstitutional, the same shall not be held to invalidate or impair the
validity, force, or effect of any other sections or part of a section of this
Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other section or part of a section
is wholly or necessarily dependent for its operation upon the section or part
of a section so held unconstitutional or invalid.
ARTICLE XI: CHARTER
11.01 AMENDMENTS TO CHARTER.
   (A)   Submission to Electors.
   Council may, by affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of its members, submit
to the electors any proposed amendment to this Charter, or, upon petition
signed by not less than five (5) percent of the electors of the Municipality,
that voted in at the last general election, setting forth any proposed
amendment to this Charter, Council shall submit such proposed amendment to the
electors in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and laws of the
State of Ohio.
   (B)   Adoption.
   If any such amendment is approved by a majority of the electors voting
thereon, it shall become a part of this Charter, except that if two (2) or more
inconsistent proposed amendments on the same subject be submitted at the same
election, only the one of such amendments receiving the largest affirmative
vote, not less than a majority, shall become a part of the Charter.
11.02 EFFECT OF CHARTER UPON EXISTING LAWS AND RIGHTS.
The adoption of this Charter shall not affect any pre-existing rights of the
Municipality, nor any right or liability or pending suit or prosecution, either
on behalf of or against the Municipality or any officer thereof, nor any
franchise granted by the Municipality, nor pending proceedings for the
authorization of public improvements or the levy of assessments thereof. Except
as a contrary intent appears herein, all acts of the Council of this
Municipality shall continue in effect until lawfully amended or repealed.
ARTICLE XII: EMINENT DOMAIN
12.01 PUBLIC USE.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, neither this municipal
government or any political subdivision thereof, nor any other condemning
entity shall use eminent domain unless it is necessary for a public use.
   (B)   The term “public use” shall only mean the possession, occupation and
enjoyment of the land by the general public, or by public agencies, or the use
of land for the creation or functioning of public utilities or common carriers
such as railroad, utility, or toll road; the acquisition of property to cure a
concrete harmful effect of the current use of the land, including the removal
of public nuisances, structures that are beyond repair or that are unfit for
human habitation or use, and the acquisition of abandoned property.
   (C)   The public benefits of economic development, including an increase in
tax base, tax revenues, employment, general economic health, shall not
constitute a public use.
   (D)   The municipal government or any political subdivision thereof or any
other condemning entity shall not use eminent domain to take private property,
without the consent of the property owner, to be used for private commercial
use.
ARTICLE XIII: TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS
13.01 EFFECTIVE DATE.
The provisions of this Charter shall be submitted to the voters at the general
election to be held in November 2006. This Charter, if approved, shall become
effective January 1, 2007, except as may otherwise be provided for in this
Charter.
13.02 CREATION OF WARDS.
Council shall enact an ordinance dividing the municipality into four (4) wards
according to the manner prescribed in Section
4.02 of this Charter.
13.03 INITIAL MUNICIPALITY OFFICERS.
Upon the effective date of this Charter, the Mayor and Council defined under
this Charter shall be composed of the currently serving Mayor and Council of
the City of New Franklin. Such offices shall continue to be compensated as
previously authorized until Council revises the method or rate of compensation
by ordinance or resolution in accordance with the provisions in this Charter.
Should any official of the Municipality occupy an elective office by reason of
appointment to fill a vacancy occurring before the effective date of this
Charter, he or she shall serve as an appointed official until elected or
replaced by a person elected to fill the unexpired term in accordance with the
provisions of the Charter dealing with vacancies in office (Section
3.03 C for Mayor, and
4.05 for Council members).
These officials shall have all the rights and powers provided herein the same
as if they had been elected under the provisions of this Charter.
The Mayor, whose term expires December 31, 2009, may serve his four-year term
before being replaced by a mayor elected in the regular municipal election of
November 2009; and again every four (4) years thereafter.
The four (4) Council-at-large members, whose terms expires in December 31,
2009, may serve their four (4) year terms, before being replaced by three (3)
Council-at-Large members elected in the regular municipal election in November
2009; and again four (4) years thereafter.
The two (2) Council-at-Large members, whose two terms expire December 31, 2007,
shall be replaced by four (4) Ward Council members, elected in the regular
municipal election in November 2007.
Currently elected Council-At-Large members who choose to run for their
respective Ward Council positions in the regular municipal election in November
2007 may do so without relinquishing their at-Large council seat should they
lose the Ward election. Up to three (3) council-at-large seats vacant after the
Ward election must be filled by Council to bring the total Council membership
to seven (7). Council will elect at-large members under Section
4.05 A, B and C of this Charter.
Should no council members at-large run for and get elected to one of the four
(4) Ward council member positions, Council will operate with eight (8) members
until a vacancy occurs in an at-large position or the 2009 election, whichever
comes first.
13.04 ABOLISHMENT OF OFFICES.
The elected office of Clerk/Treasurer is eliminated by the State statute for
Cities and under the provisions of this Charter.
The elected Village of New Franklin Clerk/Treasurer shall be offered the
position of Finance Director/Clerk of Council, a part-time position reporting
to the Mayor and the Council respectively, until the Clerk/Treasurer term
expires March 31, 2010. After the expiration date, or sooner, if the position
becomes open, a Finance Director will be appointed by the Mayor and approved by
Council, according to Section
6.03 A and B of this Charter and a Clerk of Council shall be appointed by
Council according to Section
4.07.
During the time that the Clerk/Treasurer serves as Finance Director/Clerk of
Council, Council cannot lower or raise the compensation for that position
during the transition term.
13.05 FIRST ELECTION.
The first election under this Charter shall be held on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November 2007, unless it is necessary, under the provisions
of this Charter, for a primary election to be held in accordance with the
provisions of this Charter.
13.06 CONTINUANCE OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES.
Upon the effective date of this Charter all individuals lawfully appointed and
employed by the Municipality, shall continue employment with the new City of
New Franklin under the same terms, privileges, duties, and responsibilities,
and with no loss in pay and in the same position to which such employees would
normally be assigned, subject to the following:
   (A)   That no civil service, psychological or physical examinations shall be
required of such employees to qualify for initial employment with the new
Municipality.
   (B)   That nothing in the terms and conditions of this Charter shall be
construed so as to limit the lawful authority of the new Municipality to
determine employment requirements beyond the effective date of this Charter, or
to create any expectancy of employment or re-employment beyond the effective
date of this Charter.
   Any officer or employee who has been in the classified service of the
Municipality for a period of more than ninety (90) days on the effective date
of this Charter or who has been continuously and permanently employed for more
than ninety (90) days in a position which will be included in the classified
service as a result of the adoption of this Charter, shall retain his/her
position until discharged, reduced, promoted or transferred pursuant to the
provisions of civil service.
13.07 CONTINUANCE OF PRESENT BOARD AND COMMISSION MEMBERS.
All existing Boards and Commissions shall remain in their current terms and
shall continue pursuant to the ordinances and resolutions creating them until
such time as they shall be revised. All present members to Boards and
Commissions will remain in their present positions for their current terms
unless removed pursuant to Section
10.05 of this Charter.
13.08 CONTINUATION OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances, resolutions, orders, and regulations of the Municipality in
effect at the time of the adoption of this Charter shall remain in effect,
except as superseded by the provisions of the Charter, until they are amended
or repealed.
13.09 CONTINUANCE OF CONTRACTS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.
All contracts entered into by the Municipality or for its benefit prior to the
taking effect of the Charter shall continue in full force and effect. Public
improvements for which legislative steps have been taken under laws existing at
the time this Charter takes effect shall be completed, as nearly as
practicable, under the provisions of such laws.
13.10 PENDING ACTIONS AND PROCEEDINGS.
No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time when this
Charter takes effect, brought by or against the Municipality or any office,
agency, or officer thereof, shall be abated or affected by anything herein
contained, but all such actions shall be prosecuted or defended under the laws
in effect when they were filed.
13.11 SUCCESSION.
The City of New Franklin, under this Charter, is hereby declared to be the
legal successor of the City of New Franklin, under the general laws of the
State of Ohio, and as such it has title to all property, real and personal,
owned by its predecessor including all moneys on deposit and all taxes in
process of collection together with all accounts receivable and rights of
action. The Municipality is liable for all outstanding orders, contracts, and
debts of its predecessor, and for any other obligations for which it may be
held liable, as such successor, by any court of competent jurisdiction. All
contracts entered into by the Municipality for its benefit prior to the
effective date of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect.
All laws and parts of laws relating to or affecting the Municipality in force
when this Charter shall take effect are hereby repealed and superseded to the
extent that the same are inconsistent with the provisions of the Charter;
however, all laws, ordinances and regulations not inconsistent with the
provisions of the Charter shall continue in full force and effect until the
same shall be lawfully amended or repealed under the terms and provisions of
this Charter.
13.12 DEFINITION OF MAJORITY.
For as long as Council shall consist of seven (7) members, a simple majority
shall be deemed to be four (4) members, a two-thirds (2/3) majority shall be
deemed to be five (5) members, and a three-fourths (3/4) majority shall be
deemed to be six (6) members. Should the size of Council be different, the
number of votes satisfying these definitions shall be revised appropriately to
be consistent with the stated types of majority, providing that the number of
votes satisfying each definition shall be different and unique.
 
CERTIFICATE
We, the qualified members of the Charter Commission of the City of New
Franklin, Ohio, elected November 8, 2005, have framed the foregoing Charter and
have fixed November 7, 2006 as the time of the election which the Charter shall
be submitted to the electors of the City of New Franklin.
John Perduyn, Chairman
Robin I. Aikey, Vice-Chairman  Carol Adamson
Jim Berry                      Fred Ford-Smith
Bill Hunter                    Martin Hyatt
Sylvia Johnson                 Dick Lowry
Nick Kechkes                   Glenn Lackey
Gladding Miller                R. C. Norris
Minnie Pritchard               Perry Surgeon
 
Charter Commission of the City of New Franklin
Amended 11-24-2014
Amended 11-26-2019
2009 Charter Review Commission
Andrea Norris (Chair), Robert Armbruster, Jim Berry, Bill Hunter, Robert
Nitzsche, Eric Roberts, Richard Sponseller
2014 Charter Review Commission
Joseph D. Parsons (Chair), Carol Adamson, Robin Aikey, Bill Hunter, John
Perduyn, Eric Roberts, Perry Surgeon
2019 Charter Review Commission
Joseph D. Parsons (Chair), Carol Adamson, Lynn Clark, Scott Fischer, Harry
Gehm, Nela Lucy, Mary Stormer
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Short titles
   
10.02   Definitions
   
10.03   Rules of construction
   
10.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal
   
10.05   Construction of section references
   
10.06   Conflicting provisions
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to offices
   
10.09   Errors and omissions
   
10.10   Ordinances repealed
   
10.11   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.12   Ordinances saved
   
10.13   Application to future ordinances
   
10.14   Interpretation
   
10.15   Amendments to code; amendatory language
   
10.16   Statutory references
   
10.17   Preservation of penalties, offenses, rights and liabilities
   
10.18   Determination of legislative intent
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 SHORT TITLES.
   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the municipality,
as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered and consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known and designated as the “New
Franklin Municipal Code”, for which designation “code of ordinances”, “codified
ordinances” or “code” may be substituted. Title, chapter and section headings
do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code.
(R.C. § 1.01)
   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters and sections are to such
components of the code unless otherwise specified. Any component code may be
referred to and cited by its name, such as the “traffic code”. Sections may be
referred to and cited by the designation “§” followed by the number, such as “§
10.01”. Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter
and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AND/OR. The word “and” may be read as “or”, and the word “or” may be read as
“and”, if the sense requires it.
   ANOTHER. When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   BOND. Includes an undertaking.
   CERTIFIED MAIL. Includes registered mail.
   CHILD. Includes child by adoption.
   COUNCIL. The Council of the City of New Franklin, Ohio.
   COUNTY. Summit County, Ohio.
   FIRE CHIEF. Shall include the Chief of the Fire Department if a Fire
Department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the Fire
Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
municipality.
   IMPRISONED. Shall have the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05.
   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and non-federal
interoperable packet switched data networks, including the graphical subnetwork
known as the World Wide Web.
   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR. Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves or
as a servant, agent or employee.
   LAND or REAL ESTATE. Includes rights and easements of incorporeal nature.
   LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY. The Council of the City of New Franklin, Ohio.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   MUNICIPALITY, CITY or MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. When used in this code, shall
denote the municipality of New Franklin, Ohio, irrespective of its population
or legal classification.
   O.A.C. Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   OATH. Includes affirmation.
   OF UNSOUND MIND. The person lacks the relevant mental capacity.
   OWNER. When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner or
tenant in common of the whole or part of that property.
   PERSON. Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes all property except real property.
   PLAN OF SEWERAGE, SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE, SEWER and SEWERS. Includes sewers,
sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations,
together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor.
   PREMISES. As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   PROPERTY. Includes real, personal, mixed estates and interests.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Includes boards of education; the municipal, county, state
or federal government, its officers or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement.
   R.C. Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
   REGISTERED MAIL. Includes certified mail.
   SHALL. Is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   STATE. The State of Ohio.
   STREET. Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   SWEAR. Includes affirm.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person holding a
written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of the
premises, alone or with others.
   UNDERTAKING. Includes a bond.
   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.
   WHOEVER. Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners; principals,
agents and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   WRITING. Includes printing.
   WRITTEN or IN WRITING. The terms include any representation of words,
letters, symbols or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to
signatures.
   YEAR. Twelve consecutive months.
(R.C. §§ 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 10.03 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Common and technical usage. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(R.C. § 1.42)
   (B)   Singular and plural; gender; tenses. As used in this code, unless the
context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(R.C. § 1.43)
   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   As used in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section, LEGAL
HOLIDAY means the following days:
         (a)   The first day of January, known as New Year’s Day;
         (b)   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King, Jr.
Day;
         (c)   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln Day;
         (d)   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968”, 82 Stat. 250,
5 U.S.C. § 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         (e)   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         (f)   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         (g)   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         (h)   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s Day;
         (i)   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day; and
         (j)   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(R.C. § 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, the priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(R.C. § 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(R.C. § 1.45)
      (7)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be done in a
reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE
shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the
duty or compliance with the notice.
   (D)   Numbers. If there is a conflict between figures and words in
expressing a number, the words govern.
(R.C. § 1.46)
   (E)   Authority. When the law requires an act to be done which may by law as
well be done by an agent as by the principal, the requirement shall be
construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.
   (F)   Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more municipal officers or other persons shall be construed as giving that
authority to a majority of the officers or other persons, unless it shall be
otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority, or it is
inconsistent with state law or municipal charter provisions.
   (G)   Exceptions. The rules of construction shall not apply to any law which
contains any express provision excluding the construction, or when the subject
matter or context of the law is repugnant thereto.
§ 10.04 REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the ordinance
originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause therein.
(R.C. § 1.57)
   (B)   The re-enactment, amendment or repeal of an ordinance does not, except
as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture or punishment imposed, as if the ordinance had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture or punishment for any offense is reduced by
a re-enactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty, forfeiture or
punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according to the ordinance
as amended.
(R.C. § 1.58)
   (D)   An ordinance which is re-enacted or amended is intended to be a
continuation of the prior ordinance and not a new enactment, so far as it is
the same as the prior ordinance.
(R.C. § 1.54)
§ 10.05 CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, the reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under designated
sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or authorized under
the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by this code.
(R.C. § 1.23)
   (C)   A reference to any portion of a provision of this code applies to all
re-enactments or amendments thereof.
(R.C. § 1.55)
   (D)   If a section refers to a series of numbers or letters, the first and
the last numbers or letters are included.
(R.C. § 1.56)
   (E)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter has been
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.06 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   (A)   If a general provision conflicts with a special or local provision,
they shall be construed, if possible, so that effect is given to both. If the
conflict between the provisions is irreconcilable, the special or local
provision prevails as an exception to the general provision, unless the general
provision is the later adoption and the manifest intent is that the general
provision prevail.
(R.C. § 1.51)
   (B)   (1)   If ordinances enacted at different meetings of Council are
irreconcilable, the ordinance latest in date of enactment prevails.
      (2)   If amendments to the same ordinance are enacted at different
meetings of Council, one amendment without reference to another, the amendments
are to be harmonized, if possible, so that effect may be given to each. If the
amendments are substantively irreconcilable, the latest in date of enactment
prevails. The fact that a later amendment restates language deleted by an
earlier amendment, or fails to include language inserted by an earlier
amendment, does not of itself make the amendments irreconcilable. Amendments
are irreconcilable only when changes made by each cannot reasonably be put into
simultaneous operation.
(R.C. § 1.52)
   (C)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this code,
or between any of the provisions of this code and any standard code adopted by
the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 731.231, the provision that establishes the
higher or stricter standard shall control.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of this code or the application thereof to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions are severable.
(R.C. § 1.50)
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.09 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any words necessary to express the intention of the
provisions affected, the use of words to which no meaning can be attached, or
the use of a word when another word was clearly intended to express the
intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and the words supplied, omitted or
substituted shall conform with the manifest intention, and the provision shall
have the same effect as though the correct words were contained in the text as
originally published. No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question
exists regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.10 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   With the exception of any ordinances specifically saved by the municipality,
this code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code of
ordinances.
§ 10.11 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of ordinances,
and all ordinances specifically saved by the municipality shall remain in full
force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.12 ORDINANCES SAVED.
   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intention of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar nature
serving the purpose, effected prior to the codification and not inconsistent
thereto, shall remain in effect and are saved.
§ 10.13 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.14 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.15 AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.
   (A)   Any chapter, section or division amended or added to this code by
ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code may be numbered in
accordance with the numbering system of this code and need not be inserted in
this code, but shall be treated as if printed for inclusion herein.
   (B)   The following language may be used by the municipality to amend, add,
or repeal a chapter, section, or division:
      (1)   To amend a section: “Section                 of the Municipal Code
of Ordinances is amended to read as follows: ....”
      (2)   To add a section: “Section                 of the Municipal Code of
Ordinances, which is to be added to and amends the Municipal Code of
Ordinances, reads as follows: ....”
      (3)   To repeal a section: “Section                 of the Municipal Code
of Ordinances, which reads as follows, is repealed: ....”
§ 10.16 STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, located in parentheses
immediately following a division or section of this code, this indicates that
the text of the division or section is substantially equivalent to the
statutory provision.
      Example: (R.C. § 4511.02)
   (B)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following
the text of a section, this indicates that the reader should refer to that
statute for further information.
      Example:
      § 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         Unless otherwise exempted by state law, all public records shall be
promptly prepared and made available for inspection to any person.
      Statutory reference:
         Public records, see R.C. § 149.43
§ 10.17 PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date of
this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those laws.
This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued, penalties incurred
or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this code. The liabilities,
proceedings and rights are continued; punishments, penalties or forfeitures
shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had not been enacted. In
particular, any agreement granting permission to utilize highway rights-of-way,
contracts entered into or franchises granted, the acceptance, establishment or
vacation of any highway, and the election of corporate officers shall remain
valid in all respects, as if this code had not been enacted.
§ 10.18 DETERMINATION OF LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   In enacting an ordinance, it is presumed that:
      (1)   Compliance with the constitutions of the state and of the United
States is intended;
      (2)   The entire ordinance is intended to be effective;
      (3)   A just and reasonable result is intended; and
      (4)   A result feasible of execution is intended.
(R.C. § 1.47)
   (B)   An ordinance is presumed to be prospective in its operation unless
expressly made retrospective.
(R.C. § 1.48)
   (C)   If an ordinance is ambiguous, the court, in determining the intention
of the Council, may consider among other matters:
      (1)   The object sought to be attained;
      (2)   The circumstances under which the ordinance was enacted;
      (3)   The legislative history;
      (4)   The common law or former legislative provisions, including laws
upon the same or similar subjects;
      (5)   The consequences of a particular construction; and
      (6)   The administrative construction of the ordinance.
(R.C. § 1.49)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Whenever, in this municipal code or in any ordinance of the
municipality, any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an
offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the
failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is
otherwise provided, whoever violates any such provision shall be punished by a
fine not exceeding $500, a term of imprisonment not exceeding six months, or
both. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which
a violation continues or occurs.
   (B)   The failure of any officer or employee of the municipality to perform
any official duty imposed by this code shall not subject the officer or
employee to the penalty imposed for a violation unless a penalty is
specifically provided for the failure.
Cross-reference:
   Misdemeanor classifications, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Ordinance violations and penalties, see R.C. § 715.67
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   WARDS AND ELECTIONS
      
32.   CITY ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   CITY PERSONNEL
      
34.   TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Public records policy
   
30.02   Meetings of public bodies to be open; exceptions; notice.
Fees
   
30.15   Fees for fingerprinting services
   
30.16   Video service provider fee
Interlocal Agreements
   
30.30   Regional Council of Governments; shared public safety dispatch center
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 PUBLIC RECORDS POLICY.
   (A)   Generally. It is the policy of the city that openness leads to a
better informed citizenry, which leads to better government and better public
policy. It is the policy of the city to strictly adhere to the State Public
Records Act. All exemptions to openness are to be construed in their narrowest
sense and any denial of public records in response to a valid request must be
accompanied by an explanation, including legal authority, as outlined in the
Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      RECORDS. Any document, being paper, electronic (including, but not
limited to, e-mail), or other format that is created or received by, or comes
under the jurisdiction of a public office that documents the organization,
functions, policies, decisions, procedures, operations or other activities of
the office. All RECORDS of the city are public unless they are specifically
exempt from disclosure under the Ohio Revised Code.
   (C)   Organization and maintenance. It is the policy of the city that, as
required by state law, records will be organized and maintained so that they
are readily available for inspection and copying (see division (F) below for
the e-mail record policy). Record retention schedules are to be updated
regularly and made readily available to the public.
   (D)   Public records requests and responses.
      (1)   Evaluation of a public records request. Each request for public
records should be evaluated for a response using the guidelines set forth in
this section.
      (2)   Identification of public records requested. Although no specific
language is required to make a request, the requester must at least identify
the records requested with sufficient clarity to allow the public office to
identify, retrieve and review the records. If it is not clear what records are
being sought, a city representative shall contact the requester for
clarification, and should assist the requestor in revising the request by
informing the requestor of the manner in which the office keeps its records.
      (3)   Method of public records request and identity of requestor.
         (a)   The requester does not have to put a records request in writing,
and does not have to provide his or her identity or the intended use of the
requested public record. It is the city’s general policy that this information
is not to be requested.
         (b)   In order to aid in the clarity of a public records request, the
city may, in accordance with R.C. § 149.43(B)(5), ask a requester to make the
request in writing, may ask for the requester’s identity and may inquire about
the intended use of the information requested if such information will benefit
the requester by enhancing the ability of the city to identify, locate or
deliver the public records sought by the requester. However, when making the
request for additional information, the city shall inform the requester that a
written request, disclosure of the requester’s identity or the intended use of
the information requested is not required to obtain the records requested.
      (4)   Availability of public records for inspection and production of
copies.
         (a)   Public records are to be available for inspection during regular
business hours, with the exception of Saturdays, Sundays and published
holidays. Public records must be made available for inspection promptly. Copies
of public records must be made available within a reasonable period of time.
Prompt and reasonable take into account the volume of records requested, the
proximity of the location where the records are stored and the necessity for
any legal review of the records requested.
         (b)   Requests made in person must be done during regular business
hours which are defined as 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. weekdays, excluding
Saturdays, Sundays and published holidays. All public record requests made in
person shall adhere to this requirement even if a city department is operated
on a 24-hour basis. Due to staffing issues, city departments operating on a 24-
hour basis may not have sufficient personnel to respond to requests for public
records made in person outside of normal business hours.
      (5)   Time constraints for satisfying public records requests.
         (a)   Each request should be evaluated for an estimated length of time
required to gather the records. If feasible, routine requests for records
should be satisfied immediately. Routine requests include, but are not limited
to, meeting minutes (both in draft and final form), budgets, salary
information, forms and applications, personnel rosters, and the like. If fewer
than 20 pages of copies are requested or if the records are readily available
in an electronic format that can be e-mailed or downloaded easily, these should
be made as quickly as the equipment allows.
         (b)   All requests for public records must either be satisfied or be
acknowledged in writing by a public office within a reasonable period of time
following the office’s receipt of the request. In responding to a public
records request, New Franklin shall comply with the provisions of R.C. §
149.43.
      (6)   Denial of public records requests. Any denial of public records
requested must be in writing and shall include an explanation, including legal
authority. If portions of a record are public and portions are exempt, the
exempt portions are to be redacted and the rest released. If there are
redactions, each redaction must be accompanied by a supporting explanation,
including legal authority.
   (E)   Costs for obtaining copies of public records.
      (1)   Charges for copies and postage. Those seeking public records from
the city shall be charged in accordance with the fees set forth in Resolution
08-R-14. It is the intent of the fee schedule, or any subsequent changes made
by City Council, to charge only for the actual cost of making reproductions of
public records. The cost is not intended to compensate the city for the time
used for gathering, reviewing or physically copying the records.
      (2)   Payment for public records. Payment for public records may be made
by cash, check or money order.
   (F)   E-mail as public records.
      (1)   Definition of e-mail as public records. Documents in electronic
mail format are records as defined by the Ohio Revised Code when their content
relates to the business of the office. E-mail is to be treated in the same
fashion as records in other formats and should follow the same retention
schedules.
      (2)   Private e-mail accounts holding public records. Records in private
e-mail accounts used to conduct public business are subject to disclosure, and
all employees or representatives of the city are instructed to retain their e-
mails that relate to public business (see division (B) above) and to copy them
to their business e-mail accounts and/or to the city e-mail records custodian,
if one has been designated.
      (3)   Duties of the records custodian in managing private account e-
mails. The city is to treat the e-mails from private accounts as records of the
public office, filing them in the appropriate way, retaining them per
established schedules and making them available for inspection and copying in
accordance with the Public Records Act.
   (G)   Failure to respond to a public records request. The city recognizes
the legal and non-legal consequences of failure to properly respond to a public
records request. In addition to the distrust in government that failure to
comply may cause, failure to comply may also result in a court ordering the
city to comply with the law and to pay the requester’s attorney’s fees and
damages.
(Res. 09-R-49, passed 10-7-2009; Res. 23-R-91, passed 11-15-2023)
§ 30.02 MEETINGS OF PUBLIC BODIES TO BE OPEN; EXCEPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (A)   This section shall be liberally construed to require public officials
to take official action and to conduct all deliberations upon official business
only in open meetings, unless the subject matter is specifically excepted by
law.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      MEETING. Any prearranged discussion of the public business of the public
body by a majority of its members.
      PUBLIC BODY. Any of the following:
         (a)   Any board, commission, committee, council or similar decision-
making body of a state agency, institution or authority, and any legislative
authority or board, commission, committee, council, agency, authority or
similar decision-making body of any county, township, municipal corporation,
school district, or other political subdivision or local public institution;
         (b)   Any committee or subcommittee of a body described in division
(a) of this definition; or
         (c)   A court of jurisdiction of a sanitary district organized wholly
for the purpose of providing a water supply for domestic municipal and public
use when meeting for the purpose of the appointment, removal or reappointment
of a member of the board of directors of such a district pursuant to R.C. §
6115.10, if applicable, or for any other matter related to such a district
other than litigation involving the district. As used in this division (c),
COURT OF JURISDICTION has the same meaning as “court” in R.C. § 6115.01.
      PUBLIC OFFICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.011.
      REGULATED INDIVIDUAL. Either of the following:
         (a)   A student in a state or local public educational institution; or
         (b)   A person who is, voluntarily or involuntarily, an inmate,
patient or resident of a state or local institution because of criminal
behavior, mental illness, an intellectual disability, disease, disability, age
or other condition requiring custodial care.
   (C)   (1)   All meetings of any public body are declared to be public
meetings open to the public at all times. A member of a public body shall be
present in person at a meeting open to the public to be considered present or
to vote at the meeting and for purposes of determining whether a quorum is
present at the meeting.
      (2)   The minutes of a regular or special meeting of any public body
shall be promptly prepared, filed and maintained and shall be open to public
inspection. The minutes need only reflect the general subject matter of
discussions in executive sessions authorized under division (F) of this
section.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following: a grand jury; an
audit conference conducted by the auditor of state or independent certified
public accountants with officials of the public office that is the subject of
the audit; or to other entities as set forth in R.C. § 121.22(D) and (E).
   (E)   (1)   Every public body, by rule, shall establish a reasonable method
whereby any person may determine the time and place of all regularly scheduled
meetings and the time, place and purpose of all special meetings. A public body
shall not hold a special meeting unless it gives at least 24 hours advance
notice to the news media that have requested notification, except in the event
of an emergency requiring immediate official action. In the event of an
emergency, the member or members calling the meeting shall notify the news
media that have requested notification immediately of the time, place and
purpose of the meeting.
      (2)   The rule shall provide that any person, upon request and payment of
a reasonable fee, may obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at
which any specific type of public business is to be discussed. Provisions for
advance notification may include but are not limited to mailing the agenda of
meetings to all subscribers on a mailing list or mailing notices in self-
addressed, stamped envelopes provided by the person.
   (F)   Except as provided in division (F)(8) of this section, the members of
a public body may hold an executive session only after a majority of a quorum
of the public body determines, by a roll call vote, to hold an executive
session and only at a regular or special meeting for the sole purpose of the
consideration of any of the following matters:
      (1)   To consider the appointment, employment, dismissal, discipline,
promotion, demotion, or compensation of a public employee or official, or the
investigation of charges or complaints against a public employee, official,
licensee or regulated individual, unless the public employee, official,
licensee or regulated individual requests a public hearing. Except as otherwise
provided by law, no public body shall hold an executive session for the
discipline of an elected official for conduct related to the performance of the
elected official’s official duties or for the elected official’s removal from
office. If a public body holds an executive session pursuant to division (F)(1)
of this section, the motion and vote to hold that executive session shall state
which one or more of the approved purposes listed in division (F)(1) of this
section are the purposes for which the executive session is to be held, but
need not include the name of any person to be considered at the meeting;
      (2)   (a)   To consider the purchase of property for public purposes, the
sale of property at competitive bidding, or the sale or other disposition of
unneeded, obsolete, or unfit-for-use property in accordance with R.C. § 505.10,
if premature disclosure of information would give an unfair competitive or
bargaining advantage to a person whose personal, private interest is adverse to
the general public interest. No member of a public body shall use this division
(F)(2) as a subterfuge for providing covert information to prospective buyers
or sellers. A purchase or sale of public property is void if the seller or
buyer of the public property has received covert information from a member of a
public body that has not been disclosed to the general public in sufficient
time for other prospective buyers and sellers to prepare and submit offers.
         (b)   If the minutes of the public body show that all meetings and
deliberations of the public body have been conducted in compliance with this
section, any instrument executed by the public body purporting to convey,
lease, or otherwise dispose of any right, title or interest in any public
property shall be conclusively presumed to have been executed in compliance
with this section insofar as title or other interest of any bona fide
purchasers, lessees, or transferees of the property is concerned.
      (3)   Conferences with an attorney for the public body concerning
disputes involving the public body that are the subject of pending or imminent
court action;
      (4)   Preparing for, conducting or reviewing negotiations or bargaining
sessions with public employees concerning their compensation or other terms and
conditions of their employment;
      (5)   Matters required to be kept confidential by federal law or
regulations or state statutes;
      (6)   Details relative to the security arrangements and emergency
response protocols for a public body or a public office, if disclosure of the
matters discussed could reasonably be expected to jeopardize the security of
the public body or public office;
      (7)    In the case of a county hospital operated pursuant to R.C. Chapter
339, a joint township hospital operated pursuant to R.C. Ch. 513, or a
municipal hospital operated pursuant to R.C. Chapter 749, to consider trade
secrets, as defined in R.C. § 1333.61;
      (8)   To consider confidential information related to the marketing
plans, specific business strategy, production techniques, trade secrets, or
personal financial statements of an applicant for economic development
assistance, or to negotiations with other political subdivisions respecting
requests for economic development assistance, provided that both of the
following conditions apply:
         (a)   The information is directly related to a request for economic
development assistance that is to be provided or administered under any
provision of R.C. Chapter 715, 725, 1724, or 1728 or R.C. §§ 701.07, 3735.67 to
3735.70, 5709.40 to 5709.43, 5709.61 to 5709.69, 5709.73 to 5709.75 or 5709.77
to 5709.81, or that involves public infrastructure improvements or the
extension of utility services that are directly related to an economic
development project.
         (b)   A unanimous quorum of the public body determines, by a roll call
vote, that the executive session is necessary to protect the interests of the
applicant or the possible investment or expenditure of public funds to be made
in connection with the economic development project.
      (9)   If a public body holds an executive session to consider any of the
matters listed in divisions (F)(2) through (F)(8) of this section, the motion
and vote to hold that executive session shall state which one or more of the
approved matters listed in those divisions are to be considered at the
executive session; or
      (10)   A public body specified in division (c) of the definition of
“public body” in this section shall not hold an executive session when meeting
for the purposes specified in that division (c).
   (G)   A resolution, rule or formal action of any kind is invalid unless
adopted in an open meeting of the public body. A resolution, rule or formal
action adopted in an open meeting that results from deliberations in a meeting
not open to the public is invalid unless the deliberations were for a purpose
specifically authorized in division (F) of this section and conducted at an
executive session held in compliance with this section. A resolution, rule or
formal action adopted in an open meeting is invalid if the public body that
adopted the resolution, rule or formal action violated division (E) of this
section.
   (H)   (1)   Any person may bring an action to enforce this section. An
action under this division (H)(1) shall be brought within two years after the
date of the alleged violation or threatened violation. Upon proof of a
violation or threatened violation of this section in an action brought by any
person, the court of common pleas shall issue an injunction to compel the
members of the public body to comply with its provisions.
      (2)   (a)   If the court of common pleas issues an injunction pursuant to
division (H)(1) of this section, the court shall order the public body that it
enjoins to pay a civil forfeiture of $500 to the party that sought the
injunction and shall award to that party all court costs and, subject to
reduction as described in this division (H)(2), reasonable attorney’s fees. The
court, in its discretion, may reduce an award of attorney’s fees to the party
that sought the injunction or not award attorney’s fees to that party if the
court determines both of the following:
            1.   That, based on the ordinary application of statutory law and
case law as it existed at the time of violation or threatened violation that
was the basis of the injunction, a well-informed public body reasonably would
believe that the public body was not violating or threatening to violate this
section;
            2.   That a well-informed public body reasonably would believe that
the conduct or threatened conduct that was the basis of the injunction would
serve the public policy that underlies the authority that is asserted as
permitting that conduct or threatened conduct.
         (b)   If the court of common pleas does not issue an injunction
pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section and the court determines at that
time that the bringing of the action was frivolous conduct, as defined in R.C.
§ 2323.51(A), the court shall award to the public body all court costs and
reasonable attorney’s fees, as determined by the court.
      (3)   Irreparable harm and prejudice to the party that sought the
injunction shall be conclusively and irrebuttably presumed upon proof of a
violation or threatened violation of this section.
      (4)   A member of a public body who knowingly violates an injunction
issued pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section may be removed from office
by an action brought in the court of common pleas for that purpose by the
prosecuting attorney or the attorney general.
(R.C. § 121.22)
Statutory reference:
   Application of open meetings and exceptions to specific state bodies, see
R.C. § 121.22(D), (E) and (J)
FEES
§ 30.15 FEES FOR FINGERPRINTING SERVICES.
   Fees for fingerprinting service performed by the city’s Police Department
shall be as follows.
 
        Residents Nonresidents
BCI     $30       $35
FBI     $30       $35
BCI/FBI $60       $70
 
(Res. 18-R-06, passed 2-21-2018)
§ 30.16 VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.
   (A)   The Council hereby establishes a VSP fee that is calculated by
applying a VSP fee percentage of 3% to the video service provider’s gross
revenues as defined in R.C. § 1332.3 2(B) of the Video Law. All video service
providers and cable television operators providing video service in the city
shall apply the VSP fee percentage against gross revenues as defined in the
Video Law.
   (B)   The VSP fee shall be paid by each video service provider providing
service in the city on a quarterly basis but not sooner than 45 days nor later
than 60 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
   (C)   The Mayor is authorized and directed to provide any video service
provider with notice of the VSP fee percentage as determined by the City
Council, which notice shall be given upon receipt of notice from any video
service provider that it will begin providing video service in the city
pursuant to a state- issued video service authorization.
(Ord. 09-O-03, passed 11-4-2009)
INTERLOCAL AGREEMENTS
§ 30.30 REGIONAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS; SHARED PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCH CENTER.
   (A)   Council authorizes the Mayor to enter into an agreement between the
Cities of New Franklin and Green for the purpose of creating a regional council
of governments, the South Summit Council of Governments, for the purpose of
sharing services. The agreement is as follows.
      (1)   The Council shall be deemed formed upon enactment of ordinances by
the City Councils of both parties.
      (2)   Each of the parties and any political subdivision which has been
duly appointed as an additional member in accordance with the agreement, shall
be represented on the South Summit Council of Governments’ Board (“the Board”)
by its elected chief executive or by an alternate, designated by them with a
letter of proxy. Each representative shall be entitled to one vote on each item
under consideration before the Board. In the event of an unresolved deadlock on
any item or issue, the matter shall be referred to binding arbitration
according to terms to be agreed upon by the parties.
      (3)   The parties, and any additional members admitted hereafter agree to
retain their membership in the Council for at least 24 months. Any party
wishing to withdraw at the end of that two-year period must provide written
notice of intent at least 60 days prior to the end of the initial two-year
period. Thereafter, any party wishing to withdraw from the Council may do so 60
days after notifying the Council members, in writing, of their intent to
withdraw.
      (4)   The parties agree that the costs of formation and operation of the
Council shall be shared based on the cost sharing formula as agreed by the
parties. Said cost sharing formula may be revised by the Board as circumstances
change and as the Board sees fit.
      (5)   The parties agree the Council shall not displace the authority of
any of its member municipalities in the exercise of their statutory powers.
      (6)   The first meeting of the Council shall be held no later than ten
days following formation of the Council by the parties. The meeting shall be
held at a time and place to be designated by the representative from the City
of Green, who shall act as temporary chairperson until such time as designation
and appointment of officers is determined. The first order of business shall be
the adoption of the by-laws. The Board shall have the continuing authority
thereafter to amend the by-laws and otherwise adopt rules to govern its
proceedings in any manner not in conflict with this agreement.
      (7)   The parties agree to create and approve by-laws for the Council
(the “by-laws”). The by-laws shall be approved by a majority vote of the
Council members. The by-laws shall designate the officers of the Council,
including a Fiscal Officer, and the method for their selection to create a
governing board for the Council. The by-laws shall provide for the conduct of
the business of the Council.
      (8)   The parties recognize that once approved by the State Auditor, the
Council may enter into contracts to provide any service to the parties. The
parties also recognize the Council may enter into contracts to perform any
function or render any service the parties may perform or render.
      (9)   The parties agree any community desiring to become an additional
member of the Council must pass legislation accepting the terms of this
agreement as a party, express their interest to join Council through the
ordinance or resolution, commit to a minimum of 24 months as a member of the
Council and receive approval by the Council Executive Board of its application
for membership.
      (10)   By approving this agreement, it is understood that all parties
have reviewed it and agree with its contents. Approval of this agreement
signifies a commitment to work together for the betterment of the Council and
each member community by improving services and increasing cost effectiveness.
      (11)   This agreement is hereby approved by the governing bodies of the
Cities of New Franklin and Green.
   (B)   Council authorizes the Mayor to enter into an agreement between the
Cities of New Franklin and Green for the purpose of creating a shared public
safety dispatch center. The agreement is as follows.
      (1)   Upon formation of the Council, the parties agree to participate
together as a project management group to jointly plan, design and operate the
dispatch center, and engage a consultant as necessary to assist in the project.
      (2)   The parties agree to fund approved portions of the dispatch center
through in-kind contributions or through specific appropriations as necessary
for the project and operations.
      (3)   The parties agree that the costs of consolidation and all future
costs will be shared based on the cost sharing formula as agreed to by the
parties.
      (4)   The parties agree that the Fiscal Officer of the City of Green
shall be designated as Interim Fiscal Agent for the parties until such time as
a Fiscal Agent is retained, and as such, shall be responsible to collect the
contributions, loan proceeds or appropriations as described in division (B)(2)
of this section and any overages as described in division (B)(5) of this
section. In return, the City of New Franklin shall provide primary legal
services to the dispatch center with review by the City of Green Law Director
until such time as separate legal counsel is retained.
      (5)   The parties acknowledge and agree that costs of the dispatch center
project may exceed the projected amounts (“overages”). In that event, the
parties agree to contribute an amount in proportion to the cost sharing formula
as agreed to by the parties in order to satisfy the overages, upon presentation
of an invoice by the Fiscal Agent and documentation of the overages. The
Interim Fiscal Officer’s time will not be included in any expenses related to
the operating costs of the dispatch center during formation.
      (6)   Subject to pre-approval of all parties, the parties hereby
authorize the Fiscal Agent to execute all necessary contracts relating to the
dispatch project as agent of the parties.
      (7)   Any disputes or disagreements regarding this agreement or the
dispatch project shall be discussed at a meeting with a representative from
each of the parties. The dispute or disagreement shall be discussed in a
professional manner and an amicable resolution shall be presented. In the event
that an amicable resolution cannot be reached, the dispute or disagreement
shall be referred to binding arbitration according to terms to be agreed upon
by the parties.
      (8)   By approving this agreement, it is understood that all parties have
reviewed it and agree with its contents. Approving this agreement is also a
commitment to work together for the betterment of each community, to improve
service, increase cost effectiveness and create an efficient and effective
dispatch center.
      (9)   This agreement is hereby approved by the governing bodies of the
Cities of New Franklin and Green, Ohio.
(Ord. 20-O-03, passed 9-16-2020)
CHAPTER 31: WARDS AND ELECTIONS
Section
   
31.01   Wards
§ 31.01 WARDS.
   (A)   The city is hereby divided into four wards in accordance with the map
set forth below. The wards shall be known as Ward 1, Ward 2, Ward 3 and Ward 4.
   (B)   Council shall have the power to change ward boundaries but shall not
have the power to change the number of wards. After each recurring United
States census, but more often as Council finds it necessary because of
population changes, Council shall redraw the boundaries of the four wards
subject to the population requirements of § 4.02 of the city’s Charter. The
division of the city into wards shall also be in accordance with R.C. § 731.06.
   (C)   This initial division of the city into wards is done in accordance
with the provisions of the city’s Charter and is done in accordance with R.C. §
731.06.
(Ord. 07-O-01, passed 3-21-2007)
Charter reference:
   Wards, see Charter § 4.02
CHAPTER 32: CITY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board
   
32.01   Introduction
   
32.02   Jurisdiction and powers
   
32.03   Personnel principles and rules
   
32.04   Election and duties of officers
   
32.05   Meetings
   
32.06   Adoption, amendment, rescission of rules
   
32.07   General duties of the Board
   
32.08   Hearing procedure
PERSONNEL ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD
§ 32.01 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   On November 26, 2019, following a city referendum vote, the city’s
Charter was amended to replace the Civil Service Commission with a Personnel
Advisory and Appeals Board.
   (B)   Pursuant to the Charter amendment, the City Council is charged with
appointing three disinterested qualified voters of the city to the Board to
serve without compensation for a term of six years. Each member shall have been
a resident of the municipality or territory annexed thereto for a period of two
years preceding the appointment and shall continue to remain a resident during
the member’s term. In the event of a vacancy, Council shall appoint a qualified
elector to complete the unexpired term. Members shall serve no more than two
consecutive full six-year terms.
(Ord. 20-O-04, passed 10-7-2020)
Charter reference:
   Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board; Personnel principles and rules, see
Charter § 7.03(C)
§ 32.02 JURISDICTION AND POWERS.
   (A)   As set forth below, the Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board shall
have jurisdiction over personnel matters for municipal employees, other than
the Mayor and the Directors of Finance, Law, Service and Safety, except
provisions covered by collective bargaining agreements, and shall not be
required to extend its jurisdiction to any other city, or school district or
political subdivision of the state or their employees. Any employee, except for
department managers and other similarly situated employees as designated by
Council, shall have the right to appeal grievances involving dismissals or
suspensions for periods of longer than three days or eligibility rulings, to
successively higher levels of the municipal management until satisfied, or
until heard and decided by the Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board; provided,
however, that such aggrieved employee presents the grievance to the Board
within 30 days of final determination of the grievance by the Mayor.
   (B)   Any department manager or similarly situated employee as designated by
Council aggrieved by the final determination of the Mayor may appeal grievances
involving dismissals or suspensions for periods of longer than three days or
eligibility rulings to the Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board within 30 days
of the final determination of the Mayor.
(Ord. 20-O-04, passed 10-7-2020)
Charter reference:
   Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board; Powers and duties, see Charter § 7.03
(B)
§ 32.03 PERSONNEL PRINCIPLES AND RULES.
   (A)   Appointments and promotions. All appointments and promotions of
municipal employees shall be made solely on the basis of merit and fitness
demonstrated by examination, demonstrated job performance or other evidence of
competence. Department managers, division heads and other similarly situated
employees as designated by Council shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor,
subject to the city’s standard performance evaluation process by the Mayor,
with right of appeal as provided in § 7.03(B) of the city’s Charter.
   (B)   Personnel rules. The Mayor shall propose such personnel rules to the
Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board which assure compliance with the
principles and policies referenced in division (A) of this section, as well as
all constitutional and federal/state mandates. The Personnel Advisory and
Appeals Board shall report to Council its recommendations thereon, and Council
may by ordinance adopt such rules and amendments consistent herewith.
(Ord. 20-O-04, passed 10-7-2020)
Charter reference:
   Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board; Personnel principles and rules, see
Charter § 7.03(C)
   Personnel Advisory and Appeals Board; Powers and duties, see Charter § 7.03
(B)
§ 32.04 ELECTION AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS.
   (A)   Election and duties of the Chair and Vice Chair.
      (1)   The Board shall elect one of its members as Chair of the Board and
one as Vice Chair, who shall each serve until their successors are elected,
which election shall occur when a new member is appointed and qualified. It
shall be the duty of the Chair:
         (a)   To call such meetings of the Board as are necessary to transact
the business and affairs of the Board;
         (b)   To sign the minutes of all actions taken by the Board;
         (c)   To preside at all the meetings of the Board; and
         (d)   To ensure that all reports to the Mayor are assembled and
transmitted in a timely manner.
      (2)   In the absence of the Chair, the Vice Chair shall act as Chair of
the Board.
   (B)   Appointments and duties of Board Secretary. The city’s Human Resources
Director shall act as Secretary to the Board and shall also act as its Clerk.
In the absence of the Secretary, the Board may appoint a member of the Board or
another person to act as the temporary Secretary of the Board in the place of
the Secretary. The Secretary shall perform the following duties:
      (1)   Attend all meetings of the Board and keep the minutes thereof;
      (2)   Keep in the form of minutes a record of the official actions of the
Board;
      (3)   Receive calls, accept service of filings and provide access to
Board records;
      (4)   Process all applications and appeals;
      (5)   Accurately and properly maintain all of the records of the Board;
      (6)   Keep all files in proper order;
      (7)   Prepare and deliver, or cause to be delivered, notices, and other
communications ordered by the Board;
      (8)   Handle such correspondence as the Commission shall determine,
including any required reports;
      (9)   Work with the Finance Director regarding the payment of money on
behalf of the Board;
      (10)   Make available to the public those documents deemed to be public
records under the terms of R.C. § 149.43;
      (11)   Maintain a journal, which shall be open to the public for
inspection, in which the Board shall keep a record of its proceedings and of
the vote of each of its members upon every action taken by it; and
      (12)   Perform other duties as assigned by the Board.
(Ord. 20-O-04, passed 10-7-2020)
§ 32.05 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Organizational and regular meetings.
      (1)   The first meeting of the Board shall be its organizational meeting.
The Board shall hold such other meetings as may be called by the Chair of the
Board, or by two members thereof.
      (2)   All meetings of the Board are open to the public, except as set
forth in R.C. § 121.22, other applicable provisions of the Revised Code, the
provisions of the city’s Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual, and this rule.
Notice of regular meetings shall be provided by publication in a newspaper of
general circulation and to other media or individuals who have requested
notification at least five days prior to the dates set for the meeting.
      (3)   General minutes shall be taken at all Board meetings and shall be
open to public inspection.
   (B)   Special meetings.
      (1)   The Chair of the Board may, on his or her own initiative, and
shall, upon the request of the other two members of the Board, call a special
meeting of the Board to be held not later than ten days from the date of notice
of such meeting. Two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum at any
meeting of the Board. It shall require the affirmative vote of at least two
members to adopt any motion or resolution.
      (2)   Twenty-four hours’ advance notice of any special meeting of the
Board must be given to the local news media and to other media or individuals
who have requested notification, except in the event of an emergency requiring
immediate official action.
   (C)   Order of business. The order of business for meetings of the Board
shall be:
      (1)   Roll call;
      (2)   Disposition of unapproved minutes;
      (3)   Reports;
      (4)   Unfinished business;
      (5)   New business; and
      (6)   Adjournment.
   (D)   Executive session. An executive session may be held only after a
majority of a quorum of the members, by roll call vote, have approved such
action. Such executive session may be convened to consider the appointment,
employment, dismissal, discipline, promotion, demotion or compensation of a
city employee coming under the jurisdiction of the Board, unless such employee
requests a public hearing. The motion and vote to hold the executive session
shall state which one or more of these purposes are the purposes for which the
executive session is being held, but need not name the person who is to be
considered during the session. Executive session may also be held for other
reasons enumerated in R.C. § 121.22 and the other laws and regulations
incorporated therein. Minutes of any executive session shall be appropriate to
the nature of such executive session.
(Ord. 20-O-04, passed 10-7-2020)
§ 32.06 ADOPTION, AMENDMENT, RESCISSION OF RULES.
   (A)   Proposed rules. A copy of the full text of any proposed rule or rule
change shall be submitted to the Mayor at least ten days prior to the date set
for consideration. Revisions following the initial submission are not subject
to the ten-day requirement, but substantial revisions should be submitted
reasonably in advance of adoption.
   (B)   Emergency rules. Division (A) of this section does not apply to an
emergency rule, amendment or rescission or to any rule, amendment or rescission
required by state or federal law or regulation.
   (C)   Adoption of rules. Board rules shall be adopted at an open meeting by
a majority vote and entered into the minutes. Interested parties may provide
input in writing preferably in advance, or offer written or oral input at the
meeting(s) called to consider the rules or rule changes. Copies of the rules or
rule changes, together with the minutes of the Board adopting the change, will
be kept by the designee of the Board and made available to any person upon
request. Due notice of the contents of such rules and of all changes shall be
given to appointing authorities affected by such rules, and such rules shall
also be printed for public distribution.
   (D)   Submission to Council. Once the Board approves the rules they will be
submitted to the City Council for adoption in accordance with Council’s home
rule authority. The rules become effective upon adoption by the City Council.
(Ord. 20-O-04, passed 10-7-2020)
§ 32.07 GENERAL DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   Appeals. The Board shall hear appeals as provided for in the city’s
Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Appeals from eligibility rulings on vacancies/promotions as
provided for in § 3.04(E)(12) of the Manual;
      (2)   Unresolved disputes regarding requests for special accommodations
for testing, as provided in § 3.05(C)(3) of the Manual;
      (3)   Appeals from demotions as provided for in § 3.15(D) of the Manual;
      (4)   Unresolved disputes regarding selection of a physician for
examination regarding injury leave as provided for in § 5.15(A)(5) of the
Manual;
      (5)   Appeals regarding disability leave/separation as provided for in §
5.17(C)(5) of the Manual;
      (6)   Appeals regarding reinstatement following disability as provided
for in § 5.15(D)(9) of the Manual;
      (7)   Appeals from suspensions of more than three days, demotions or
terminations as provided for in § 7.04 of the Manual;
      (8)   Appeals from layoffs and/or reductions in force as provided for in
§ 8.00(C) of the Manual; and
      (9)   Any and all other matters referred to the Board by virtue of the
Manual or as specifically referred for consideration and determination by the
Mayor, or by operation of law.
   (B)   Hearing procedures. The Board shall conduct all hearings and appeals
pursuant to the procedures set forth in § 7.05 of the Manual which provides as
provided in §
32.08.
(Ord. 20-O-04, passed 10-7-2020)
§ 32.08 HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   In determination of appeals to the PAAB regarding special testing
accommodations, demotions, physical examinations, disability leave/separation/
reinstatement, disciplinary actions, layoffs or appointment/promotion
eligibility decisions, the following rules shall apply.
      (1)   The PAAB shall set a time and place to hear such appeal and shall
provide sufficient notice of same to all parties and designated representatives
by certified U.S. mail no less than ten calendar days prior to the date set for
hearing. This time limit may be waived by the parties. Attendance at the
hearing without objection as to notice shall constitute waiver as to any
defects in the time, manner or method of service.
      (2)   Both parties are entitled but are not required to be represented by
a third party of their choice.
      (3)   The Ohio Rules of Evidence and Rules of Civil Procedure shall be
used as general procedural guidelines but the Board may permit the introduction
of evidence otherwise excludable, including hearsay, where a sufficient
foundation establishing reliability, credibility, relevance and materiality has
been established.
      (4)   The Board may, in its discretion, issue prehearing orders, permit
discovery, permit motions, issue subpoenas on forms provided by the parties,
determine the order of presentation of evidence, call witnesses other than
those called by the parties, hear arguments and request submission of briefs,
memoranda or other written materials. The filing, response and determination of
motions shall generally conform to the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure.
      (5)   Hearings before the Board shall be closed. If the appellant
requests a public hearing, the Board shall consider and rule on that request.
      (6)   Hearings shall be recorded either stenographically or by another
reliable recording process.
   (B)   Procedure. At the hearing, the following procedure shall apply:
      (1)   The Board shall first confirm jurisdiction (right to appeal, stages
of appeal, conformity with procedure for appeal and the like) and proper notice
or waiver of same by the parties, and thereafter proceed as follows;
      (2)   All witnesses must testify under oath or affirmation. The Board may
limit the number of witnesses to avoid cumulative, repetitive or unnecessary
testimony;
      (3)   The city shall be required to establish by a preponderance of the
evidence sufficient factual allegations which support the disciplinary action,
layoff decision or employment eligibility action;
      (4)   The employee shall then produce such evidence as he or she may wish
to present to refute such charges or contest the action;
      (5)   The city may then offer evidence in rebuttal;
      (6)   Either party may call the opposing party, agents, officers or
others as witnesses and question them as if on cross-examination;
      (7)   The Board may then request or permit closing arguments or
submission of written arguments;
      (8)   Within 30 days following conclusion of the hearing or submission of
post-hearing written arguments, the Board shall issue a written decision and
final orders signed by the Chair and the other Board members; and
      (9)   In discipline actions, the acceptance by the Mayor of the
resignation of the employee/ complainant/appellant prior to the conclusion of
the hearing shall be considered a withdrawal of the charges and the appeal. The
separation of the employee shall be entered upon the records of the Board and
the proceedings shall be dismissed without judgement.
   (C)   Appointment of Hearing Officer.
      (1)   The Board may appoint a Hearing Officer to hear an appeal. If so,
the Hearing Officer shall follow the procedure set forth division (B) of this
section for management of the hearing, and within 30 days following the
conclusion of the hearing or the submission of post-hearing written arguments
shall submit and serve upon the parties by certified U.S. mail a written report
and recommendations.
      (2)   Either party may object to the Hearing Officer’s report and
recommendations by filing with the Board written objections within ten days
after receipt of the report and recommendations. The other party may file a
written response within ten days after the filing of the opposing party’s
objections. The Board may extend the time for filing of objections and/or
responses.
      (3)   Within 30 days following receipt of the Hearing Officer’s report
and recommendations, and any objections/responses thereto, the Board shall
issue a final order either adopting, modifying, amending or rejecting the
recommendations.
   (D)   Decisions of the Personal Policy and Appeals Board are final. Final
orders shall be signed by the Chair and the other members of the Board. Copies
of the final order shall be forwarded by certified U.S. mail to all parties. If
the copies are returned as unclaimed or refused, they shall be reissued by
regular U.S. mail.
(Ord. 20-O-04, passed 10-7-2020)
Cross-reference:
   New Franklin Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual, see Charter § 7.05(A),
(B) and (C)
CHAPTER 33: CITY PERSONNEL
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Per diem
Personnel Policy and Procedures Manual
   
33.15   Adopted
   
33.16   Family and Medical Leave policy
Credit Card Policy
   
33.30   Purpose
   
33.31   Definitions
   
33.32   Types of expenses for which a credit card account may be used
   
33.33   Procedure for opening new credit card account
   
33.34   Eligibility to use card
   
33.35   Procedure for issuance of card to employee for use
   
33.36   Procedure for managing credit card account
   
33.37   Maximum amount of credit
   
33.38   Procedure for re-issuing, cancelling or reporting lost cards
   
33.39   Compliance officer
   
33.40   Periodic review of cards/authorization
   
33.41   General policy and penalty for misuse
   
33.42   Expense itemization/documentation
   
33.43   Disclosure of credit card rewards
   
33.44   Acknowledgment form
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 PER DIEM.
   Effective retroactively to January 1, 2019, employees traveling overnight
outside the city for conferences and seminars when meals are not provided shall
be entitled to reimbursement for meals and tips in the total amount of $50 per
day. All meal costs, including tips, are to be receipted, with copies to the
Finance Director.
(Res. 19-R-40, passed 5-15-2019)
PERSONNEL POLICY AND PROCEDURES MANUAL
§ 33.15 ADOPTED.
   The revised Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual is hereby adopted. A
copy of the revised Policy Manual has been distributed to all Council members
and is available for review in the city administration offices and on the city
website.
(Ord. 20-O-05, passed 11-4-2020)
§ 33.16 FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE POLICY.
   (A)   The proposed city FFCRA family and medical leave addendum is hereby
approved and adopted as an addendum to the city’s Personnel Policies and
Procedures Manual, § 7.10 Family and Medical Leave. A copy of the addendum is
attached hereto and incorporated by reference herein.
   (B)   The city FFCRA family and medical leave addendum as approved and
adopted as an addendum to the city’s Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual,
by prior Ord. 20-0-01, is hereby extended until such time as the state of
emergency as enacted on March 17, 2020 is withdrawn.
(Ord. 20-O-01, passed 4-1-2020; Ord. 20-O-06, passed 12-30-2020)
CREDIT CARD POLICY
§ 33.30 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this policy is to establish the procedure and protocol for
the use of the city business credit cards and other vendor supplied lines of
credit, in accordance with R.C. § 9.21 (effective November 2, 2018). In
accordance with R.C. § 9.21 the name of the city shall appear on any credit
card to be used by the city.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.31 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CREDIT CARD ACCOUNT. Includes any bank-issued credit card account, store-
issued credit card account, financial institution-issued credit card account,
financial depository-issued credit card account, affinity credit card account
or any other card account allowing the holder to purchase goods or services on
credit or otherwise transact with the account, and any debit or gift card
account related to the receipt of grant moneys. The term CREDIT CARD ACCOUNT
expressly excludes any procurement card account, gasoline or telephone credit
card account, or any other card account where merchant category codes are in
place as a system of control for the account’s use; in other words, an account
that can be used only to pay for certain types of goods or services. However,
the penalty provisions set forth in §
33.41 apply to all credit cards issued in the name of the city.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.32 TYPES OF EXPENSES FOR WHICH A CREDIT CARD ACCOUNT MAY BE USED.
   A credit card opened by the city shall be used for only the following
purposes:
   (A)   Meals;
   (B)   Gas and oil;
   (C)   Repair and maintenance of city assets (e.g., buildings, vehicles,
tools, equipment and the like);
   (D)   Professional development (shall include classes, seminars, conferences
and lodging);
   (E)   Internet;
   (F)   Software;
   (G)   Purchased services;
   (H)   Equipment; and
   (I)   Supplies (e.g., office, general and the like).
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.33 PROCEDURE FOR OPENING NEW CREDIT CARD ACCOUNT.
   In order to open a new credit card account a written request must be made to
the Finance Director. The request shall be reviewed by the Finance Director and
must be approved by the Finance Director and the Mayor. Once approved, the
Finance Director shall open the account under his or her name as the custodian
of the account.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.34 ELIGIBILITY TO USE CARD.
   The Mayor and Finance Director shall identify those employees whose day-to-
day responsibilities require access to a city credit card. Before receiving
authorization to carry or use a city credit card, authorized employees must
acknowledge receipt of this policy.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.35 PROCEDURE FOR ISSUANCE OF CARD TO EMPLOYEE FOR USE.
   (A)   The city will use a sign-in and sign-out policy where an employee
authorized to use a credit card for allowable purposes shall sign a form
checking-out and checking-in the credit card. The form shall, at a minimum,
document the following: the name of the employee; the card signed out; the
purpose for the use of the card; the date the card was signed out; the time the
card was signed in and signed out; and the signature of the employee that
signed the card in or out. The Mayor, Police Chief, Police Captain, Fire Chief,
Assistant Fire Chief and Deputy Service Director shall maintain possession of
their credit cards until such time as they separate from employment or the
cards are otherwise recalled. For all others, the applicable credit card shall
be returned no later than the end of the next business day.
   (B)   Further, before the employee shall be allowed to sign-out any credit
card he or she shall be issued a copy of this policy and sign the
acknowledgment form in §
33.44.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.36 PROCEDURE FOR MANAGING CREDIT CARD ACCOUNT.
   (A)   The Finance Director shall retain day-to-day control over all credit
cards with the exception of those issued to the Mayor and department/division
heads. The credit card(s) shall otherwise be kept in the possession of the
Finance Director.
   (B)   Any employees using the card shall sign the card out and return the
card at a reasonable time, no later than close of business on the following
day. The employee shall sign-out the card and sign-in the card once returned.
Exceptions shall be made as deemed necessary by the Finance Director and
documented in writing.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.37 MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF CREDIT.
   The maximum amount of credit on any one card shall be no more than $5,000.
Additionally, the city shall have no more than $400,000 in available credit
between all credit card accounts open at any one time.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.38 PROCEDURE FOR RE-ISSUING, CANCELLING OR REPORTING LOST CARDS.
   (A)   Employees must surrender all city credit cards upon their separation
of employment from the city or when requested by the Mayor or Finance Director.
   (B)   In the event the card is lost or stolen, the cardholder must notify
the Finance Director as soon as reasonably possible. The employee is to assist
the Finance Director in identifying and resolving any charges made to the
account.
   (C)   An open credit card account may be cancelled by the Mayor or Finance
Director.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.39 COMPLIANCE OFFICER.
   Because credit cards are maintained and possessed by the Finance Director,
and issued using a sign-in and sign-out procedure, the city does not utilize a
compliance officer designated by the Mayor. Should there be a time where the
city issues credit cards to individual employees that are not signed-in and out
each day, the city shall first name a compliance officer.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.40 PERIODIC REVIEW OF CARDS/AUTHORIZATION.
   Generally, the legislative authority of a political subdivision and the
compliance officer, if one exists, must review the following at least
quarterly: the number of cards issued; the number of active cards issued; and
the cards’ expiration dates and credit limits.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.41 GENERAL POLICY AND PENALTY FOR MISUSE.
   City credit cards are issued solely for the purpose of conducting city
business and are not to be used for any personal expenses (including the use of
credit card points). Personal and/or unauthorized usage of city credit cards
shall be immediate grounds for revocation of the credit card. The use of a
credit card account for expenses beyond those authorized by the legislative
authority and/or this policy constitutes misuse of a credit card account, that
may result in discipline up to an including termination of employment. An
officer or employee of the municipal corporation or a public servant as defined
under R.C. § 2921.01 who knowingly misuses a credit card account held by the
municipal corporation violates R.C. § 2913.21. The use of a city credit card to
purchase goods or services does not waive the city purchasing procedures.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.42 EXPENSE ITEMIZATION/DOCUMENTATION.
   (A)   The city recognizes that the credit card provides convenience to
employees in acquiring goods and services for the city. The city also
recognizes the additional risk inherent with credit card usage. Therefore,
whenever a vendor will accept a city purchase order or super blanket, a
purchase order or super blanket should be used in lieu of the city credit card.
   (B)   For individual expenditures, the expense must fall within pre-approved
budgets. Itemized receipts shall be turned in to the Finance Director within
two business days. If an employee is out of town during the expenditure, signed
receipts shall be turned in within two business days of returning to work.
   (C)   In the rare event an employee misplaces or loses a receipt, a missing
receipt form shall be fully completed and submitted within two business days.
This form shall be signed by the employee’s department head and/or supervisor.
   (D)   The employee may be liable in person and upon any official bond the
officer or employee has given to the political subdivision to reimburse the
treasury the amount for which the officer or employee does not provide itemized
receipts in accordance with the credit card policy.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.43 DISCLOSURE OF CREDIT CARD REWARDS.
   The Finance Director shall file an annual report with the legislative
authority detailing any rewards received based on the use of the municipal
corporation’s credit card account.
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
§ 33.44 ACKNOWLEDGMENT FORM.
   The city’s Personnel Policy and Procedure Manual credit card use
acknowledgment:
 
 
Your signature also acknowledges that you have received, reviewed and understand the
City’s Policy on City Credit Use. Improper use of a City Credit card can be
considered misappropriation of City funds. This may result in disciplinary action up
to and including termination of employment. Your signature below verifies that you
have read the City policies and procedures and agree to comply with them as well as
with the following responsibilities.
 
Employee Signature:______________________________    Finance Director:
____________________________
                                    Signature
 
Employee Printed Name:__________________________   Finance Director:
____________________________
                                    Printed Name
 
Date:_______________________________            Date:_______________________________
 
(Res. 19-R-05, passed 1-16-2019)
CHAPTER 34: TAXATION
Section
   
34.01   Authority to levy tax; purposes of tax; rate
   
34.02   Statement of procedural history; state mandated changes to municipal
income tax; effective date
   
34.03   Definitions
   
34.04   Income subject to tax for individuals
   
34.05   Collection at source
   
34.06   Income subject to net profit tax
   
34.07   Declaration of estimated tax
   
34.08   Credit for tax paid
   
34.09   Annual return
   
34.10   Penalty, interest, fees, and charges
   
34.11   Audit
   
34.12   Rounding
   
34.13   Authority and powers of the Tax Administrator
   
34.14   Confidentiality
   
34.15   Fraud
   
34.16   Opinion of the Tax Administrator
   
34.17   Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery
   
34.18   Local Board of Tax Review; appeal to Local Board of Tax Review
   
34.19   Actions to recover; statute of limitations
   
34.20   Adoption of rules
   
34.21   Collection after termination of chapter
   
34.22   Savings clause
   
34.23   Net profit tax election
   
34.24   H.B. 49 provisions
 
   
34.99   Penalty
§ 34.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.
   (A)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this chapter
are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio Constitution. The tax on
income and the withholding tax established by this chapter are deemed to be
levied in accordance with, and to be consistent with, the provisions and
limitations of R.C. Chapter 718. This chapter is deemed to incorporate the
provisions of R.C. Chapter 718.
   (B)   The tax is an annual tax levied on the income of every person residing
in or earning or receiving income in the city, and shall be measured by
municipal taxable income. The city shall tax income at a uniform rate and the
tax is levied on municipal taxable income, as defined in this chapter.
   (C)   The purpose of this city income tax chapter is to provide funds for
capital improvements and the general municipal operations of the city. The
additional 1.0% income tax rate to be effective on January 1, 2017 is to
provide funds for the general operating expenses of the city’s Police
Department and to provide funds for the general municipal operations of the
city.
   (D)   The tax enforced in accordance with this chapter on or after January
1, 2016, shall be at the rate of 1.0% per annum. On and after January 1, 2017,
the tax enforced in accordance with this chapter shall be at the rate of 2.0%
per annum.
   (E)   The funds collected under the chapter shall be deposited into the
income tax funds and shall be disbursed at the end of each month in the
following manner:
      (1)   Pay those funds necessary to defray all costs of collecting the tax
and the cost of administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter; and
      (2)   The balance of funds shall be used for the General Fund.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015; Ord. 16-O-03, passed 4-20-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to tax income and withhold tax, see R.C. § 718.04
§ 34.02 STATEMENT OF PROCEDURAL HISTORY; STATE MANDATED CHANGES TO MUNICIPAL
INCOME TAX; EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   Significant and wide-ranging amendments to R.C. Chapter 718 were
enacted by Am. Sub. H.B. 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and signed by
Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal
corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718 in
order to have the authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a
municipal income tax.
   (B)   As mandated by H.B. 5, this municipal income tax chapter, effective
January 1, 2016, comprehensively amends existing city income tax laws in
accordance with the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718 to allow the city to
continue the income tax and withholding tax administration and collection
efforts on behalf of the city.
   (C)   This municipal income tax chapter, effective January 1, 2016, and
corresponding changes to R.C. Chapter 718, applies to municipal taxable years
beginning on or after January 1, 2016. All provisions of this chapter apply to
taxable years beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years.
   (D)   This municipal income tax chapter does not repeal the existing city
income tax laws for any taxable year prior to 2016, but rather amends city
income tax laws effective January 1, 2016. For municipal taxable years
beginning before January 1, 2016, the city shall continue to administer, audit
and enforce the income tax of the city under R.C. Chapter 718 and ordinances
and resolutions of the city as that ordinance and those ordinances and
resolutions existed before January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see R.C. § 718.04
§ 34.03 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter
that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context
in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in
R.C. Title LVII and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over the
use of the term in R.C. Title LVII.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the singular shall include the plural,
and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral.
   (C)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. For a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under division (C)(23)(d) of this section, means a C corporation’s federal
taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined
under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (C)(1)(a) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange or other disposition of property
described in § 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         (d)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(d)2. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; and
            2.   Division (C)(1)(d)1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in §§ 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
         (h)   1.   Except as limited by divisions (C)(1)(h)2., (C)(1)(h)3. and
(C)(1)(h)4. of this section, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the
person in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017. The amount of
such net operating loss shall be deducted from net profit that is reduced by
exempt income to the extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to
zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss carried
forward to not more than five consecutive taxable years following the taxable
year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more years than
necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (C)(1)
(h) of this section to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 or
2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a
municipal corporation that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, more
than 50% of the amount of the deduction otherwise allowed by division (C)(1)
(h)1. of this section.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by a municipal corporation
that levies an income tax before January 1, 2016, the full amount allowed by
division (C)(1)(h)1. of this section.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
division (C)(1)(h) of this section.
            5.   Nothing in division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section. To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years by operation of division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this
section is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for a taxable
year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021 or 2022, the limitation described in
division (C)(1)(h)3.a. of this section shall apply to the amount carried
forward.
         (i)    Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly
or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
34.06(D)(5)(c)2.;
         (j)   1.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
34.06(D)(5)(c)2.
            2.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made the election described in division (C)(47)(b) of this
section, is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election
described in division (C)(23)(d) of this section, and is not an individual, the
taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if
the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar
amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible
expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and
treated as payment of interest under § 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or
United States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
         (k)   Nothing in this definition shall be construed as allowing the
taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be construed as
allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for purposes of
federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   ASSESSMENT.
         (a)   Any of the following:
            1.   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty or interest, to the municipal corporation;
            2.   A full or partial denial of a refund request issued under §
34.09(F)(2)(b) of this chapter;
            3.   A Tax Administrator’s denial of a taxpayer’s request for use
of an alternative apportionment method, issued under §
34.06(B)(2)(b) of this chapter; or
            4.   A Tax Administrator’s requirement for a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method, issued under §
34.06(B)(2)(c) of this chapter.
            5.   For purposes of divisions (C)(2)(a)1., (C)(2)(a)2., (C)(2)
(a)3. and (C)(2)(a)4. of this section, an assessment shall commence the
person’s time limitation for making an appeal to the Local Board of Tax Review
pursuant to §
34.18 of this chapter, and shall have “ASSESSMENT” written in all capital
letters at the top of such finding.
         (b)   ASSESSMENT does not include notice(s) denying a request for
refund issued under §
34.09(F)(2)(c) of this chapter, a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of
current or past-due balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax
Administrator’s request for additional information, a notification to the
taxpayer of mathematical errors, or a Tax Administrator’s other written
correspondence to a person or taxpayer that does not meet the criteria
prescribed by division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
      (3)   AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal income
tax
      (4)   BOARD OF REVIEW. Has same meaning as LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
      (5)   CALENDAR QUARTER. The three-month period ending on the last day of
March, June, September or December.
      (6)   CASINO OPERATOR and CASINO FACILITY. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 3772.01.
      (7)   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, POSTAL SERVICE
AND SIMILAR TERMS. Include any delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. §
5703.056.
      (8)   COMPENSATION. Any form of remuneration paid to an employee for
personal services.
      (9)   DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      (10)   DOMICILE. The true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to
which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
      (11)   EXEMPT INCOME. All of the following:
         (a)   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
national guard of any state;
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(11)(b)2. of this
section, intangible income;
            2.   A municipal corporation that taxed any type of intangible
income on March 29, 1988, pursuant to § 3 of S.B. 238 of the 116th General
Assembly, may continue to tax that type of income if a majority of the electors
of the municipal corporation voting on the question of whether to permit the
taxation of that type of intangible income after 1988 voted in favor thereof at
an election held on November 8, 1988.
         (c)   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident
or liability insurance policies. As used in this division (C)(11)(c) of this
section, “unemployment compensation” does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (d)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities;
         (e)   Compensation paid under R.C. § 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation;
         (f)   Dues, contributions and similar payments received by charitable,
religious, educational or literary organizations or labor unions, lodges and
similar organizations;
         (g)   Alimony and child support received;
         (h)   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property from
insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost salaries
or wages or awards for punitive damages;
         (i)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject
to the tax levied under R.C. §§ 5727.24 or 5727.30. This division (C)(11)(i) of
this section does not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745;
         (j)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business;
         (k)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under § 107 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (l)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as defined in
division (C)(34) of this section;
         (m)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of
a United States air force base under the jurisdiction of the United States air
force that is used for the housing of members of the United States air force
and is a center for air force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile;
         (n)   An S corporation shareholder’s distributive share of net profits
of the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive share of net
profits that represents wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue
Code or net earnings from self-employment as defined in § 1402(a) of the
Internal Revenue Code;
         (o)   All of the municipal taxable income earned by individuals under
18 years of age;
         (p)   1.   Except as provided in divisions (C)(11)(p)2., (C)(11)(p)3.,
and (C)(11)(p)4. of this section, qualifying wages described in §
34.05(B)(2)(a) or (B)(5) of this chapter to the extent the qualifying wages are
not subject to withholding for the city under either of those divisions;
            2.   The exemption provided in division (C)(11)(p)1. of this
section does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the
employee resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages;
            3.   The exemption provided in division (C)(11)(p)1. of this
section does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold
under §
34.05(B)(4)(b) of this chapter;
            4.   The exemption provided in division (C)(11)(p)1. of this
section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions
apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
34.05(B)(2)(a) of this chapter, the employee’s employer withholds and remits
tax on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee’s principal place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages
described in division §
34.05(B)(5) of this chapter, the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax
on the qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer’s
fixed location is located; and
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (C)(11)(p)4.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
         (q)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(11)(q)2. or (C)(11)(q)3.
of this section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a
nonresident individual for personal services performed in the city on not more
than 20 days in a taxable year;
            2.   The exemption provided in division (C)(11)(q)1. of this
section does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the city;
and
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure, and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer or public figure. For purposes of this division (C)
(11)(q)2.b. of this section, PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE, PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER and
PUBLIC FIGURE have the same meanings as in §
34.05(B) of this chapter.
            3.   Compensation to which division (C)(11)(q) of this section
applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual’s base of
operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled; and
            4.   For purposes of division (C)(11)(q) of this section, BASE OF
OPERATION means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and at
which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         (r)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed
for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C. § 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence;
         (s)   All of the following:
            1.   Income derived from disaster work conducted in this state by
an out-of-state disaster business during a disaster response period pursuant to
a qualifying solicitation received by the business;
            2.   Income of a qualifying employee described in R.C. § 5703.94(A)
(14)(a), to the extent such income is derived from disaster work conducted in
this state by the employee during a disaster response period pursuant to a
qualifying solicitation received by the employee’s employer; and
            3.   Income of a qualifying employee described in R.C. § 5703.94(A)
(14)(b), to the extent such income is derived from disaster work conducted in
this state by the employee during a disaster response period on critical
infrastructure owned or used by the employee’s employer.
         (t)   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the constitution
or laws of the United States. Any item of income that is exempt income of a
pass-through entity under this division (C)(11) is exempt income of each owner
of the pass-through entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or
proportionate share of that item of the entity’s income.
      (12)   FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (13)   GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed
by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability, including a
request for refund.
      (14)   INCOME. Means the following:
         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in division (C)(23)(d) of this
section.
            2.   For the purposes of division (C)(14)(a)1. of this section:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident’s distributive share of any net profit
attributable to the resident’s ownership interest in a pass-through entity
until fully utilized, subject to division (C)(14)(a)4. of this section;
               b.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
passthrough entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity’s net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (C)(14)(a)2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation.
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer’s
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         (b)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the city, including any net profit of the nonresident,
but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net profit or loss of
only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident;
         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer; and
         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings
from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax withheld or paid
to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to the municipal
corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as specified in §
34.08(A) of this chapter.
      (15)   INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income
yield; interest; capital gains; dividends; or other income arising from the
ownership, sale, exchange or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money or credits as those
terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights, trademarks,
trade names, investments in real estate investment trusts, investments in
regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred compensation.
INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include prizes, awards, or other income associated
with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other similar games of chance.
      (16)   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 26
U.S.C. _For example, where reference is made to “§ 1221 of the Internal Revenue
Code,” the complete citation would then be, 26 U.S.C. § 1221.
      (17)   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed
under R.C. Chapter 1705 or 1706 or under the laws of another state.
      (18)   LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW and BOARD OF TAX REVIEW. The entity
created under §
34.18 of this chapter.
      (19)   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. In general terms, a status conferred upon a
local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain autonomous
operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of eminent domain,
police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. §§ 718.691, 715.70, 715.71 or 715.74.
      (20)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.
         (a)   Means the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income reduced by
exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to New Franklin under §
34.06(B) of this chapter, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating
loss carryforward available to the person for the city.
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of New Franklin other
than a qualified municipal corporation, income reduced by exempt income to the
extent otherwise included in income, then reduced as provided in division (C)
(20)(b) of this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward available to the individual for New Franklin.
               b.   For an individual who is a resident of a qualified
municipal corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by income exempted,
and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal corporation
from the qualified municipal corporation’s tax on or before December 31, 2013.
If a qualified municipal corporation, on or before December 31, 2013, exempts
income earned by individuals who are not residents of the qualified municipal
corporation and net profit of persons that are not wholly located within the
qualified municipal corporation, such individual or person shall have no
municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax levied by the qualified
municipal corporation and may be exempted by the qualified municipal
corporation from the requirements of R.C. § 718.03.
            3.   For an individual who is a nonresident of New Franklin, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to New Franklin under §
34.06(B) of this chapter, then reduced as provided in division (C)(20)(b) of
this section, and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward available to the individual for New Franklin.
         (b)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is
an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (C)(20)
(a)2.a. or (C)(20)(a)3. of this section, the amount of the individual’s
employee business expenses reported on the individual’s Form 2106 that the
individual deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year,
subject to the limitation imposed by § 67 of the Internal Revenue Code. For the
municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer may
deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes. For a
municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may
deduct such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related to the
taxpayer’s performance of personal services in that nonresident municipal
corporation.
      (21)   MUNICIPALITY. The City of New Franklin.
      (22)   NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation
of a trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations or passive activity loss
limitations.
      (23)   NET PROFIT.
         (a)   For a person other than an individual, means adjusted federal
taxable income.
         (b)   For a person who is an individual, means the individual’s net
profit required to be reported on Schedule C, Schedule E or Schedule F reduced
by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes of division (C)(23)
(a) of this section, the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated
and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (C)(1)(h) of this
section.
         (c)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(C)(23)(a) of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be
taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in
the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         (d)   1.   For purposes of this chapter, PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP
means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded on an
established securities market. A PUBLICLY TRADED PARTNERSHIP may have any
number of partners.
            2.   For the purposes of this chapter, and not withstanding any
other provision of this chapter, the NET PROFIT of a publicly traded
partnership that makes the election described in division (C)(23)(d) of this
section shall be taxed as if the partnership were a C corporation, and shall
not be treated as the net profit or income of any owner of the partnership.
            3.   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its net profits
in one or more municipal corporations in this state may elect to be treated as
a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly traded
partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in which the
partnership is subject to taxation on its net profits. The election shall be
made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal corporation. Once
the election is made, the election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election. The election continues to
be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a C corporation for
municipal purposes under division (C)(23)(d)4. of this section.
            4.   An election to discontinue filing as a C corporation must be
made in the first year following the last year of a five-year election period
in effect under division (C)(23)(d)3. of this section. The election to
discontinue filing as a C corporation is binding for a five-year period
beginning with the first taxable year of the election and continues to be
binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a partnership for municipal
purposes. An election to discontinue filing as a partnership must be made in
the first year following the last year of a five-year election period.
            5.   The publicly traded partnership shall not be required to file
the election with any municipal corporation in which the partnership is not
subject to taxation on its net profits, but this division (C)(23)(d) applies to
all municipal corporations in which an individual owner of the partnership
resides.
            6.   The individual owners of the partnership not filing as a C
corporation shall be required to file with their municipal corporation of
residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit.
      (24)   NONRESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident of New Franklin.
      (25)   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The online computer network system, created
under R.C. § 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file business reply
forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing and
payment system.
      (26)   OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual’s employer or
the employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the
federal gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators
and video lottery terminal sales agents.
      (27)   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association
taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability
company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal
income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which
the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for
federal income tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not include a trust,
estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (28)   PENSION. Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is
reported to the recipient on an IRS Form 1099-R, or successor form. PENSION
does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to nonqualified
deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an IRS Form W-
2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      (29)   PERSON. Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities and any other entity.
      (30)   POSTAL SERVICE. The United States Postal Service, or private
delivery service delivering documents and packages within an agreed upon
delivery schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item.
      (31)   POSTMARK DATE, DATE OF POSTMARK AND SIMILAR TERMS. Includes the
date recorded and marked by a delivery service and recorded electronically to a
database kept in the regular course if its business and marked on the cover in
which the payment or document is enclosed, the date on which the payment or
document was given to the delivery service for delivery
      (32)   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD.
         (a)   Any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year beginning
before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a resolution
or ordinance of New Franklin that was adopted by New Franklin before January 1,
2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit
generated in such municipality in future taxable years.
         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (33)   QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. A municipal corporation that, by
resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December 31, 2011, adopted Ohio
adjusted gross income, as defined by R.C. § 5747.01, as the income subject to
tax for the purposes of imposing a municipal income tax.
      (34)   QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages, as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in § 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer or other payer; and
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         (b)   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986;
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise
of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock
purchased under a stock option. This division (C)(34)(b)2. of this section
applies only to those amounts constituting ordinary income;
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in §§ 401(k), 403(b) or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. This
division (34)(b)3. of this section applies only to employee contributions and
employee deferrals;
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages;
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with § 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code; and
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside of the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under § 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either division (C)(34)(b) of this section or R.C. §
718.03, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the
130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (35)   RELATED ENTITY. Any of the following:
         (a)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder’s
family enumerated in § 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the
taxpayer’s outstanding stock;
         (b)   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s
outstanding stock;
         (c)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (C)(35)(d) of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially or
constructively, at least 50% of the value of the corporation’s outstanding
stock;
         (d)   The attribution rules described in § 318 of the Internal Revenue
Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in
divisions (C)(35)(a) to (C)(35)(c) of this section have been met.
      (36)   RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during
all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component
member as defined in § 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a person to or
from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance with § 1563(e)
of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining whether a
person is a related member under this division, “20%” shall be substituted for
“5%” wherever “5%” appears in § 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (37)   RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in New Franklin as
determined under §
34.04(B) of this chapter.
      (38)   S CORPORATION. A person that has made an election under subchapter
S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year.
      (39)   SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service Schedule C (Form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (40)   SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service Schedule E (Form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service Schedule F (Form 1040) filed
by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability
company that has one direct member.
      (43)   SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than
$500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division (C)
(43), TOTAL REVENUE means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not
limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and
other investment income; commissions; premiums; money; property; grants;
contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient service
revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees; tuition
payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment from
a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and any other
similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under generally
accepted accounting principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the federal
government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      (44)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR. 
         (a)   Subject to division (44)(b) of this section, the individual
charged with direct responsibility for administration of an income tax levied
by a municipal corporation in accordance with this chapter, and also includes
the following:
            1.   A municipal corporation acting as the agent of another
municipal corporation;
            2.   A person retained by a municipal corporation to administer a
tax levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the municipal corporation
does not compensate the person in whole or in part on a contingency basis; and
            3.   The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the Regional Income Tax
Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another entity organized to
perform functions similar to those performed by the Central Collection Agency
and the Regional Income Tax Agency.
         (b)   TAX ADMINISTRATOR does not include the Tax Commissioner.
         (c)   A private individual or entity serving in any position described
in division (44)(a)2. or (a)3. of this section shall have no access to criminal
history record information.
      (45)   TAX RETURN PREPARER. Any individual described in § 7701(a)(36) of
the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. part 301.7701-15.
      (46)   TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed
for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (47)   TAXPAYER.
         (a)   A person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal
corporation in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not include a
grantor trust or, except as provided in division (C)(47)(b)1. of this section,
a disregarded entity.
         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company;
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004;
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under R.C. § 718.01(L) as this section existed on December 31, 2004;
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member; and
               e.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (C)(47)(b)1.e. of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      (48)   TAXPAYERS’ RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to
taxpayers in R.C. §§ 718.11, 718.12, 718.19, 718.23, 718.36, 718.37, 718.38,
5717.011 and 5717.03 and any corresponding ordinances of New Franklin, and the
responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold, remit and pay
municipal income tax and otherwise comply with R.C. Chapter 718 and
resolutions, ordinances, and rules adopted by a municipal corporation for the
imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.
      (49)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL. The same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
      (50)   VIDEO LOTTERY TERMINAL SALES AGENT. A lottery sales agent licensed
under R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on behalf of the
state pursuant to R.C. § 3770.21.
      (51)   PENSION. A retirement benefit plan, regardless of whether the plan
satisfies the qualifications described under I.R.C. § 401(a), including amounts
that are taxable under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act, I.R.C. Chapter
21, excluding employee contributions and elective deferrals, and regardless of
whether such amounts are paid in the same taxable year in which the amounts are
included in the employee’s wages, as defined by I.R.C. § 3121(a).
      (52)   RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLAN. An arrangement whereby an entity provides
benefits to individuals either on or after their termination of service because
of retirement or disability. RETIREMENT BENEFIT PLAN does not include wage
continuation payments, severance payments or payments made for accrued personal
or vacation time.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Related definitions, see R.C. § 718.01
§ 34.04 INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS.
   (A)   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals.
      (1)   Municipal taxable income for a resident of New Franklin is
calculated as follows:
         (a)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent such exempt income
is otherwise included in income, reduced by allowable employee business expense
deduction as found in §
34.03(C)(20)(b), further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward equals municipal taxable income.
            1.   Income is defined in §
34.03(C)(14) of this chapter.
               a.   Qualifying wages is defined in §
34.03(C)(34).
               b.   Net profit is included in income, and is defined in §
34.03(C)(23) of this chapter. This section also provides that the net operating
loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as
provided in §
34.03(C)(1)(h). Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer
from rental real estate is provided in §
34.06(B)(5).
               c.   Section
34.03(C)(14) provides the following: offsetting and net operating loss
carryforward treatment in §
34.03(C)(14)(a)2.a.; resident’s distributive share of net profit from pass
through entity treatment in §
34.03(C)(14)(a)2.b.; treatment of S Corporation distributive share of net
profit in the hands of the shareholder in §
34.03(C)(14)(a)3.; restriction of amount of loss permitted to be carried
forward for use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable year in §
34.03(C)(14)(a)4..
               d.   Pass through entity is defined in §
34.03(C)(27).
            2.   Exempt income is defined in §
34.03(C)(11) of this chapter.
            3.   Allowable employee business expense deduction is described in
§
34.03(C)(20)(b) of this chapter, and is subject to the limitations provided in
that section.
            4.   Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward is defined in §
34.03(C)(32) of this chapter.
      (2)   (a)   Municipal taxable income for a nonresident of New Franklin is
calculated as follows.
         (b)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent such exempt income
is otherwise included in income, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to New
Franklin as provided in §
34.06(B) of this chapter, reduced by allowable employee business expense
deduction as found in §
34.03(C)(20)(b) of this chapter, further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating
loss carryforward equals municipal taxable income.
            1.   Income is defined in §
34.03(C)(14) of this chapter.
               a.   Qualifying wages is defined in §
34.03(C)(34).
               b.   Net profit is included in income, and is defined in §
34.03(C)(23) of this chapter. This section also provides that the net operating
loss carryforward shall be calculated and deducted in the same manner as
provided in §
34.03(C)(1)(h). Net profit for a nonresident individual includes any net profit
of the nonresident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or loss
of only pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.
               c.   Pass through entity is defined in §
34.03(C)(27).
            2.   Exempt income is defined in §
34.03(C)(11) of this chapter.
            3.   Apportioned or sitused to New Franklin as provided in §
34.06(B) of this chapter includes the apportionment of net profit income
attributable to work done or services performed in New Franklin. Treatment of
net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is
provided in §
34.06(B)(5).
            4.   Allowable employee business expense deduction as described in
§
34.03(C)(20)(b) of this chapter, is subject to the limitations provided in that
section. For a nonresident of New Franklin, the deduction is limited to the
extent the expenses are related to the performance of personal services by the
nonresident in New Franklin.
            5.   Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward is defined in §
34.03(C)(32) of this chapter.
   (B)   Domicile.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         (a)   DOMICILE means the true, fixed and permanent home of the
taxpayer to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.
         (b)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in New Franklin for
all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in New Franklin
on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax
Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in New
Franklin for all or part of the taxable year.
         (c)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (B)(1)(a) of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in New
Franklin for all or part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in New Franklin for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be
considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
         (b)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         (c)   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
         (d)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
         (e)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         (f)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual’s residency;
         (g)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
         (h)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in § 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to
the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal
corporation or state where the educational institution is located; and
         (i)   The number of contact periods the individual has with New
Franklin. For the purposes of this division (B)(2)(i), an individual has one
“contact period” with New Franklin if the individual is away overnight from the
individual’s abode located outside of New Franklin and while away overnight
from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of each of two
consecutive days in New Franklin. For purposes of this section, the state’s
contact period test or bright-line test and resulting determination have no
bearing on municipal residency or domicile.
      (3)   All applicable factors are provided in R.C.§ 718.012.
   (C)   Exemption for member or employee of general assembly and certain
judges.
      (1)   Only the municipal corporation of residence shall be permitted to
levy a tax on the income of any member or employee of the Ohio General
Assembly, including the Lieutenant Governor, whose income is received as a
result of services rendered as such member or employee and is paid from
appropriated funds of this state.
      (2)   Only the municipal corporation of residence and the city of
Columbus shall levy a tax on the income of the Chief Justice or a Justice of
the Supreme Court received as a result of services rendered as the Chief
Justice or Justice. Only the municipal corporation of residence shall levy a
tax on the income of a judge sitting by assignment of the Chief Justice or on
the income of a district court of appeals judge sitting in multiple locations
within the district, received as a result of services rendered as a judge.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Domicile, see R.C. § 718.012
   Exclusion of General Assembly employee or member and certain judges from
tax, see R.C. § 718.50
§ 34.05 COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   Collection at source; withholding from qualifying wages.
      (1)   (a) Each employer, agent of an employer or other payer located or
doing business in New Franklin shall withhold from each employee an amount
equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by the employee in New
Franklin multiplied by the applicable rate of New Franklin’s income tax, except
for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under division (B)
of this section or division (A)(4) or (A)(6) of this section. An employer,
agent of an employer or other payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from
qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other payer directly,
indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to, or credits the
qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee.
         (b)   In addition to withholding the amounts required under division
(A)(1)(a) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer or other payer may
also deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee, taxes for the
municipal corporation in which the employee is a resident.
      (2)   (a)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall remit
to the Tax Administrator of New Franklin the greater of the income taxes
deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and withheld
by the employer, agent or other payer, along with any report required by the
Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according to the following
schedule:
            1.   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer not required
to make payments under division (A)(2)(a)2. of this section of taxes required
to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax
Administrator not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the end
of each calendar quarter.
            2.   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent or other payer on
behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar year exceeded
$2,399, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be
deducted and withheld on behalf of New Franklin in any month of the preceding
calendar quarter exceeded $200. Payment under this division (A)(2)(a)2. shall
be made so that the payment is received by the Tax Administrator not later than
15 days after the last day of each month.
      (3)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other payer under this
division (B)(3) shall be accepted by New Franklin as the return required of an
employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this chapter is the
qualifying wages reported by the employee’s employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer, unless New Franklin requires all resident individual taxpayers to
file a tax return under §
34.09(A) of this chapter.
      (4)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer is not required to
withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual’s disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation’s
successor entity.
      (5)   (a)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer’s, agent’s or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
         (b)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer or other payer
to remit to New Franklin the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability
for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent or other
payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
      (6)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to any
municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax withholding
requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not constitute
qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or distributed.
      (7)   Each employer, agent of an employer or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for New Franklin until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
      (8)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of all employees from
whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been withheld for New
Franklin during the preceding calendar year, the amount of tax withheld, if
any, from each such employee’s qualifying wage, the total amount of qualifying
wages paid to such employee during the preceding calendar year, the name of
every other municipal corporation for which tax was withheld or should have
been withheld from such employee during the preceding calendar year, any other
information required for federal income tax reporting purposes on Internal
Revenue Service Form W-2 or its equivalent form with respect to such employee,
and other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
      (9)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
      (10)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold municipal income
tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and
constituting qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips and gratuities
are under the employer’s control. For the purposes of this division (A)(10), a
tip or gratuity is under the employer’s control if the tip or gratuity is paid
by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or
if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card, or other
electronic means.
      (11)   A Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an employer
at the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise required to be
withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted for the
purposes of this section.
   (B)   Collection at source; occasional entrant.
      (1)   (a)   The following terms as used in this section:
            1.   EMPLOYER includes a person that is a related member to or of
an employer.
            2.   PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE means an athlete who performs services in
a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
            3.   PROFESSIONAL ENTERTAINER means a person who performs services
in the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-
event basis.
            4.   PUBLIC FIGURE means a person of prominence who performs
services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances or similar
events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
            5.   FIXED LOCATION means a permanent place of doing business in
this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront or similar location owned
or controlled by an employer.
            6.   WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. “Worksite location” does not include the home of
an employee.
            7.   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, “principal place of work” means
the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, “principal place of work” means the
location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days
in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s
employer.
         (b)   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the “greatest number of days in a calendar year” performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s
qualifying wages subject to division (B)(2)(a)1. of this section among those
two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair
and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee’s “principal place of work” with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
         (c)   For the purposes of this division (B)(1), the location at which
an employee spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with division
(B)(2)(b) of this section, except that location shall be substituted for
municipal corporation wherever municipal corporation appears in that division.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to divisions (B)(3), (B)(5), (B)(6) and (B)(7) of
this section, an employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in a municipal corporation that imposes such a tax if the employee performed
such services in the municipal corporation on 20 or fewer days in a calendar
year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee’s principal place of work is located in New
Franklin;
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in New Franklin. For the purposes of this division (B)(2)
(a)2., PRESUMED WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services that can
reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a calendar
year. Services can “reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20
days” if either of the following applies at the time the services commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of actual services to complete the services; and
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform actual services
at the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of New Franklin and has requested
that the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages as provided
in division (A) of this section; and
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer or public figure within New Franklin.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (B)(2)(a) of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in a
municipal corporation only if the employee spent more time performing services
for or on behalf of the employer in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation on that day. For the purposes of determining the
amount of time an employee spent in a particular location, the time spent
performing one or more of the following activities shall be considered to have
been spent at the employee’s principal place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured or improved by the employee’s employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (B)
(2)(b)3. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used or controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer; and
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in a
municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this
chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in division (B)
(2)(a) of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee’s
qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and remits
tax on such qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee’s principal place of work is located.
      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(4)(b) of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the 20-day threshold
described in division (B)(2)(a) of this section, the employer shall withhold
and remit tax to that municipal corporation for any subsequent days in that
calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for
personal services performed in that municipal corporation.
         (b)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for a municipal
corporation under division (B)(4)(a) of this section may elect to withhold tax
for that municipal corporation for the first 20 days on which the employer paid
qualifying wages to the employee for personal services performed in that
municipal corporation.
         (c)   If an employer makes the election described in division (B)(4)
(b) of this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an employer during
those first 20 days to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s
principal place of work is located are refundable to the employee.
      (5)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year on which an
employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation, an employer
shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee’s qualifying wages
for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal corporation in
which the employer’s fixed location is located if the employer qualifies as a
small employer as defined in §
34.03 of this section. To determine whether an employer qualifies as a small
employer for a taxable year, a Tax Administrator may require the employer to
provide the Tax Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for
the preceding taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(4) of this section shall not apply to
the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of this section.
      (7)   In the case of a person performing personal services at a petroleum
refinery located in a municipal corporation that imposes a tax on income, an
employer is not required to withhold municipal income tax on the qualifying
wages of such a person if the person performs those services on 12 or fewer
days in a calendar year, unless the principal place of work of the employer is
located in another municipal corporation in this state that imposes a tax
applying to compensation paid to the person for services performed on those
days and the person is not liable to that other municipal corporation for tax
on the compensation paid for such services. For the purposes of this division,
a petroleum refinery is a facility with a standard industrial classification
code facility classification of 2911, petroleum refining.
Notwithstanding division (B)(4) of this section, if, during a calendar year,
the number of days an individual performs personal services at a petroleum
refinery exceeds 12, the employer shall withhold tax for the municipal
corporation for the first 12 days for which the employer paid qualifying wages
to the individual and for all subsequent days in the calendar year on which the
individual performed services at the refinery.
   (C)   Collection at source; casino and VLT.
      (1)   New Franklin shall require a casino facility or a casino operator,
as defined in § 6(C)(9) of Article XV, Ohio Constitution, and R.C. § 3772.01,
respectively, or a lottery sales agent conducting video lottery terminals sales
on behalf of the state to withhold and remit municipal income tax with respect
to amounts other than qualifying wages as provided in this section.
      (2)   If a person’s winnings at a casino facility are an amount for which
reporting to the Internal Revenue Service of the amount is required by § 6041
of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the casino operator shall deduct and
withhold municipal income tax from the person’s winnings at the rate of the tax
imposed by the municipal corporation in which the casino facility is located.
      (3)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a casino operator are held in
trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is owed.
         (a)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the casino operator
shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of New Franklin,
providing the name, address and social security number of the person from whose
winnings amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount of each such deduction
and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the amount of the winnings
from which each such amount was withheld, the type of casino gaming that
resulted in such winnings, and any other information required by the Tax
Administrator. With this return, the casino operator shall remit electronically
to New Franklin all amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month.
         (b)   Annually, on or before January 31, a casino operator shall file
an annual return electronically with the Tax Administrator of the municipal
corporation in which the casino facility is located, indicating the total
amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The casino
operator shall remit electronically with the annual return any amount that was
deducted and withheld and that was not previously remitted. If the name,
address or social security number of a person or the amount deducted and
withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a monthly return for that
reporting period, that information shall be indicated on the annual return.
         (c)   Annually, on or before January 31, a casino operator shall issue
an information return to each person with respect to whom an amount has been
deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The information
return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted from the
person’s winnings during the preceding year. The casino operator shall provide
to the Tax Administrator a copy of each information return issued under this
division. The Administrator may require that such copies be transmitted
electronically.
         (d)   A casino operator that fails to file a return and remit the
amounts deducted and withheld shall be personally liable for the amount
withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty and
interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.
         (e)   1.   If a casino operator sells the casino facility or otherwise
quits the casino business, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any
penalties and interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor
shall withhold an amount of the purchase money that is sufficient to cover the
amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and interest thereon
until the predecessor casino operator produces either of the following:
               a.   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the
amounts deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been
paid; and
               b.   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due.
            2.   If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the
successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and
withheld and penalties and interest thereon.
         (f)   The failure of a casino operator to deduct and withhold the
required amount from a person’s winnings does not relieve that person from
liability for the municipal income tax with respect to those winnings.
      (4)   If a person’s prize award from a video lottery terminal is an
amount for which reporting to the Internal Revenue Service is required by §
6041 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, the video lottery sales agent
shall deduct and withhold municipal income tax from the person’s prize award at
the rate of the tax imposed by the municipal corporation in which the video
lottery terminal facility is located.
      (5)   Amounts deducted and withheld by a video lottery sales agent are
held in trust for the benefit of the municipal corporation to which the tax is
owed.
         (a)   The video lottery sales agent shall issue to a person from whose
prize award an amount has been deducted and withheld a receipt for the amount
deducted and withheld, and shall obtain from the person receiving a prize award
the person’s name, address and social security number in order to facilitate
the preparation of returns required by this section.
         (b)   On or before the tenth day of each month, the video lottery
sales agent shall file a return electronically with the Tax Administrator of
New Franklin providing the names, addresses and social security numbers of the
persons from whose prize awards amounts were deducted and withheld, the amount
of each such deduction and withholding during the preceding calendar month, the
amount of the prize award from which each such amount was withheld, and any
other information required by the Tax Administrator. With the return, the video
lottery sales agent shall remit electronically to the Tax Administrator all
amounts deducted and withheld during the preceding month.
         (c)   A video lottery sales agent shall maintain a record of all
receipts issued under this division (C)(5) and shall make those records
available to the Tax Administrator upon request. Such records shall be
maintained in accordance with R.C. § 5747.17 and any rules adopted pursuant
thereto.
         (d)   Annually, on or before January 31, each video lottery terminal
sales agent shall file an annual return electronically with the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation in which the facility is located
indicating the total amount deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar
year. The video lottery sales agent shall remit electronically with the annual
return any amount that was deducted and withheld and that was not previously
remitted. If the name, address or social security number of a person or the
amount deducted and withheld with respect to that person was omitted on a
monthly return for that reporting period, that information shall be indicated
on the annual return.
         (e)   Annually, on or before January 31, a video lottery sales agent
shall issue an information return to each person with respect to whom an amount
has been deducted and withheld during the preceding calendar year. The
information return shall show the total amount of municipal income tax deducted
and withheld from the person’s prize award by the video lottery sales agent
during the preceding year. A video lottery sales agent shall provide to the Tax
Administrator of the municipal corporation a copy of each information return
issued under this division. The Tax Administrator may require that such copies
be transmitted electronically.
         (f)   A video lottery sales agent who fails to file a return and remit
the amounts deducted and withheld is personally liable for the amount deducted
and withheld and not remitted. Such personal liability extends to any penalty
and interest imposed for the late filing of a return or the late payment of tax
deducted and withheld.
      (6)   If a video lottery sales agent ceases to operate video lottery
terminals, the amounts deducted and withheld along with any penalties and
interest thereon are immediately due and payable. The successor of the video
lottery sales agent that purchases the video lottery terminals from the agent
shall withhold an amount from the purchase money that is sufficient to cover
the amounts deducted and withheld and any penalties and interest thereon until
the predecessor video lottery sales agent operator produces either of the
following:
         (a)   A receipt from the Tax Administrator showing that the amounts
deducted and withheld and penalties and interest thereon have been paid; or
         (b)   A certificate from the Tax Administrator indicating that no
amounts are due. If the successor fails to withhold purchase money, the
successor is personally liable for the payment of the amounts deducted and
withheld and penalties and interest thereon.
      (7)   The failure of a video lottery sales agent to deduct and withhold
the required amount from a person’s prize award does not relieve that person
from liability for the municipal income tax with respect to that prize award.
      (8)   If a casino operator or lottery sales agent files a return late,
fails to file a return, remits amounts deducted and withheld late, or fails to
remit amounts deducted and withheld as required under this section, the Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may impose the following applicable
penalty:
         (a)   For the late remittance of, or failure to remit, tax deducted
and withheld under this section, a penalty equal to 50% of the tax deducted and
withheld; or
         (b)   For the failure to file, or the late filing of, a monthly or
annual return, a penalty of $500 for each return not filed or filed late.
Interest shall accrue on past due amounts deducted and withheld at the rate
prescribed in R.C. § 5703.47.
      (9)   Amounts deducted and withheld on behalf of a municipal corporation
shall be allowed as a credit against payment of the tax imposed by the
municipal corporation and shall be treated as taxes paid for purposes of §
34.07 of this chapter. This division (C)(9) applies only to the person for whom
the amount is deducted and withheld.
      (10)   The Tax Administrator shall prescribe the forms of the receipts
and returns required under this section.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015) Penalty, see §
34.99
Statutory reference:
   Definitions, see R.C. § 718.01
   Occasional entrant, personal services; withholding, see R.C. § 718.011
   Withholding by casinos and lottery sales agents, see R.C. § 718.031
   Withholding from qualifying wages, see R.C. § 718.03
§ 34.06 INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX.
   (A)   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers who are not
individuals.
      (1)   Municipal taxable income for a taxpayer who is not an individual
for New Franklin is calculated as follows.
      (2)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in
income, multiplied by apportionment, further reduced by any pre-2017 net
operating loss carryforward equals municipal taxable income.
         (a)   Income for a taxpayer that is not an individual means the net
profit of the taxpayer.
            1.   Net profit for a person other than an individual is defined in
§
34.03(C)(23) of this chapter; and
            2.   Adjusted federal taxable income is defined in §
34.03(C)(1) of this chapter.
         (b)   Exempt income is defined in §
34.03(C)(11) of this chapter.
         (c)   Apportionment means the apportionment as determined by division
(B) of this chapter.
         (d)   Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward is defined in §
34.03(C)(32) of this chapter.
   (B)   Net profit; income subject to net profit tax; alternative
apportionment. This section applies to any taxpayer engaged in a business or
profession in New Franklin unless the taxpayer is an individual who resides in
New Franklin or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company, or
telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under R.C.
Chapter 5745.
      (1)   Net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and
without the boundaries of New Franklin shall be considered as having a taxable
situs in New Franklin for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same
proportion as the average ratio of the following:
         (a)   1.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in New Franklin during the taxable period to the average original cost of all
of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated; and
            2.   As used in division (B)(1)(a)1. of this section, tangible
personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the
taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the
annual rental thereon by eight;
         (b)   Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in New Franklin to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under §
34.05(B) of this chapter;
         (c)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in New
Franklin to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same
period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   (a)   If the apportionment factors described in division (B)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business
activity in New Franklin, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of
New Franklin may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any
portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
involving one or more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to New
Franklin; and
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         (b)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
34.19(A) of this chapter.
         (c)   A Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an alternative
apportionment method as described in division (B)(2)(a) of this section only by
issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period prescribed by §
34.19(A) of this chapter.
         (d)   Nothing in this division (B)(2) nullifies or otherwise affects
any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by a Tax Administrator or
otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and taxpayer before January
1, 2016.
      (3)   As used in division (B)(1)(a) of this section, “wages, salaries and
other compensation” includes only wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         (a)   A location that is owned, controlled or used by, rented to or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient; or
            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described
in division (B)(3)(a)2. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client or patient.
         (b)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         (c)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (B)(3)(a) or (B)(3)(b) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax
liability. If a Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer may
dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the Tax Administrator’s determination was unreasonable.
      (4)    For the purposes of division (B)(1)(c) of this section, and except
as provided in division (C) of this section, receipts from sales and rentals
made and services performed shall be sitused to a municipal corporation as
follows:
         (a)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale originated. For the
purposes of this division (B)(4)(a), a sale of property originates in a
municipal corporation if, regardless of where title passes, the property meets
any of the following criteria:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the municipal
corporation from a stock of goods located within the municipal corporation;
            2.   The property is delivered within the municipal corporation
from a location outside the municipal corporation, provided the taxpayer is
regularly engaged through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of
sales within such municipal corporation and the sales result from such
solicitation or promotion; and
            3.   The property is shipped from a place within the municipal
corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation, provided that the
taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the
solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
         (b)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation to the extent that such services are performed in the
municipal corporation.
         (c)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in the municipal corporation shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation.
         (d)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation.
         (e)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation based upon the extent to
which the tangible personal property is used in the municipal corporation.
      (5)   (a)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the
rental of real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded
entity owned by the individual shall be subject to tax only by the municipal
corporation in which the property generating the net profit is located and the
municipal corporation in which the individual taxpayer that receives the net
profit resides.
         (b)   A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers to elect to
use separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit sitused under
this division to the municipal corporation in which the property is located.
      (6)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(6)(b) of this section,
commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to the sale,
purchase or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the municipal corporation
in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate
agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal corporation based upon the
ratio of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase,
or lease of real estate located in the municipal corporation to the commissions
received from the sale, purchase or lease of real estate everywhere in the
taxable year.
         (b)   An individual who is a resident of a municipal corporation that
imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual’s net profit from
all real estate activity on the individual’s annual tax return for that
municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such credit is allowed under §
34.08(A) of this chapter.
      (7)   (a)   If, in computing a taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable
income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted
to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the
employee’s income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted
from taxation under §
34.03(C)(11)(l) and (C)(34)(a)3. of this chapter, by a municipal corporation to
which the taxpayer has apportioned a portion of its net profit, the taxpayer
shall add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer’s net profit
that was apportioned to that municipal corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer
be required to add to its net profit that was apportioned to that municipal
corporation any amount other than the amount upon which the employee would be
required to pay tax were the amount related to the stock option not exempted
from taxation.
         (b)   This division (B)(7) of this section applies solely for the
purpose of making an adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer’s net profit that
was apportioned to a municipal corporation under this section.
      (8)   When calculating the ratios described in division (B)(1) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (B)(2) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
   (C)   Net profit allocation. 
      (1)   As used in this division:
         (a)   QUALIFYING REMOTE EMPLOYEE OR OWNER. An individual who is an
employee of a taxpayer or who is a partner or member holding an ownership
interest in a taxpayer that is treated as a partnership for federal income tax
purposes, provided that the individual meets both of the following criteria:
            1.   The taxpayer has assigned the individual to a qualifying
reporting location.
            2.   The individual is permitted or required to perform services
for the taxpayer at a qualifying remote work location.
         (b)   QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION. A permanent or temporary
location at which an employee or owner chooses or is required to perform
services for the taxpayer, other than a reporting location of the taxpayer or
any other location owned or controlled by a customer or client of the taxpayer.
QUALIFYING REMOTE WORK LOCATION may include the residence of an employee or
owner and may be located outside of a municipal corporation that imposes an
income tax in accordance with this chapter. An employee or owner may have more
than one qualifying remote work location during a taxable year.
         (c)   REPORTING LOCATION. Means either of the following:
            1.   A permanent or temporary place of doing business, such as an
office, warehouse, storefront, construction site, or similar location, that is
owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the taxpayer;
            2.   Any location in this state owned or controlled by a customer
or client of the taxpayer, provided that the taxpayer is required to withhold
taxes under § 34.04 on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance
of personal services at that location.
         (d)   QUALIFYING REPORTING LOCATION. Means one of the following:
            1.   The reporting location in this state at which an employee or
owner performs services for the taxpayer on a regular or periodic basis during
the taxable year;
            2.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee
or owner under division (C)(1)(d)1. of this section, the reporting location in
this state at which the employee's or owner's supervisor regularly or
periodically reports during the taxable year;
            3.   If no reporting location exists in this state for an employee
or owner under division (C)(1)(d)1. or 2. of this section, the location that
the taxpayer otherwise assigns as the employee's or owner's qualifying
reporting location, provided the assignment is made in good faith and is
recorded and maintained in the taxpayer's business records. A taxpayer may
change the qualifying reporting location designated for an employee or owner
under this division at any time.
      (2)   (a)   For tax years ending on or after December 31, 2023, a
taxpayer may elect to apply the provisions of this division to the
apportionment of its net profit from a business or profession. For taxpayers
that make this election, the provisions of division (F) of this section apply
to such apportionment except as otherwise provided in this division.
         (b)   A taxpayer shall make the election allowed under this division
in writing on or with the taxpayer's net profit return or, if applicable, a
timely filed amended net profit return or a timely filed appeal of an
assessment. The election applies to the taxable year for which that return or
appeal is filed and for all subsequent taxable years, until the taxpayer
revokes the election.
         (c)   The taxpayer shall make the initial election with the tax
administrator of each municipal corporation with which, after applying the
apportionment provisions authorized in this division, the taxpayer is required
to file a net profit tax return for that taxable year. A taxpayer shall not be
required to notify the tax administrator of a municipal corporation in which a
qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying remote work location is
located, unless the taxpayer is otherwise required to file a net profit return
with that municipal corporation due to business operations that are unrelated
to the employee's or owner's activity at the qualifying remote work location.
         (d)   After the taxpayer makes the initial election, the election
applies to every municipal corporation in which the taxpayer conducts business.
The taxpayer shall not be required to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in such municipal corporation.
         (e)   Nothing in this division prohibits a taxpayer from making a new
election under this division after properly revoking a prior election.
      (3)   For the purpose of calculating the ratios described in division (F)
(1) of this section, all of the following apply to a taxpayer that has made the
election described in division (C)(2) of this section:
         (a)   For the purpose of division (F)(1)(a) of this section, the
average original cost of any tangible personal property used by a qualifying
remote employee or owner at that individual's qualifying remote work location
shall be sitused to that individual's qualifying reporting location.
         (b)   For the purpose of division (F)(1)(b) of this section, any
wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable period to a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
         (c)   For the purpose of division (F)(1)(c) of this section, and
notwithstanding division (F)(4) of this section, any gross receipts of the
business or profession from services performed during the taxable period by a
qualifying remote employee or owner for services performed at that individual's
qualifying remote work location shall be sitused to that individual's
qualifying reporting location.
      (4)   Nothing in this division prevents a taxpayer from requesting, or a
tax administrator from requiring, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or
a portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method as
described in division (F)(2) of this section. However, a tax administrator
shall not require an alternative apportionment method in such a manner that it
would require a taxpayer to file a net profit return with a municipal
corporation solely because a qualifying remote employee's or owner's qualifying
remote work location is located in that municipal corporation.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, nothing in this
division is intended to affect the withholding of taxes on qualifying wages
pursuant to §
34.04.
   (D)   Consolidated federal income tax return.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         (a)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS means an affiliated group as
defined in § 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group
includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
         (b)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         (c)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. “Consolidated
federal taxable income” does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (D)
(1)(a) of this section.
         (d)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4927.01.
         (e)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5727.01.
      (2)   (a)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the municipal
income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year.
            1.   The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with
the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting
method is required under federal law.
            2.    The election continues to be binding for each subsequent
five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing consolidated
municipal income tax returns under division (D)(2)(a) of this section; or
            3.   A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The
Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
         (b)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income
tax returns under this section must be made in the first year following the
last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election
period in effect under division (D)(2)(a) of this section. The election to
discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a
five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
         (c)   An election made under division (D)(2)(a) or (D)(2)(b) of this
section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations
subject to a municipal income tax.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that taxable year if the
Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is
required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year
shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for all subsequent
taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written permission from
the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a
change in circumstances.
      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income tax return
in the same manner as is required under the United States Department of
Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the
consolidated federal income tax return required to be filed by the common
parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D)(5)(b), (D)(5)
(c) and (D)(5)(d) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated
municipal income tax return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as
defined in §
34.03(C)(1) of this chapter, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable
income” for “federal taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears
in that division and by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for
“a C corporation’s” wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
         (b)   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make any adjustment otherwise required under §
34.03(C)(1) of this chapter to the extent that the item of income or deduction
otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
         (c)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at
least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return shall do one of
the following with respect to that pass- through entity’s net profit or loss
for that taxable year:
            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in division (B) of this section,
exclude the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in
the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity
shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
            2.   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in division (B) of this section,
include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in
the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so included, the entity
shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
         (d)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less
than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in division (B) of this section,
exclude the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in
the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation; and
            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of
the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
      (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
shall make the computations required under division (B) of this section by
substituting “consolidated federal taxable income attributable to” for “net
profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by
substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever
“taxpayer” appears in that section.
      (7)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines,
charges or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in accordance with
this chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation
is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of
such an affiliated group.
      (8)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1, 2016, to file
a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal corporation may
continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in accordance with such
election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
   (F)   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in Ohio. New Franklin,
by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit against its tax on
income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in New Franklin. If a credit is
granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of the new
income tax revenue New Franklin derives from new employees of the taxpayer and
shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before New Franklin passes an
ordinance granting a credit, New Franklin and the taxpayer shall enter into an
agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit.
   (G)   Tax credits to foster job retention. New Franklin, by ordinance, may
grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit against its tax on income to a
taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job retention in New Franklin. If a
credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of
the income tax revenue New Franklin derives from the retained employees of the
taxpayer, and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before New Franklin
passes an ordinance allowing such a credit, New Franklin and the taxpayer shall
enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Consolidated municipal tax return, see R.C. § 718.06
   Definitions, see R.C. § 718.01
   Fostering job retention; tax credits, see R.C. § 718.151
   Fostering new jobs; tax credits, see R.C. § 718.15
   Income subject to tax, see R.C. § 718.02
§ 34.07 DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer’s tax liability for a municipal corporation’s
income tax for the current taxable year.
      (2)   TAX LIABILITY means the total taxes due to a municipal corporation
for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is
entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or
credit from another taxable year.
   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         (a)   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be considered as paid
to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld in equal amounts
on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes the dates on which all
amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld shall be considered as
paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually withheld;
         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent
taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic
funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division (B)
of this section, DATE OF THE POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than
one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal
service;
         (c)   A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall
make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator; and
         (d)   Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a lottery sales agent
under R.C. § 718.031 are deemed to be paid to the municipal corporation for
which the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes are withheld from the
taxpayer’s winnings.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
34.09(A)(7) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the first
taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to New Franklin or Tax
Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and
withholding on or before the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
and
         (d)   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable year.
      (2)   A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by the
Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid
balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal
installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended declaration
must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in (C)(1)(a) through
(C)(1)(d) of this section.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with §
34.09(A) of this chapter.
         (a)   For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not individuals
and are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual tax return is
due on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return, unless extended
pursuant to R.C. § 5747.08(G).
         (b)   For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are reporting and
filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a calendar year, the
annual return is due on the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end
of the taxable year or period.
      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the taxpayer’s
estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change in estimated
tax liability may either increase or decrease the estimated tax liability for
the taxable year.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
34.10 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment; and
         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due;
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the municipal
corporation under §
34.09(A) of this chapter for that year; or
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in New Franklin but was
not domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that
includes the first day of the taxable year.
   (F)   A Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a declaration
of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that the waiver is
reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other factors.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Estimated taxes, see R.C. § 718.08
§ 34.08 CREDIT FOR TAX PAID.
   (A)   Credit for tax paid to another municipality or joint economic
development district.
      (1)   Where a resident of New Franklin is subject to a municipal income
tax in another municipality or joint economic development district, he or she
shall not pay a total municipal income tax on the same greater than the tax
imposed at the highest rate.
      (2)   Every individual taxpayer who resides in New Franklin but receives
net profits, salaries, income, wages, commissions, other personal service
compensation or a distributive share of net profits from a resident or
nonresident unincorporated business entity or association of which he or she is
a partner or owner, for work done or services performed or rendered outside of
New Franklin, if it is made to appear that he, she or such business entity has
paid a municipal income tax on or with respect to the same income taxable under
this chapter to another, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed by
this chapter in the amount so paid by him or her, or on his or her behalf, or
by such business entity, to the other municipality or joint economic
development district and allowed as a credit hereunder be deductible in
computing the net profit of such taxpayer or such business entity. In addition,
the credit shall not exceed the tax assessed by this chapter on income earned
in such other municipality or municipalities or joint economic development
districts where the tax is paid.
      (3)   A claim for refund or credit under this section shall be made in
such a manner as the Tax Administrator may by regulation provide.
      (4)   No credit will be given unless the taxpayer claims such credit on
his or her final tax return or other form prescribed by the Tax Administrator,
and presents such evidence, i.e., W-2 form(s) of the payment of a similar tax
to another municipality or joint economic development district.
      (5)   If, after filing a New Franklin return and claiming the credit on
his or her return, a taxpayer receives a refund of all and/or a portion of the
taxes paid to another municipality or joint economic development district, the
taxpayer is required to file an amended New Franklin tax return to pay the
appropriate tax due New Franklin as reflected by the amended return.
      (6)   The Tax Administrator, or any duly authorized agent or employee,
may exchange information with the Tax Administrator or his or her authorized
agent, or employees of other taxing jurisdictions for the purpose of verifying
any claim for credit by New Franklin residents, or for the purpose of verifying
any claims for credit for taxes paid to New Franklin by residents of other
taxing jurisdictions, and may enter into agreements for such purpose.
   (B)   Refundable credit for qualifying loss.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         (a)   NONQUALIFIED DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN means a compensation
plan described in § 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(1)(b)2. of this section,
QUALIFYING LOSS means the excess, if any, of the total amount of compensation
the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan over the total amount of income the taxpayer has recognized
for federal income tax purposes for all taxable years on a cumulative basis as
compensation with respect to the taxpayer’s receipt of money and property
attributable to distributions in connection with the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
            2.   If, for one or more taxable years, the taxpayer has not paid
to one or more municipal corporations income tax imposed on the entire amount
of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan, then the qualifying loss is the product of the
amount resulting from the calculation described in division (B)(1)(b)1. of this
section computed without regard to this division (B)(1)(b)2. and a fraction the
numerator of which is the portion of such compensation on which the taxpayer
has paid income tax to one or more municipal corporations and the denominator
of which is the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred
pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            3.   With respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
taxpayer sustains a qualifying loss only in the taxable year in which the
taxpayer receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (c)   QUALIFYING TAX RATE means the applicable tax rate for the
taxable year for the which the taxpayer paid income tax to a municipal
corporation with respect to any portion of the total amount of compensation the
payment of which is deferred pursuant to a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan. If different tax rates applied for different taxable years, then the
qualifying tax rate is a weighted average of those different tax rates. The
weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the municipal corporation
each year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(4) of this section, a
refundable credit shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by a
municipal corporation for each qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during
the taxable year. The amount of the credit shall be equal to the product of the
qualifying loss and the qualifying tax rate.
         (b)   A taxpayer shall claim the credit allowed under this section
from each municipal corporation to which the taxpayer paid municipal income tax
with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan in one or more
taxable years.
         (c)   If a taxpayer has paid tax to more than one municipal
corporation with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan, the
amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal corporation
shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s proportionate
share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the taxpayer to all
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
         (d)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to a
municipal corporation for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   (a)   For purposes of this section, municipal corporation income
tax that has been withheld with respect to a nonqualified deferred compensation
plan shall be considered to have been paid by the taxpayer with respect to the
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         (b)   Any municipal income tax that has been refunded or otherwise
credited for the benefit of the taxpayer with respect to a nonqualified
deferred compensation plan shall not be considered to have been paid to the
municipal corporation by the taxpayer.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this section is allowed only to the extent
the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
         (a)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         (b)   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
   (C)   Credit for person working in joint economic development district or
zone. New Franklin shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident
of New Franklin who works in a joint economic development zone created under
R.C. § 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under R.C. §§
715.70, 715.71 or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against its
tax on income to its residents who are employed in another municipal
corporation, pursuant to division (A) of this section.
   (D)   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund.
      (1)   Income tax that has been deposited or paid to New Franklin, but
should have been deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, is
allowable by New Franklin as a refund, but is subject to the three-year
limitation on refunds as provided in §
34.09(F) of this chapter.
      (2)   Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to New Franklin,
but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation, shall be subject to
collection and recovery by New Franklin. To the extent a refund of such tax or
withholding is barred by the limitation on refunds as provided in §
34.09(F) of this chapter, New Franklin will allow a non-refundable credit equal
to the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality against the income tax
New Franklin claims is due. If New Franklin’s tax rate is higher, the tax
representing the net difference of the tax rates is also subject to collection
by New Franklin, along with any penalty and interest accruing during the period
of nonpayment.
      (3)   No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the overpayment is
beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as provided in §
34.09(F) of this chapter.
      (4)   Nothing in this section requires a municipality to allow credit for
tax paid to another municipal corporation if the municipality has reduced
credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation. Division (A) of this
section regarding any limitation on credit shall prevail.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Qualifying loss; refundable credit, see R.C. § 718.021
   Second municipality imposing tax after time period for refund, see R.C. §
718.121
   Worker in joint economic development zone or district, see R.C. § 718.16
§ 34.09 ANNUAL RETURN.
   (A)   Return and payment of tax.
      (1)   (a)   An annual return with respect to the income tax levied on
municipal taxable income by New Franklin shall be completed and filed by every
taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax,
regardless of whether or not income tax is due.
         (b)   The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer or
other payer located in New Franklin under §
34.05(A)(3) of this chapter when the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole
income subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer, and no additional tax is due to New
Franklin.
         (c)   All resident individual taxpayers, 18 years of age and older,
shall file an annual municipal income tax return with New Franklin, regardless
of income or liability.
         (d)   Retirees having no taxable income for New Franklin municipal
income tax purposes shall be exempt from these mandatory filing requirements.
The resident retiree shall file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption
on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The exemption shall be in effect
until such time as the resident retiree receives income subject to the New
Franklin income tax, at which time the resident retiree shall be required to
comply with all applicable provisions of the income tax chapter. Any exemption
request granted under the prior income tax ordinance shall remain in effect.
      (2)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
      (3)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by New Franklin in accordance with this chapter, the return or notice
required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the individual’s
duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary or other person charged
with the care of the person or property of that individual. Such duly
authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary or other person charged with
the care of the person or property of that individual shall provide, with the
filing of the return, appropriate documentation to support that they are
authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice
shall include any legally binding authorizations, and contact information
including name, address, and phone number of the duly authorized agent,
guardian, conservator, fiduciary or other person.
      (4)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be
completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such fiduciary
shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate documentation to
support that they are authorized to file a return or notice on behalf of the
taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding authorizations, and
contact information including name, address and phone number of the fiduciary.
      (5)   No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability to file a
joint return.
      (6)   (a)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer’s social security number or taxpayer identification number. Each
return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of perjury.
         (b)   A taxpayer who is an individual is required to include, with
each annual return, amended return, or request for refund required under this
section, copies of only the following documents: all of the taxpayer’s Internal
Revenue Service Form W-2; wage and tax statements, including all information
reported on the taxpayer’s federal W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or
withheld for any municipal corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service
Form 1040; and, with respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any
other documentation necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments
made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return
required by this section electronically is not required to provide paper copies
of any of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless the Tax Administrator
requests such copies after the return has been filed.
         (c)   A taxpayer that is not an individual is required to include,
with each annual net profit return, amended net profit return or request for
refund required under this section, copies of only the following documents: the
taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form 1041; Form 1065; Form 1120; Form 1120-
REIT; Form 1120F; or Form 1120S, and, with respect to an amended tax return or
refund request, any other documentation necessary to support the refund request
or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         (d)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual
net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some
other manner shall either mail the documents required under this division (A)
(6)(d) to the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic
submission is available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio
Business Gateway or a portal provided by municipality. The Department of
Taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents
required under this division (A)(6)(a) through the Ohio Business Gateway on or
before January 1, 2016. The Department shall transmit all documents submitted
electronically under this division (A)(6)(d) of this section to the appropriate
Tax Administrator.
         (e)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator shall
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements or
documents required by New Franklin to determine and verify the taxpayer’s
municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under this division
(A)(6) of this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a
generic form or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
         (f)   Any other documentation, including schedules, other municipal
income tax returns, or other supporting documentation necessary to verify
credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on the return shall also be
included to avoid delay in processing, or disallowance by the Tax Administrator
of undocumented credits or losses.
      (7)   (a)   1.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under R.C. §
5747.08(A)(7). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on
forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to New Franklin or Tax Administrator.
            2.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit income tax return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer
that is not an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax
Administrator on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the
end of the taxpayer’s taxable year or period. The taxpayer shall complete and
file the return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on
generic forms, together with remittance made payable to New Franklin or Tax
Administrator.
            3.   In the case of individual income tax return required to be
filed by an individual, and net profit income tax return required to be filed
by a taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is required if the amount
shown to be due is $10 or less.
         (b)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to
ensure the payment of the tax imposed by New Franklin in accordance with this
chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file returns and make
payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not
otherwise required to file annual returns.
         (c)   With respect to taxpayers to whom division (B) of this section
applies, to the extent that any provision in this division (A) conflicts with
any provision in division (B) of this section, the provision in division (B) of
this section prevails.
      (8)   (a)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, New Franklin shall
not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the amount
due is $10 or less.
         (b)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to New Franklin for a
taxable year pursuant to division (A)(8)(a) of this section shall file with New
Franklin an annual net profit return under division (A)(6)(c) and (A)(6)(d) of
this section.
      (9)   This division (A)(9) shall not apply to payments required to be
made under division §
34.05(A)(1)(b) of this chapter.
         (a)   If any report, claim, statement or other document required to be
filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed period or on or
before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered after that period or
that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal official with which the
report, claim, statement or other document is required to be filed, or to which
the payment is required to be made, the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the report, claim, statement, or other document, or payment is
mailed shall be deemed to be the date of delivery or the date of payment. THE
DATE OF POSTMARK means, in the event there is more than one date on the cover,
the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
         (b)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic funds
transfer, the payment is considered to be made when the payment is credited to
an account designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of tax payments,
except that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer is delayed due to
circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the payment is considered
to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. For purposes of this
section, SUBMITTED THE PAYMENT means the date which the taxpayer has designated
for the delivery of payment, which may or may not be the same date as the date
the payment was initiated by the taxpayer.
      (10)   The amounts withheld for New Franklin by an employer, the agent of
an employer, or other payer as described in §
34.05(A) of this chapter shall be allowed to the recipient of the compensation
as credits against payment of the tax imposed on the recipient unless the
amounts withheld were not remitted to New Franklin and the recipient colluded
with the employer, agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to
remit the amounts withheld.
      (11)   Each return required by New Franklin to be filed in accordance
with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by
checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to contact the
preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the examination
or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only
to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is missing from the
return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information about the examination
or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer’s refund or
payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors, offsets or
return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the Tax Administrator
and has shown to the preparer or other person. Authorization by the taxpayer of
another person to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters
pertaining to the return does not preclude the Tax Administrator from
contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters.
      (12)   The Tax Administrator of New Franklin shall accept for filing a
generic form of any income tax return, report or document required by New
Franklin in accordance with this chapter, provided that the generic form, once
completed and filed, contains all of the information required by ordinances,
resolutions or rules adopted by New Franklin or Tax Administrator, and provided
that the taxpayer or tax return preparer filing the generic form otherwise
complies with the provisions of this chapter and of New Franklin’s ordinance or
resolution governing the filing of returns, reports, or documents.
      (13)   When income tax returns, reports or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall accept a
facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
      (14)   (a)   As used in this division (A), worksite location has the same
meaning as in §
34.05(B) of this chapter.
         (b)   A person may notify a Tax Administrator that the person does not
expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal corporation for a taxable
year if both of the following conditions apply.
            1.   The person was required to file a tax return with the
municipal corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because the
person performed services at a worksite location within the municipal
corporation, and the person has filed all appropriate and required returns and
remitted all applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided by this
chapter. The Tax Administrator is not required to accept an affidavit from a
taxpayer who has not complied with the provisions of this chapter.
            2.   a.   The person no longer provides services in the municipal
corporation, and does not expect to be subject to the municipal corporation’s
income tax for the taxable year.
               b.   The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit
that briefly explains the person’s circumstances, including the location of the
previous worksite location and the last date on which the person performed
services or made any sales within the municipal corporation. The affidavit also
shall include the following statement: “The affiant has no plans to perform any
services within the municipal corporation, make any sales in the municipal
corporation, or otherwise become subject to the tax levied by the municipal
corporation during the taxable year. If the affiant does become subject to the
tax levied by the municipal corporation for the taxable year, the affiant
agrees to be considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a taxpayer with
the municipal corporation, if such a registration is required by the municipal
corporation’s resolutions, ordinances, or rules. The person shall sign the
affidavit under penalty of perjury.”
            3.   If a person submits an affidavit described in division (A)(14)
(b) of this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file
any tax return for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses
information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described
in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has engaged in activity which results
in work being performed, services provided, sales made or other activity that
results in municipal taxable income reportable to New Franklin in the taxable
year. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer to comply with the
provisions of this chapter relating to the reporting and filing of municipal
taxable income on an annual municipal income tax return, even if an affidavit
has been filed with the Tax Administrator for the taxable year. Nothing in this
division (A)(14) of this section prohibits the Tax Administrator from
performing an audit of the person.
   (B)   Return and payment of tax; individuals serving in combat zone.
      (1)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of New Franklin
for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time
for payment of taxes required by New Franklin in accordance with this chapter
during the period of the member’s or civilian’s duty service and for 180 days
thereafter. The application shall be filed on or before the one hundred
eightieth day after the member’s or civilian’s duty terminates. An applicant
shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator considers necessary to
demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. Except as provided in division
(B)(2)(c) of this section, the Tax Administrator may prescribe such contract
terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
         (b)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be
required to file any return, report or other tax document nor be required to
pay any tax otherwise due to New Franklin before the one hundred eighty-first
day after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates.
         (c)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division
(B)(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not
require any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes
for the extension period.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division denies to any person described in
this division the application of divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section.
         (b)   1.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension
under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in
which to file any return, report or other tax document and an extension of time
in which to make any payment of taxes required by New Franklin in accordance
with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under division (B)(3)
(b)1. of this section shall be equal to the length of the corresponding
extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used
in this section, QUALIFYING TAXPAYER means a member of the national guard or a
member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called
to active duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of
the United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces.
            2.   Taxes the payment of which is extended in accordance with
division (B)(3)(b)1. of this section are not delinquent during the extension
period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of
the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax
Administrator shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in
connection with those taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator
shall not include any period of extension granted under division (B)(3)(b)1. of
this section in calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
      (4)   For each taxable year to which division (B)(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of
this section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (B)(2)(b) and
(B)(2)(c) or (B)(3) of this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that
taxpayer if the filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing
jointly for that year.
   (C)   Use of Ohio Business Gateway; types of filings authorized.
      (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect to
the taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file any municipal
income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.
      (4)   The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal corporations,
taxpayers or other persons does not affect the legal rights of municipalities
or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The State of Ohio shall not be a
party to the administration of municipal income taxes or to an appeal of a
municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically provided by law.
      (5)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting or removing
the authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit, and enforce
the provisions of its municipal income tax.
   (D)   Extension of time to file.
      (1)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates. For tax years ending on or after January 1, 2023, the
extended due date of the city’s income tax return for a taxpayer that is not an
individual shall be the fifteenth day of the eleventh month after the last day
of the taxable year to which the return relates.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal extension for
a period other than six-months for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax
return shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal
income tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return
shall be the same as that of the extended federal income tax return.
      (3)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month extension
for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request that the Tax
Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for filing
the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the request is received by the
Tax Administrator on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due,
the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s requested extension.
      (4)   An extension of time to file under this chapter is not an extension
of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator grants an extension
of that date.
      (5)   If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date
for filing state income tax returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income tax
return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be the
same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (6)   (a)   If a taxpayer receives an extension for the filing of a
municipal income tax return under division (D)(1), (D)(2), (D)(3), and (D)(5)
of this section, the Tax Administrator shall not make any inquiry or send any
notice to the taxpayer with regard to the return on or before the date the
taxpayer files the return or on or before the extended due date to file the
return, whichever occurs first.
         (b)   If a tax administrator violates division (F) of this section,
the municipal corporation shall reimburse the taxpayer for any reasonable costs
incurred to respond to such inquiry or notice, up to $150.
         (c)   Division (F) of this section does not apply to an extension
received under division (A) or (B) of this section if the Tax Administrator has
actual knowledge that the taxpayer failed to file for a federal extension as
required to receive the extension under division (A) or (B) of this section or
failed to file under division (C) of this section.
   (E)   Amended returns.
      (1)   (a) A taxpayer shall file an amended return with the Tax
Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any of the
facts, figures, computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual
return to determine the tax due levied by New Franklin in accordance with this
chapter must be altered.
         (b)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or
state tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s municipal tax liability, that
taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return showing income subject
to the municipal income tax based upon such final determination of federal or
state tax liability, and pay any additional municipal income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is $10 or less.
         (c)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
      (2)   (a)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, such amount need not accompany the amended return. Except as provided
under division (E)(2)(b) of this section, the amended return shall not reopen
those facts, figures, computations or attachments from a previously filed
return that are not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment
to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless the applicable
statute of limitations for civil actions or prosecutions under §
34.19 of this chapter has not expired for a previously filed return.
         (b)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.
      (3)   (a)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be
filed under this division (E) within the period prescribed by §
34.19(E) of this chapter for filing the amended return even if it is filed
beyond the period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the
requirements of that division. If the amount of the refund is $10 or less, no
refund need be paid by New Franklin to the taxpayer. Except as set forth in
division (E)(3)(b) of this section, a request filed under this division shall
claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts,
figures, computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return
that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return unless it is also filed within
the time prescribed in division (F) of this chapter. Except as set forth in
division (E)(3)(b) of this section, the request shall not reopen those facts,
figures, computations or attachments that are not affected, either directly or
indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax
return.
         (b)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and attachments were
reopened.
   (F)   Refunds.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator of
New Franklin, in accordance with this section, shall refund to employers,
agents of employers, other payers, or taxpayers, with respect to any income or
withholding tax levied by New Franklin:
         (a)   Overpayments of more than $10; or
         (b)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested exceeds $10.
      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, returns setting
forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, within
three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is later. Any
documentation that substantiates the taxpayer’s claim for a refund must be
included with the return filing. Failure to remit all documentation, including
schedules, other municipal income tax returns or other supporting documentation
necessary to verify credits, income, losses or other pertinent factors on the
return will cause delay in processing, and/or disallowance of undocumented
credits or losses.
         (b)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (F)
(2)(c) of this section, the Administrator shall issue an assessment to any
taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment
shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
         (c)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund
request included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax
return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the
amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial and
instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
34.18 of this chapter.
      (3)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for
filing specified in division (F)(2) of this section shall be considered to have
been filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
         (a)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request;
         (b)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only
postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private
postal meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for
filing the request, and the request is received within seven days of such last
day; or
         (c)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
      (4)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer
of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the overpayment until
the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any overpayment is
refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the annual return or 90
days after the completed return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall
be allowed on the refund. For the purpose of computing the payment of interest
on amounts overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered
to have been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is
reported is due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that
return. Interest shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
34.10(A)(4) of this chapter.
   (G)   As used in this section, withholding tax has the same meaning as in §
34.10 of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015; Ord. 16-O-01, passed 2-17-2016)
Statutory reference:
   Amended returns, see R.C. § 718.41
   Annual return; filing; extensions, see R.C. § 718.05
   Filing extension for certain armed forces service, see R.C. § 718.052
   Limitations, see R.C. § 718.12
   Requests for refunds, see R.C. § 718.19
   Use of Ohio Business Gateway, see R.C. § 718.051
§ 34.10 PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances,
codes, directives, instructions and rules adopted by New Franklin provided such
resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules impose or
directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance or filing
requirements of a municipal income tax.
      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE means the rate of the average market yield
on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining
periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under § 1274 of the
Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX AND WITHHOLDING TAX mean any
income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by a municipal
corporation pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1,
2016.
      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS SECTION means
the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus
5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the
year in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with
division (A)(2) of this section.
      (5)   RETURN includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule
and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or municipal
corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or any other
payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX means estimated income tax due but not
paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX means income tax due but not paid by the date the
income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX means withholding tax due but not paid by
the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee’s qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying
wages.
   (B)   (1)   This section shall apply to the following:
         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; and
         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax required
to be paid or remitted to New Franklin on or after January 1, 2016 for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before January 1, 2016 of
New Franklin.
   (C)   New Franklin shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the interest
amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer, employer,
any agent of the employer or any other payer for any reason fails, in whole or
in part, to make to New Franklin timely and full payment or remittance of
income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with New
Franklin any return required to be filed.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as interest rate as
described in division (A) of this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax,
unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding tax. This imposition of
interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of a month.
      (2)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income tax,
a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
      (3)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty equal to 50%
of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.
      (4)    For tax years ending on or before December 31, 2022, with respect
to returns other than estimated income tax returns, New Franklin shall impose a
monthly penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each return, regardless
of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any fraction thereof, during
which the return remains unfiled regardless of the liability shown thereon. The
penalty shall not exceed a total of $150 in assessed penalty for each failure
to timely file a return.
   (D)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes and returns, New Franklin shall not impose, seek to collect or collect
any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees not described in
this section.
   (E)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes, withholding
taxes and returns, New Franklin shall not refund or credit any penalty, amount
of interest, charges, or additional fees that were properly imposed or
collected before January 1, 2016.
   (F)   The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator’s sole discretion,
abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when
the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement to be
appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly documented
and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit of such
abatement or partial abatement.
   (G)   New Franklin may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer or any other payer New Franklin’s post-judgment collection costs and
fees, including attorney’s fees.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Interest and penalties, see R.C. § 718.27
§ 34.11 AUDIT.
   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in §
34.03(C)(3) of this chapter, the Tax Administrator shall provide to the
taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the
taxpayer during an audit and a statement of the taxpayer’s rights, including
any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the
commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when
the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (C)   (1)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer
is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant,
bookkeeper or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a
form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      (2)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer’s attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner. This
division (C)(2) does not authorize the practice of law by a person who is not
an attorney.
   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising from
the audit.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Audits, see R.C. § 718.36
§ 34.12 ROUNDING.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped, rounding down to the nearest
whole dollar. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a document, the
person shall round all amounts entered on the document.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Rounding of amounts, see R.C. § 718.25
§ 34.13 AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative powers of the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all duties
and functions necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of this
chapter, including without limitation:
      (1)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial nature as
provided by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts, records,
memorandums, and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under
oath, to issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts,
papers, records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a
court for attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the
fees of officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths; provided that the
powers referred to in this division of this section shall be exercised by the
Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of the duties
respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a municipal corporation
income tax ordinance or resolution adopted in accordance with this chapter;
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or collected,
or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax Administrator may
investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written statement of the Tax
Administrator’s findings, and, if the Tax Administrator finds that there has
been an overpayment, approve and issue a refund payable to the taxpayer, the
taxpayer’s assigns, or legal representative as provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
34.06(B) of this chapter;
      (7)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations, assessments
and orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own
motion, review, redetermine or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations, assessments or orders the Tax Administrator has made, but the Tax
Administrator shall not review, redetermine or correct any tax finding,
determination, computation, assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has
made for which an appeal has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review or
other appropriate tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by
the appellant or applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law; and
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described
in §
34.05(A) of this chapter.
   (B)   Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim and payment over
time.
      (1)   As used in this section, CLAIM means a claim for an amount payable
to New Franklin that arises pursuant to the municipal income tax imposed in
accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if such action
is in the best interests of New Franklin:
         (a)   Compromise a claim; and
         (b)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim
by agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments, upon such terms and
conditions as the Tax Administrator may require.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-
time agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be
appealable.
      (4)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
      (5)   (a)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a
claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement
or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation
of a material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement
and that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would
have accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to
accrue and be due.
         (b)   The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion to determine
whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees will be assessed
through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time agreement.
      (6)   The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer provide
detailed financial documentation and information, in order to determine whether
or not a payment-over-time agreement will be authorized. The taxpayer’s failure
to provide the necessary and required information by the Tax Administrator
shall preclude consideration of a payment-over-time agreement.
   (C)   Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records and federal and state income tax returns
of any employer, taxpayer or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by the
Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent or employee
to investigate and examine such books, papers, records and federal and state
income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator of a municipal corporation may require any person, by notice
served on that person, to keep such records as the Tax Administrator determines
necessary to show whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such
liability, for the income tax levied by New Franklin or for the withholding of
such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division (C)(3) of this section does not authorize the
practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal and state income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.
   (D)   Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring identifying information.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a tax document
with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information, which may
include the person’s social security number, federal employer identification
number or other identification number requested by the Tax Administrator. A
person required by the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information
that has experienced any change with respect to that information shall notify
the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon, filing the next tax
document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
34.10 of this chapter, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
34.99 of this chapter.
         (b)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (D)(1) of this section
within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying
information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
imposing a penalty pursuant to §
34.10 of this chapter.
      (3)   The penalties provided for under divisions (D)(2)(a) and (D)(2)(b)
of this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
34.99 of this chapter for a violation of this section, and any other penalties
that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by law.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015) Penalty, see §
34.99
Statutory reference:
   Accuracy of returns; verification, see R.C. § 718.23
   Administration of claims, see R.C. § 718.28
   Authority of Tax Administrator, see R.C. § 718.24
   Identification information, see R.C. § 718.26
§ 34.14 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by R.C. Chapter 718 or by the
charter or ordinance of New Franklin is confidential, and no person shall
access or disclose such information except in accordance with a proper judicial
order or in connection with the performance of that person’s official duties or
the official business of New Franklin as authorized by R.C. Chapter 718 or the
charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax Administrator of New
Franklin or a designee thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise
received under this chapter and other related tax information to the Internal
Revenue Service, the State Tax Commissioner and Tax Administrators of other
municipal corporations.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit New Franklin from publishing or
disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect
to particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015) Penalty, see §
34.99
Statutory reference:
   Tax information confidential, see R.C. § 718.13
§ 34.15 FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid or assist in the preparation or
presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim or document authorized or required by municipal corporation ordinance or
state law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel
or advise the preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule,
statement, claim or document, or knowingly change, alter, or amend, or
knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change, alteration or amendment of
the records upon which such report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or
document is based with intent to defraud New Franklin or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015) Penalty, see §
34.99
Statutory reference:
   Fraud, see R.C. § 718.35
§ 34.16 OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   An OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR means an opinion issued under this
section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It does not
include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the Tax
Administrator shall be an “opinion of the Tax Administrator” and shall bind the
Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (C), (G) and (H) of this
section, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied:
      (1)   The taxpayer’s request fully and accurately describes the specific
facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the taxability of the
income, source of income, activity or transaction, and, if an activity or
transaction, all parties involved in the activity or transaction are clearly
identified by name, location, or other pertinent facts;
      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by New Franklin in accordance
with this chapter; and
      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s response is signed by the Tax Administrator
and designated as an “opinion of the Tax Administrator”.
   (C)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and shall
protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who reasonably
relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty or interest otherwise
chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the Tax
Administrator’s opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to be
subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the opinion,
or until the earliest of the following dates:
      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax Administrator
sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt requested. The effective
date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer’s date of receipt or one year
after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is later;
      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a relevant
section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law or New Franklin’s income
tax regulations that would substantially change the analysis and conclusion of
the opinion of the Tax Administrator;
      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing or
changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified
state law, or New Franklin’s income tax ordinance;
      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the relevant
federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues an opinion
establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal statutes or
regulations;
      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer’s material facts
or circumstances; and
      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if specified
in the opinion.
   (D)   (1)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
      (2)   If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the pertinent facts or
omitted material facts with intent to defraud New Franklin in order to obtain a
more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be in violation of §
34.15 of this chapter.
   (E)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this section, the
opinion shall include a statement that:
      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be subject to change
for any of the reasons stated in division (C) of this section; and
      (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such changes.
   (F)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section.
   (G)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to opinions
of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016.
   (H)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (I)   A Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all opinions
issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a taxpayer who
has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential. In no event
shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax Administrator has
removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and any other parties
involved in the activity or transaction.
   (J)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section or a
refusal to offer an opinion under division (F) of this section may not be
appealed.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Opinion of Tax Administrator; request, see R.C. § 718.38
§ 34.17 ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.
   (A)   (1)   The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment either by
personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under
R.C. § 5703.056.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through
alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to,
delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be
authorized by the person subject to the assessment.
      (3)   Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax
Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within 60
days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax
Administrator as prescribed in R.C. § 718.18 is prima facie evidence that
delivery is complete and that the assessment is served.
   (B)   (1)   A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and service
as set forth in this division (B). A person disputing the presumption of
delivery and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent
was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the
purposes of this section, a person is associated with an address at the time
the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the
person was residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the
address; or if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the
address and, when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s
affiliate was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this
section, a person’s affiliate is any other person that, at the time the
assessment was mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by
voting rights, of the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (B)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division
(B) prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the Local Board of Tax Review.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Service of assessment; presumption, see R.C. § 718.18
§ 34.18 LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The legislative authority of New Franklin shall maintain a Local
Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in R.C. Chapter 718.
      (2)   (a)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members.
The three members of the Local Board of Tax Review may be domiciled in New
Franklin, but the appointing authority may consider membership from individuals
who are not domiciled within New Franklin.
         (b)   Two members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of
New Franklin, and may not be employees, elected officials or contractors with
New Franklin at any time during their term or in the five years immediately
preceding the date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the top
administrative official of New Franklin. This member may be an employee of New
Franklin, but may not be the Director of Finance or equivalent officer, or the
Tax Administrator or other similar official or an employee directly involved in
municipal tax matters, or any direct subordinate thereof.
      (3)   The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review appointed by
the legislative authority of New Franklin shall be two years. There is no limit
on the number of terms that a member may serve should the member be reappointed
by the legislative authority. The Board member appointed by the top
administrative official of New Franklin shall serve at the discretion of the
administrative official.
      (4)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority as set forth in R.C. §
718.11(A)(4).
      (5)   A member of the board who, for any reason, ceases to meet the
qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall resign
immediately by operation of law.
      (6)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board shall impair the power and
authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the Board.
      (7)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board due to a
conflict of interest, illness, absence or similar reason, the legislative
authority or top administrative official that appointed the member shall
appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board in the member’s
place. This appointment shall be subject to the same requirements and
limitations as are applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily
unable to serve.
   (B)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed,
and to whom the appeal should be directed.
   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board by filing a request with the Board. The request shall be in
writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should be
deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60 days after the
taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (D)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held
within 60 days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C) of
this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives
a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law, certified
public accountant, or other representative. The Board may allow a hearing to be
continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case, the hearing must
be completed within 120 days after the first day of the hearing unless the
parties agree otherwise.
   (E)   The Board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax Administrator’s
assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board shall issue a final
determination on the appeal within 90 days after the Board’s final hearing on
the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by ordinary mail to all
of the parties to the appeal within 15 days after issuing the final
determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may appeal the board’s
final determination as provided in R.C. § 5717.011.
   (F)   The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall
adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related costs,
and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the Local
Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended as
needed by the Local Board of Tax Review. Such records are not public records
available for inspection under R.C. § 149.43. For this reason, any
documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working
papers for each case must be maintained in a secure location under the control
of the Tax Administrator. No member of the Local Board of Tax Review may remove
such documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or
working papers from the hearing. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a
Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section are not meetings of
a public body subject to R.C. § 121.22. For this reason, such hearings shall
not be open to the public, and only those parties to the case may be present
during the hearing.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Local Board of Tax Review, see R.C. § 718.11
§ 34.19 ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
latter of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of this section
may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer,
agent of the employer, other payer or taxpayer consent in writing to the
extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time
limit described in division (C) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD means a period
of time beginning and ending as follows.
         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in §
34.18 of this chapter. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent
decision, finding or holding by any administrative body or court that the Local
Board of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request did not
have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify the assessment or any part of
that assessment.
         (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any
party appeals from the determination of the Local Board of Tax Review, the
sixtieth day after the date on which the final determination of the Local Board
of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately
reversed and no further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part,
or that reversal is available or taken.
   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be reported,
prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission of the
offense.
   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
34.09(F) of this chapter.
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by New Franklin does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created
under §
34.18 of this chapter, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which
the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the
amount due from the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less than
the amount paid, there shall be issued to the appellant or to the appellant’s
assigns or legal representative a refund in the amount of the overpayment as
provided by §
34.09(F) of this chapter, with interest on that amount as provided by this
division (D) of this section.
   (E)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related penalties
or interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; and
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Statute of limitations, see R.C. § 718.12
§ 34.20 ADOPTION OF RULES.
   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 718.30, the city, pursuant to this chapter, grants
authority to the Tax Administrator to adopt rules to administer the income tax
imposed by New Franklin.
   (B)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of rules, see R.C. § 718.30
§ 34.21 COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar as the
levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of
taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so
levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall
continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes levied in the
aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the
collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter have
been fully terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §
34.19.
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §
34.09(A) as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
§ 34.22 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax imposed
against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of income
specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such
unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such clause,
sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not affect or
impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or other
parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the
legislative authority of New Franklin that this chapter would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part
thereof not been included in this chapter.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
§ 34.23 NET PROFIT TAX ELECTION.
   (A)   Filing net profit taxes; election to be subject to provisions of
chapter.
      (1)   A taxpayer may elect to be subject to §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations in lieu of the provisions set forth
in the remainder of the city's income tax regulations. Notwithstanding any
other provision of this section, upon the taxpayer's election, both of the
following shall apply:
         (a)   The State Tax Commissioner shall serve as the sole administrator
of the municipal net profit tax for which the taxpayer, as defined in §
34.24(B)(3) of the city’s income tax regulations, is liable for the term of the
election;
         (b)   The Commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to R.C. §§
718.80 to 718.95, §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, and any applicable provision of
R.C. Chapter 5703.
      (2)   (a)   A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or before the
first day of the third month after the beginning of the taxpayer's taxable year
by notifying the Tax Commissioner and New Franklin, on a form prescribed by the
Tax Commissioner.
         (b)   1.   The election, once made by the taxpayer, applies to the
taxable year in which the election is made and to each subsequent taxable year
until the taxpayer notifies the Tax Commissioner and New Franklin of its
termination of the election.
            2.   A notification of termination shall be made, on a form
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, on or before the first day of the third
month of any taxable year.
            3.   Upon a timely and valid termination of the election, the
taxpayer is no longer subject to §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations and is instead subject to the
provisions set forth in the remainder of the city's income tax regulations.
      (3)   The Tax Commissioner shall enforce and administer §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations. In addition to any other powers
conferred upon the Tax Commissioner by law, the Tax Commissioner may:
         (a)   Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those sections;
         (b)   Adopt such rules as the Tax Commissioner finds necessary to
carry out those sections;
         (c)   Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to carry out
the duties imposed upon the Tax Commissioner by those sections.
      (4)   The Tax Commissioner shall not be considered a tax administrator,
as that term is defined in R.C. § 718.01 and §
34.03(C)(44) of the city’s income tax regulations.
   (B)   Definitions. If a term is used in §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, that is not otherwise defined in
the city's income tax regulations, is used in a comparable context in both the
laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in R.C. Title
LVII, and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of
the United States relating to federal income tax shall have control over the
use of the term in R.C. Title LVII, unless the term is defined in R.C. Chapter
5703, in which case the definition in that chapter shall control. Any reference
in this section to the Internal Revenue Code includes other laws of the United
States related to federal income taxes. If a term is defined in both this
section and §
34.03 of the city’s income tax regulations, the definition in this section
shall control for all uses of that term in §
34.24. As used in §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations only:
      (1)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME. Income apportioned or sitused to the
municipal corporation under §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, as applicable, reduced by any pre-
2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person for the municipal
corporation.
      (2)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME, for a person required to file as a
C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
as described in division (D)(5) of R.C. § 718.01 and §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, means a C corporation's federal
taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as determined
under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income.
         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (B)(1) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in § 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code.
         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in § 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         (d)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d)2. of this section,
deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the
income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of
an asset in § 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code.
            2.   Division (B)(2)(d)1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in § 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income.
         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income.
         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02.
         (h)   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income.
         (i)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
34.03(C)(47)(b) of the city’s income tax regulations.
         (j)   1.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in
the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
34.03(C)(47)(b) of the city’s income tax regulations.
            2.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made the election described in §
34.03(C)(47)(b) of the city’s income tax regulations, and is not a publicly
traded partnership that has made the election described in §
34.03(C)(23)(d) of the city’s income tax regulations, the taxpayer shall
compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer
were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid
or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless
such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and treated as
payment of interest under § 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or United States
Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified self-employed
retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued
to or for health insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for
life insurance for a partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder,
member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deduction.
            3.   Nothing in division (B)(2) of this section shall be construed
as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be
construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for
purposes of federal self-employment tax.
      (3)   TAXPAYER. Has the same meaning as in §
34.03(C)(47)(a) of the city’s income tax regulations, except that TAXPAYER does
not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax imposed under R.C.
Chapter 5745, TAXPAYER may include receivers, assignees, or trustees in
bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a taxpayer.
      (4)   TAX RETURN or RETURN. The notifications and reports required to be
filed pursuant to §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations for the purpose of reporting
municipal income taxes, and includes declarations of estimated tax.
      (5)   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal year
ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which the
calculation of the taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income is based pursuant
to this chapter. If a taxpayer's taxable year is changed for federal income tax
purposes, the taxable year for purposes of §§ 34.01 to 34.24 of the city’s
income tax regulations is changed accordingly but may consist of an aggregation
of more than one taxable year for federal income tax purposes. The Tax
Commissioner may prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable year
for a taxpayer that has had a change of its taxable year for federal income tax
purposes, for a taxpayer that has two or more short taxable years for federal
income tax purposes as the result of a change of ownership, or for a new
taxpayer that would otherwise have no taxable year.
      (6)   ASSESSMENT. A notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax issued
pursuant to §
34.24(K).
   (C)   Applicability; taxable situs; apportionment. This section applies to
any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or profession in New Franklin and
that has made the election under §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the
boundaries of New Franklin shall be considered as having a taxable situs in New
Franklin for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as
the average ratio of the following:
         (a)   1.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in New Franklin during the taxable period to the average original cost of all
of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated.
            2.   As used in division (C)(1)(a)1. of this section, tangible
personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the
taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the
annual rental thereon by eight;
         (b)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in New Franklin to wages, salaries, and other compensation paid
during the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession,
wherever the individual's services are performed, excluding compensation from
which taxes are not required to be withheld under this chapter;
         (c)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in New
Franklin to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same
period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   (a)   If the apportionment factors described in division (C)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's business
activity in New Franklin, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Commissioner may
require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the
income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or
more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation;
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         (b)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Commissioner denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by division (A) of §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations.
         (c)   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (C)(2)(a) of this
section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by division (A) of §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations.
      (3)   As used in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, "wages, salaries,
and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation
paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         (a)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented to, or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;
            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described
in division (C)(3)(a)2. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client, or patient.
         (b)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative, judicial, or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee's presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         (c)   Any other location, if the Tax Commissioner determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (C)(3)(a) or (b) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Commissioner makes such determination, the employer may
dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the Tax Commissioner's determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to New
Franklin as follows:
         (a)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to New Franklin only if, regardless of where title passes, the
property meets either of the following criteria:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within New Franklin
from a stock of goods located within New Franklin.
            2.   The property is delivered within New Franklin from a location
outside New Franklin, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its
own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within New Franklin and
the sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
         (b)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to New
Franklin to the extent that such services are performed in New Franklin.
         (c)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in New Franklin shall be sitused to New Franklin.
         (d)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in New Franklin shall be sitused to New
Franklin.
         (e)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to New Franklin based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in New Franklin.
      (5)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to
the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to New Franklin in
which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent
or broker shall be allocated to New Franklin based upon the ratio of the
commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of
real estate located in New Franklin to the commissions received from the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year.
      (6)   If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income, the
taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under division (C)(11) of §
34.03 of the city’s income tax regulations or substantially similar provision
of the codified ordinances of another municipal corporation, the taxpayer shall
add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that
was apportioned to New Franklin. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add
to its net profit that was apportioned to New Franklin any amount other than
the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount
related to the stock option not exempted from taxation. This division applies
solely for the purpose of making an adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's
net profit that was apportioned to New Franklin under this section.
      (7)   When calculating the ratios described in division (C)(1) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (C)(2) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
   (D)   Information provided to tax administrators; confidentiality.
      (1)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations is confidential, and no person shall
disclose such information, except for official purposes, in accordance with a
proper judicial order, or as provided in R.C. § 4123.271 or 5703.21. The Tax
Commissioner may furnish the Internal Revenue Service with copies of returns
filed. This section does not prohibit the publication of statistics in a form
which does not disclose information with respect to particular taxpayers.
      (2)   In May and November of each year, the Tax Commissioner shall
provide the New Franklin Tax Administrator with the following information for
every taxpayer that filed tax returns with the Commissioner under §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations and that had municipal taxable
income apportionable to New Franklin under this section for any prior year:
         (a)   The taxpayer's name, address, and federal employer
identification number;
         (b)   The taxpayer's apportionment ratio for, and amount of municipal
taxable income apportionable to, New Franklin pursuant to this chapter;
         (c)   The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
utilized by the taxpayer;
         (d)   Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be carried
forward to a future taxable year;
         (e)   The amount of any credit claimed under R.C. § 718.94.
      (3)   Not later than 30 days after each distribution made to municipal
corporations under R.C. § 718.83, the Tax Commissioner shall provide to New
Franklin a report stating the name and federal identification number of every
taxpayer that made estimated payments that are attributable to New Franklin and
the amount of each such taxpayer's estimated payment.
      (4)   The information described under divisions (D)(2) and (D)(3) of this
section shall be provided to the individual or individuals designated by New
Franklin Tax Administrator under R.C. § 718.83(D).
      (5)   (a)   New Franklin expects that the Tax Commissioner will, pursuant
to R.C. § 718.84(E), provide tax returns and other information it receives in
the performance of its administration of the municipal net profits tax for
taxpayers making the election provided in §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations. The Tax Administrator shall review
these returns and information, as well as the information received pursuant to
divisions (D)(2) and (D)(3) of this section, and has discretion to refer any
taxpayer for audit by the Tax Commissioner. Such referral shall be made on a
form prescribed by the Commissioner and shall include any information that
forms the basis for the referral.
         (b)   If the Tax Commissioner declines to audit a taxpayer referred by
the Tax Administrator under this section, New Franklin reserves its right to
pursue any and all remedies, whether at law or in equity, to ensure that the
correct tax liability has been calculated and paid by the taxpayer.
   (E)   Filing of annual return; remittance; disposition of funds.
      (1)   (a)   For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an annual
return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be due on the return
less the amount paid for the taxable year under this chapter, shall be
submitted to the Tax Commissioner, on a form and in the manner prescribed by
the Commissioner, on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following
the end of the taxpayer's taxable year.
         (b)   If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within one
calendar year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures necessary to
compute the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with the city’s income
tax regulations onto its annual return.
         (c)   The remittance shall be made payable to the Treasurer of State
and in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. If the amount payable with
the tax return is $10 or less, no remittance is required.
      (2)   (a)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer's identification number. Each return shall be verified by a
declaration under penalty of perjury.
         (b)   1.   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to include,
with each annual tax return, amended return, or request for refund filed with
the Commissioner under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, copies of any relevant documents or
other information.
            2.   A taxpayer that files an annual tax return electronically
through the Ohio Business Gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner shall either submit the documents required under this division
electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if electronic submission
is not available, mail the documents to the Tax Commissioner. The Department of
Taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the documents
required under this division on or before January 1, 2019.
         (c)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Commissioner may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements, or
documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer's municipal income tax.
      (4)   (a)   1.   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a tax return with the
Commissioner under this section. The extended due date of the return shall be
the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates.
            2.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may request that
the Commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for
filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the Commissioner receives
the request on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due, the
Commissioner shall grant the taxpayer's extension request.
            3.   An extension of time to file under division (E)(4)(a) of this
section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax
Commissioner grants an extension of that date.
         (b)   If the Commissioner considers it necessary in order to ensure
payment of a tax imposed in accordance with of the city’s income tax
regulations, the Commissioner may require taxpayers to file returns and make
payments otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not
otherwise required to file annual returns.
      (5)   Each return required to be filed in accordance with this section
shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person,
including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with
the Tax Commissioner about matters pertaining to the return. The return or
instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box
the taxpayer authorizes the Commissioner to contact the preparer or other
person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review
of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the
Commissioner with information that is missing from the return, to contact the
Commissioner for information about the examination or other review of the
return or the status of the taxpayer's refund or payments, and to respond to
notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the
taxpayer has received from the Commissioner and has shown to the preparer or
other person.
      (6)   When income tax returns or other documents require the signature of
a tax return preparer, the Tax Commissioner shall accept a facsimile or
electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
   (F)   Electronic filing.
      (1)   All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations shall file any tax return or
extension for filing a tax return, and shall make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, electronically, either through the Ohio Business
Gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
      (2)   A taxpayer may apply to the Commissioner, on a form prescribed by
the Commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file returns and make
payments electronically. For good cause shown, the Commissioner may excuse the
applicant from the requirement and permit the applicant to file the returns or
make the payments by nonelectronic means.
      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may adopt rules establishing the following:
         (a)   The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file returns
and make payments by electronic means;
         (b)   The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax returns by
electronic means.
   (G)   Consolidated returns.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         (a)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group as defined
in § 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes
at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the
business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the
affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that
would otherwise be included in the group.
         (b)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated return
filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         (c)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (G)(1)(a) of this section.
         (d)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4927.01.
         (e)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5727.01.
      (2)   (a)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year if
at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to
municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of
corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to
that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the
reporting method is required under federal law. The election continues to be
binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under division (G)(2)(b) of this
section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Commissioner. The Tax
Commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
         (b)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under
this section must be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of
the year following the last year of a five-year consolidated tax return
election period in effect under division (G)(2)(a) of this section. The
election to discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a five-
year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
         (c)   An election made under division (G)(2)(a) or (b) of this section
is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
         (d)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under §
34.24, a valid election made by the taxpayer under division (G)(2)(a) or (b) of
§
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations is binding upon the Tax Commissioner
for the remainder of the five-year period.
         (e)   When an election made under §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations is terminated, a valid election made
under this section is binding upon the Tax Administrator for the remainder of
the five-year period.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if the Tax Commissioner
determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions
have not been conducted at arm's length and that there has been a distortive
shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to a
municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated tax
return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for all
subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written
permission from the Commissioner to file a separate return or a taxpayer has
experienced a change in circumstances.
      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the same
manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (G)(5)(b), (c), and
(d) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated tax return shall
compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
34.24(B)(2) of the city’s income tax regulations, by substituting "consolidated
federal taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable
income" appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of
corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in
that division.
         (b)   No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall make any
adjustment otherwise required under division (G)(2) of §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations to the extent that the item of
income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or
consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
         (c)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at
least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one of the following with
respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year:
            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, exclude the property, payroll, and
gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated
group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net
profit or loss is so excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a
separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise
be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
            2.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, include the property, payroll, and
gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated
group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net
profit or loss is so included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a
separate taxpayer on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in
the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         (d)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less
than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated tax return shall
exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making
the computations required in §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, exclude the property, payroll, and
gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated
group's net profit sitused to a municipal corporation;
            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations on the basis of the entity's net
profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the
computations required under §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations by substituting "consolidated
federal taxable income attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net
profit from" appears in that section and by substituting "affiliated group of
corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section.
      (7)   Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly and
severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or other
amounts applicable under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations or R.C. Chapter 5703 to the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated
group.
   (H)   Failure to pay tax. If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed
under §
34.24  of the city’s income tax regulations fails to pay any tax as required
under §§
34.01 to
34.24  of the city’s income tax regulations, or any portion of that tax, on or
before the date prescribed for its payment, interest shall be assessed,
collected, and paid, in the same manner as the tax, upon such unpaid amount at
the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the date prescribed for
its payment until it is paid or until the date an assessment is issued under §
34.24 (K) of the city’s income tax regulations, whichever occurs first.
   (I)   Declaration of estimated taxes.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         (a)   COMBINED TAX LIABILITY. The total amount of a taxpayer's income
tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state for a taxable year.
         (b)   ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer's combined tax liability for the current taxable
year.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (I)(2)(d) of this section,
every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current
taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, if the amount
payable as estimated taxes is at least $200.
         (b)   Except as provided in division (I)(2)(d) of this section, a
taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall make a declaration
under rules prescribed by the Commissioner.
         (c)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before
the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year
or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the taxpayer
becomes subject to tax for the first time.
         (d)   The Tax Commissioner may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.
      (3)   Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes with,
and remit estimated taxes to, the Tax Commissioner at the times and in the
amounts prescribed in division (I)(3)(a) of this section. Remitted taxes shall
be made payable to the Treasurer of State.
         (a)   The required portion of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as follows:
            1.   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year;
            2.   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year;
            3.   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year;
            4.   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the combined tax liability for the taxable year.
         (b)   If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of estimated
taxes will not accurately reflect the taxpayer's tax liability for the taxable
year, the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate, its subsequent
payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate payment of
estimated taxes.
         (c)   1.   Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration of estimated
taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates that it owes to
each municipal corporation for the taxable year.
            2.   Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under this
section, the Commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to the
Treasurer of State. The Treasurer shall credit the payment in the same manner
as in division (B) of R.C. § 718.85.
      (4)   (a)   In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes, there
shall be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum
prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of
underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described
in division (I)(5) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be
determined as follows:
            1.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of
the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;
            2.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of
the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;
            3.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of
the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;
            4.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of
the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment.
         (b)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the
estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is
made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before
any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment
only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the
payment presently due.
         (c)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as
taxes collected under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations and shall be credited and
distributed to municipal corporations in accordance with R.C. § 718.83.
      (5)   An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability shall be
due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be
added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply:
         (a)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90%
of the combined tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.
         (b)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least
100% of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a municipal income tax return for
that year.
   (J)   Additional penalties.
      (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed by §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations or R.C. Chapter 5703, the following
penalties shall apply:
         (a)   If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations fails to make and file the return
within the time prescribed, including any extensions of time granted by the Tax
Commissioner, the Commissioner may impose a penalty not exceeding $25 per month
or fraction of a month, for each month or fraction of a month elapsing between
the due date, including extensions of the due date, and the date on which the
return is filed. The aggregate penalty, per instance, under this division shall
not exceed $150.
         (b)   If a person required to file a tax return electronically under
§§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations fails to do so, the Commissioner may
impose a penalty not to exceed the following:
            1.   For each of the first two failures, 5% of the amount required
to be reported on the return;
            2.   For the third and any subsequent failure, 10% of the amount
required to be reported on the return.
         (c)   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations fails to timely pay an amount of tax
required to be paid under §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, the Commissioner may impose a
penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid.
         (d)   If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return required by
§§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations that does not contain information
upon which the substantial correctness of the return may be judged or contains
information that on its face indicates that the return is substantially
incorrect, and the filing of the return in that manner is due to a position
that is frivolous or a desire that is apparent from the return to delay or
impede the administration of §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, a penalty of up to $500 may be
imposed.
         (e)   If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the reporting
or payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, a penalty may be imposed not
exceeding the greater of $1,000 or 100% of the tax required to be shown on the
return.
         (f)   If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a refund
under §
34.24(L) of the city’s income tax regulations, a penalty may be imposed not
exceeding the greater of $1,000 or 100% of the claim. Any penalty imposed under
this division, any refund issued on the claim, and interest on any refund from
the date of the refund, may be assessed under §
34.24(K) of the city’s income tax regulations without regard to any time
limitation for the assessment imposed by division (K)(1) of that section.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on a tax
return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or before
the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing the
return.
      (3)   Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any penalty imposed
under this section may be abated by the Tax Commissioner. The Commissioner may
adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such penalties.
      (4)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as
taxes collected under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations and shall be credited and
distributed to municipal corporations in the same proportion as the underlying
tax liability is required to be distributed to such municipal corporations
under R.C. § 718.83.
   (K)   Assessments against taxpayer.
      (1)   (a)   If any taxpayer required to file a return under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations fails to file the return within the
time prescribed, files an incorrect return, or fails to remit the full amount
of the tax due for the period covered by the return, the Tax Commissioner may
make an assessment against the taxpayer for any deficiency for the period for
which the return or tax is due, based upon any information in the
Commissioner's possession.
         (b)   The Tax Commissioner shall not make or issue an assessment
against a taxpayer more than three years after the later of the date the return
subject to assessment was required to be filed or the date the return was
filed. Such time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer and the
Commissioner consent in writing to the extension. Any such extension shall
extend the three-year time limit in §
34.24(L) of the city’s income tax regulations for the same period of time.
There shall be no bar or limit to an assessment against a taxpayer that fails
to file a return subject to assessment as required by §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, or that files a fraudulent return.
The Commissioner shall give the taxpayer assessed written notice of the
assessment as provided in R.C. § 5703.37. With the notice, the Commissioner
shall provide instructions on how to petition for reassessment and request a
hearing on the petition.
      (2)   Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the Tax Commissioner within
60 days after service of the notice of assessment, either personally or by
certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed by the authorized
agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the facts, the assessment
becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due and payable from the
taxpayer to the Treasurer of State. The petition shall indicate the taxpayer's
objections, but additional objections may be raised in writing if received by
the Commissioner prior to the date shown on the final determination. If the
petition has been properly filed, the Commissioner shall proceed under R.C. §
5703.60.
      (3)   (a)   After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the
assessment remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of the
Tax Commissioner's entry making the assessment final may be filed in the office
of the clerk of the court of common pleas in the county in which the taxpayer
has an office or place of business in this state, the county in which the
taxpayer's statutory agent is located, or Franklin County.
         (b)   Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the clerk shall enter
a judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The
judgment may be filed by the clerk in a loose-leaf book entitled "special
judgments for municipal income taxes," and shall have the same effect as other
judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of the Tax
Commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall apply to
sales made under the judgment.
         (c)   If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within 60 days
after the day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment
consisting of tax due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by
R.C. § 5703.47 from the day the Commissioner issues the assessment until the
assessment is paid or until it is certified to the Attorney General for
collection under R.C. § 131.02, whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion of
the assessment is certified to the Attorney General for collection, the entire
unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum
prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the date of certification until the date it
is paid in its entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as the tax
and may be collected by issuing an assessment under this section.
      (4)   All money collected under this section shall be credited to the
municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to which
the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section.
      (5)   If the Tax Commissioner believes that collection of the tax will be
jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the tax are
instituted without delay, the Commissioner may issue a jeopardy assessment
against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the issuance of the
jeopardy assessment, the Commissioner shall file an entry with the clerk of the
court of common pleas in the manner prescribed by division (K)(3) of this
section. Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be served on the taxpayer
assessed or the taxpayer's legal representative in the manner provided in R.C.
§ 5703.37 within five days of the filing of the entry with the clerk. The total
amount assessed is immediately due and payable, unless the taxpayer assessed
files a petition for reassessment in accordance with division (K)(2) of this
section and provides security in a form satisfactory to the Commissioner and in
an amount sufficient to satisfy the unpaid balance of the assessment. Full or
partial payment of the assessment does not prejudice the Commissioner's
consideration of the petition for reassessment.
      (6)   (a)   Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is
pending, the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the
subject of the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the Treasurer of State
does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the
petition.
         (b)   If upon final determination of the petition an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Commissioner, upon petition so filed or
pursuant to a decision of the Board of Tax Appeals or any court to which the
determination or decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the
taxpayer under the corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there
shall be issued to the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal representative a refund
in the amount of the overpayment as provided by §
34.24(L) of the city’s income tax regulations, with interest on that amount as
provided by that section.
   (L)   Refund applications.
      (1)   An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes paid on
any illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, including assessments, shall be
filed with the Tax Commissioner within three years after the date of the
illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of the tax, or within any additional
period allowed by division (K)(1) of §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations. The application shall be filed in
the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
      (2)   (a)   On the filing of a refund application, the Tax Commissioner
shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is entitled. The
amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per return or
assessment. If the amount is greater than $10 and not less than that claimed,
the Commissioner shall certify that amount to the Director of Budget and
Management and the Treasurer of State for payment from the tax refund fund
created in R.C. § 5703.052. If the amount is greater than $10 but less than
that claimed, the Commissioner shall proceed in accordance with R.C. § 5703.70.
         (b)   Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the Commissioner
shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded to the taxpayer
attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be deducted from the
municipal corporation's next distribution under R.C. § 718.83.
      (3)   Any portion of a refund determined under division (L)(2) of this
section that is not issued within 90 days after such determination shall bear
interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the 91st day
after such determination until the day the refund is paid or credited. On an
illegal or erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at that rate from the
date of payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment until the day the refund
is paid or credited.
   (M)   Amended returns.
      (1)   If any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required
in an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election allowed
under §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations and used to determine the tax due
under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations must be altered as the result of an
adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return, whether initiated by
the taxpayer or the Internal Revenue Service, and such alteration affects the
taxpayer's tax liability under those sections, the taxpayer shall file an
amended return with the Tax Commissioner in such form as the Commissioner
requires. The amended return shall be filed not later than 60 days after the
adjustment is agreed upon or finally determined for federal income tax purposes
or after any federal income tax deficiency or refund, or the abatement or
credit resulting therefrom, has been assessed or paid, whichever occurs first.
If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax
return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated
return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax return, the
taxpayer shall notify the Commissioner before filing the amended return.
      (2)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a
return subject to assessment § 34.24(K) of the city’s income tax regulations
for the purpose of assessing any additional tax due under this section,
together with any applicable penalty and interest. The amended return shall not
reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments from a previously
filed return no longer subject to assessment that are not affected, either
directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal tax return.
      (3)   In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may be
filed under this division within the 60-day period prescribed for filing the
amended return, even if that period extends beyond the period prescribed in §
34.24(L) of the city’s income tax regulations, if the application otherwise
conforms to the requirements of that section. An application filed under this
division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only
those facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's
annual return that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the
adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return unless it is also filed
within the time prescribed in §
34.24(L) of the city’s income tax regulations. The application shall not reopen
those facts, figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected,
either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal
income tax return.
   (N)   Examination of records and other documents and persons.
      (1)   The Tax Commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee thereof,
may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax
returns of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations for the purpose of verifying the
accuracy of any return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due as required under those sections. Upon written request by the Commissioner
or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every taxpayer or other person
subject to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the
Commissioner, authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such
books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a
reasonable time and place designated in the request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other person
that is subject to §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations shall be open to the Tax
Commissioner's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a
period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the records
or documents relate, unless the Commissioner, in writing, consents to their
destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer.
The Commissioner may require any person, by notice served on that person, to
keep such records as the Commissioner determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by a municipal corporation.
      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may examine under oath any person that the
Commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such person to
attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records, and
federal income tax returns in such person's possession or control. The person
may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other
tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not
authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Commissioner compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply.
   (O)   Credits.
      (1)   A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of New Franklin
pursuant to this chapter, shall be available to a taxpayer that has made the
election allowed under §
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, against the municipal corporation's
tax on income. A municipal corporation shall submit the following information
to the Tax Commissioner on or before the later of January 31, 2018, or the 31st
day of January of the first year in which the taxpayer is eligible to receive
the credit:
         (a)   A copy of the agreement entered into by New Franklin and
taxpayer under the city’s income tax regulations;
         (b)   A copy of the ordinance or resolution authorizing the agreement
entered into between New Franklin and the taxpayer.
      (2)   (a)   Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit, with the
taxpayer's tax return, documentation issued by New Franklin granting the credit
that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the credit, the amount of the
credit for which the taxpayer is eligible, and the tax year to which the credit
is to be applied.
         (b)   Such documentation shall be provided in the form prescribed by
the Tax Commissioner.
         (c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Tax
Commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a credit, to
determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit agreement entered
into by New Franklin and taxpayer under the city’s income tax regulations, or
to modify the terms or conditions of any such existing agreement.
   (P)   Reckless violations; penalties.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (P)(2) of this section, whoever
recklessly violates §
34.24(E)(1) of the city’s income tax regulations shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both.
      (2)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
34.24(E)(1) of the city’s income tax regulations constitutes a separate
offense.
      (3)   These specific penalties shall not be construed to prevent New
Franklin from prosecuting any and all other offenses that may apply.
 
§ 34.24 H.B. 49 PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Filing net profit taxes; election to be subject to provisions of
chapter.
      (1)   A taxpayer may elect to be subject to this section of the city’s
income tax regulations in lieu of the provisions set forth in the remainder of
the city’s income tax regulations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section, upon the taxpayer’s election, both of the following shall apply:
         (a)   The State Tax Commissioner shall serve as the sole administrator
of the municipal net profit tax for which the taxpayer, as defined in division
(B)(3) of this section, is liable for the term of the election; and
         (b)   The Commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to R.C. §§
718.80 to 718.95, §§
34.01 through
34.24 of this chapter and any applicable provision of R.C. Chapter 5703.
      (2)   (a)   A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or before the
first day of the third month after the beginning of the taxpayer’s taxable year
by notifying the Tax Commissioner and New Franklin, on a form prescribed by the
Tax Commissioner.
         (b)   1.   The election, once made by the taxpayer, applies to the
taxable year in which the election is made and to each subsequent taxable year
until the taxpayer notifies the Tax Commissioner and New Franklin of its
termination of the election.
            2.   A notification of termination shall be made, on a form
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, on or before the first day of the third
month of any taxable year.
            3.   Upon a timely and valid termination of the election, the
taxpayer is no longer subject to this section of the city’s income tax
regulations, and is instead subject to the provisions set forth in the
remainder of the city’s income tax regulations.
      (3)   The Tax Commissioner shall enforce and administer this section of
the city’s income tax regulations. In addition to any other powers conferred
upon the Tax Commissioner by law, the Tax Commissioner may:
         (a)   Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those sections;
         (b)   Adopt such rules as the Tax Commissioner finds necessary to
carry out those sections; and
         (c)   Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to carry out
the duties imposed upon the Tax Commissioner by those sections.
      (4)   The Tax Commissioner shall not be considered a Tax Administrator,
as that term is defined in R.C. § 718.01 and §
34.03(C)(44) of this chapter.
   (B)   Definitions.
      (1)   If a term is used in this section, that is not otherwise defined in
§§
34.01 through
34.22, is used in a comparable context in both the laws of the United States
relating to federal income tax and in R.C. Title LVII, and the use is not
consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United States relating
to federal income tax shall have control over the use of the term in R.C. Title
LVII, unless the term is defined in R.C. Chapter 5703, in which case the
definition in that chapter shall control. Any reference in this section to the
Internal Revenue Code includes other laws of the United States related to
federal income taxes. If a term is defined in both this section and § 34.03(C)
of this chapter, the definition in this section shall control for all uses of
that term in this section of the city’s income tax regulations.
      (2)   As used in this section of the city’s income tax regulations only,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
         (a)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME. Income apportioned or sitused to the
municipal corporation under this section of the city’s income tax regulations,
as applicable, reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
available to the person for the municipal corporation.
         (b)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. For a person required to file
as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C
corporation as described in R.C. § 718.01(D)(5) and this section of the city’s
income tax regulations, means a C corporation’s federal taxable income before
net operating losses and special deductions as determined under the Internal
Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
            1.   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
            2.   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (B)(2)(a) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange or other disposition of property
described in § 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
            3.   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
            4.   a.   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b)4.b. of this
section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the
extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of an asset in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; and
               b.   Division (B)(2)(b)4.a. of this section does not apply to
the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in §§ 1245 or 1250 of
the Internal Revenue Code.
            5.   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction
in the computation of federal taxable income;
            6.   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
            7.   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C. § 4313.02;
            8.   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income;
            9.   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly
or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
34.03(C)(47)(b) of this chapter; and
            10.   a.   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
34.03(C)(47)(b) of this chapter.
               b.   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a
disregarded entity that has made the election described in §
34.03(C)(47)(b) of this chapter, and is not a publicly traded partnership that
has made the election described in §
34.03(C)(23)(d) of this chapter, the taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal
taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer were a C corporation,
except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts paid or accrued to a
partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member or former
member shall not be allowed as a deductible expense unless such payments are a
pension or retirement benefit payment paid to a retired partner, retired
shareholder or retired member are in consideration for the use of capital and
treated as payment of interest under § 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or
United States treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
               c.   Nothing in division (B)(2)(b) of this section shall be
construed as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once
or shall be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or
accrued for purposes of federal self-employment tax.
         (c)   TAXPAYER. Has the same meaning as in §
34.03 (C)(47)(a) of this chapter, except that TAXPAYER does not include natural
persons or entities subject to the tax imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745.
TAXPAYER may include receivers, assignees or trustees in bankruptcy when such
persons are required to assume the role of a taxpayer.
         (d)   TAX RETURN or RETURN. The notifications and reports required to
be filed pursuant to §§
34.01 through
34.24 of this chapter for the purpose of reporting municipal income taxes, and
includes declarations of estimated tax.
         (e)   TAXABLE YEAR. The calendar year or the taxpayer’s fiscal year
ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which the
calculation of the taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable income is based pursuant
to this chapter. If a taxpayer’s taxable year is changed for federal income tax
purposes, the taxable year for purposes of §§
34.01 through
34.24 of this chapter is changed accordingly but may consist of an aggregation
of more than one taxable year for federal income tax purposes. The Tax
Commissioner may prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable year
for a taxpayer that has had a change of its taxable year for federal income tax
purposes, for a taxpayer that has two or more short taxable years for federal
income tax purposes as the result of a change of ownership, or for a new
taxpayer that would otherwise have no taxable year.
         (f)   ASSESSMENT means a notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax
issued pursuant to division (K) of this section.
   (C)   Applicability; taxable situs; apportionment. This section applies to
any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or profession in New Franklin and
that has made the election under this section of the city’s income tax
regulations.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the
boundaries of New Franklin shall be considered as having a taxable situs in New
Franklin for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as
the average ratio of the following:
         (a)   1.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in New Franklin during the taxable period to the average original cost of all
of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated; and
            2.   As used in division (C)(1)(a)1. of this section, tangible
personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the
taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the
annual rental thereon by eight;
         (b)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in New Franklin to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during
the same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever
the individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from which
taxes are not required to be withheld under this chapter; and
         (c)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in New
Franklin to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same
period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   (a)   If the apportionment factors described in division (C)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business
activity in New Franklin, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Commissioner may
require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of the
income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one or
more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation; and
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         (b)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Commissioner denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by division (C)(1) of this
section.
         (c)   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (C)(2)(a) of this
section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by division (C)(1) of this section.
      (3)   As used in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, WAGES, SALARIES AND
OTHER COMPENSATION includes only wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         (a)   A location that is owned, controlled or used by, rented to or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client or patient; and
            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person described
in division (C)(3)(a)2. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client or patient.
         (b)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial or similar administrative, judicial or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer; and
         (c)   Any other location, if the Tax Commissioner determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Commissioner makes such determination, the employer may
dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the evidence,
that the Tax Commissioner’s determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to New
Franklin as follows:
         (a)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to New Franklin only if, regardless of where title passes, the
property meets either of the following criteria:
            1.   Their property is shipped to or delivered within New Franklin
from a stock of goods located within New Franklin; and
            2.   The property is delivered within New Franklin from a location
outside New Franklin, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its
own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within New Franklin and
the sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
         (b)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to New
Franklin to the extent that such services are performed in New Franklin;
         (c)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in New Franklin shall be sitused to New Franklin;
         (d)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in New Franklin shall be sitused to New
Franklin; and
         (e)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to New Franklin based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in New Franklin.
      (5)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating to
the sale, purchase or lease of real estate shall be sitused to New Franklin in
which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real estate agent
or broker shall be allocated to New Franklin based upon the ratio of the
commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or lease of
real estate located in New Franklin to the commissions received from the sale,
purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year.
      (6)   (a)   If, in computing a taxpayer’s adjusted federal taxable
income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted
to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the
employee’s income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted
from taxation under §
34.03(C)(11) of this chapter by New Franklin or substantially similar provision
of the codified ordinances of another municipal corporation, the taxpayer shall
add the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer’s net profit that
was apportioned to New Franklin. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add
to its net profit that was apportioned to New Franklin any amount other than
the amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount
related to the stock option not exempted from taxation.
         (b)   This division (C)(6) applies solely for the purpose of making an
adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer’s net profit that was apportioned to New
Franklin under this section.
      (7)   When calculating the ratios described in division (C)(1) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (C)(2) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the
property, payroll and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
   (D)   Information provided to Tax Administrators; confidentiality.
      (1)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by §§
34.01 to
34.24 of this chapter is confidential, and no person shall disclose such
information, except for official purposes, in accordance with a proper judicial
order, or as provided in R.C. §§ 4123.271 or 5703.21. The Tax Commissioner may
furnish the Internal Revenue Service with copies of returns filed. This section
does not prohibit the publication of statistics in a form which does not
disclose information with respect to particular taxpayers.
      (2)   In May and November of each year, the Tax Commissioner shall
provide the New Franklin Tax Administrator with the following information for
every taxpayer that filed tax returns with the Commissioner under this section
and that had municipal taxable income apportionable to New Franklin under this
section for any prior year:
         (a)   The taxpayer’s name, address and federal employer identification
number;
         (b)   The taxpayer’s apportionment ratio for, and amount of municipal
taxable income apportionable to, New Franklin pursuant to the city’s income tax
regulations;
         (c)   The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
utilized by the taxpayer;
         (d)   Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be carried
forward to a future taxable year; and
         (e)   The amount of any credit claimed under R.C. § 718.94.
      (3)   Not later than 30 days after each distribution made to municipal
corporations under R.C. § 718.83, the Tax Commissioner shall provide to New
Franklin a report stating the name and federal identification number of every
taxpayer that made estimated payments that are attributable to New Franklin and
the amount of each such taxpayer’s estimated payment.
      (4)   The information described under divisions (D)(2) and (D)(3) of this
section shall be provided to the individual or individuals designated by the
city’s Tax Administrator under R.C. § 718.83(D).
      (5)   (a)   New Franklin expects that the Tax Commissioner will, pursuant
to section R.C. § 718.84(E), provide tax returns and other information it
receives in the performance of its administration of the municipal net profits
tax for taxpayers making the election provided in this section. The Tax
Administrator shall review these returns and information, as well as the
information received pursuant to divisions (D)(2) and (D)(3) of this section,
and has discretion to refer any taxpayer for audit by the Tax Commissioner.
Such referral shall be made on a form prescribed by the Commissioner and shall
include any information that forms the basis for the referral.
         (b)   If the Tax Commissioner declines to audit a taxpayer referred by
the Tax Administrator under this section, New Franklin reserves its right to
pursue any and all remedies, whether at law or in equity, to ensure that the
correct tax liability has been calculated and paid by the taxpayer.
   (E)   Filing of annual return; remittance; disposition of funds.
      (1)   (a)   For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an annual
return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be due on the return
less the amount paid for the taxable year under the city’s income tax
regulations, shall be submitted to the Tax Commissioner, on a form and in the
manner prescribed by the Commissioner, on or before the fifteenth day of the
fourth month following the end of the taxpayer’s taxable year.
         (b)   If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within one
calendar year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures necessary to
compute the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with the city’s income
tax regulations onto its annual return.
         (c)   The remittance shall be made payable to the Treasurer of state
and in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. If the amount payable with
the tax return is $10 or less, no remittance is required.
      (2)   (a)   Each return required to be filed under this section shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall include
the taxpayer’s identification number. Each return shall be verified by a
declaration under penalty of perjury.
         (b)   1.   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to include,
with each annual tax return, amended return, or request for refund filed with
the Commissioner under §§ 34.01 to 34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations,
copies of any relevant documents or other information.
            2.   A taxpayer that files an annual tax return electronically
through the Ohio Business Gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner shall either submit the documents required under this division (E)
(2) electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if electronic
submission is not available, mail the documents to the Tax Commissioner. The
Department of Taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting the
documents required under this division (E)(2) on or before January 1, 2019.
         (c)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Commissioner may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements or
documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer’s municipal income tax.
      (4)   (a)   1.   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a tax return with the
Commissioner under this section. The extended due date of the return shall be
the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates.
            2.   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may request that
the Commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the date for
filing the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the Commissioner receives
the request on or before the date the municipal income tax return is due, the
Commissioner shall grant the taxpayer’s extension request.
            3.   An extension of time to file under division (E)(4)(a) of this
section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax
Commissioner grants an extension of that date.
         (b)   If the Commissioner considers it necessary in order to ensure
payment of a tax imposed in accordance with the city’s income tax regulations,
the Commissioner may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments
otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise
required to file annual returns.
      (5)   Each return required to be filed in accordance with this section
shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another person,
including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to communicate with
the Tax Commissioner about matters pertaining to the return. The return or
instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by checking the box
the taxpayer authorizes the Commissioner to contact the preparer or other
person concerning questions that arise during the examination or other review
of the return and authorizes the preparer or other person only to provide the
Commissioner with information that is missing from the return, to contact the
Commissioner for information about the examination or other review of the
return or the status of the taxpayer’s refund or payments, and to respond to
notices about mathematical errors, offsets, or return preparation that the
taxpayer has received from the Commissioner and has shown to the preparer or
other person.
      (6)   When income tax returns or other documents require the signature of
a tax return preparer, the Tax Commissioner shall accept a facsimile or
electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.
   (F)   Electronic filing.
      (1)   All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under this
section of the city’s income tax regulations shall file any tax return or
extension for filing a tax return, and shall make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, electronically, either through the Ohio Business
Gateway or in another manner as prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
      (2)   A taxpayer may apply to the Commissioner, on a form prescribed by
the Commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file returns and make
payments electronically. For good cause shown, the Commissioner may excuse the
applicant from the requirement and permit the applicant to file the returns or
make the payments by nonelectronic means.
      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may adopt rules establishing the following:
         (a)   The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file returns
and make payments by electronic means; and
         (b)   The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax returns by
electronic means.
   (G)   Consolidated returns.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         (a)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS. An affiliated group as defined
in § 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group includes
at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily engaged in the
business of providing local exchange telephone service in this state, the
affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange carrier that
would otherwise be included in the group.
         (b)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN. A consolidated return
filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
         (c)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. The consolidated taxable
income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the purposes of
filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before consideration of net
operating losses or special deductions. CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME
does not include income or loss of an incumbent local exchange carrier that is
excluded from the affiliated group under division (G)(1)(a) of this section.
         (d)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4927.01.
         (e)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5727.01.
      (2)   (a)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year if
at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to
municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of
corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to
that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the
reporting method is required under federal law. The election continues to be
binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under division (G)(2)(b) of this
section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Commissioner. The Tax
Commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
         (b)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under
this section must be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of
the year following the last year of a five-year consolidated tax return
election period in effect under division (G)(2)(a) of this section. The
election to discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a five-
year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
         (c)   An election made under division (G)(2)(a) or (G)(2)(b) of this
section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations
subject to a municipal income tax.
         (d)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under this section of
the city’s income tax regulations, a valid election made by the taxpayer under
division (G)(2)(a) or (G)(2)(b) of this section is binding upon the Tax
Commissioner for the remainder of the five-year period.
         (e)   When an election made under this section of the city’s income
tax regulations is terminated, a valid election made under this section is
binding upon the Tax Administrator for the remainder of the five-year period.
      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if the Tax Commissioner
determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany transactions
have not been conducted at arm’s length and that there has been a distortive
shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net profits to a
municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated tax
return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for all
subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives written
permission from the Commissioner to file a separate return or a taxpayer has
experienced a change in circumstances.
      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the same
manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (G)(5)(b), (G)(5)
(c) and (G)(5)(d) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated tax
return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in division
(B)(2) of this section, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income”
for “federal taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that
division and by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C
corporation’s” wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
         (b)   No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall make any
adjustment otherwise required under division (G)(2) of this section to the
extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment
has been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal
taxable income.
         (c)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at
least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one of the following with
respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for that taxable year:
            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in this section of the city’s
income tax regulations, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so
excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the
basis of the entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group; and
            2.   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in this section of the city’s
income tax regulations, include the property, payroll and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so
included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on
the basis of the entity’s net profits that are included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
         (d)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less
than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly
or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated tax return shall
exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the purposes of making
the computations required in this section, exclude the property, payroll, and
gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated
group’s net profit sitused to a municipal corporation; and
            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to municipal income
taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations on the basis of the entity’s net
profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the
computations required under this section of the city’s income tax regulations
by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income attributable to” for “net
profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by
substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever
“taxpayer” appears in that section.
      (7)   Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly and
severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges or other
amounts applicable under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations or R.C. Chapter 5703 to the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated
group.
   (H)   Failure to pay tax. If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed
under this section of the city’s income tax regulations fails to pay any tax as
required under §§
34.01 to
34.24  of the city’s income tax regulations, or any portion of that tax, on or
before the date prescribed for its payment, interest shall be assessed,
collected, and paid, in the same manner as the tax, upon such unpaid amount at
the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the date prescribed for
its payment until it is paid or until the date an assessment is issued under
division (K) of this section, whichever occurs first.
   (I)   Declaration of estimated taxes.
      (1)   For the purpose of this division (I), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         (a)   COMBINED TAX LIABILITY. The total amount of a taxpayer’s income
tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state for a taxable year.
         (b)   ESTIMATED TAXES. The amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer’s combined tax liability for the current taxable
year.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (I)(2)(d) of this section,
every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the current
taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, if the amount
payable as estimated taxes is at least $200.
         (b)   Except as provided in division (I)(2)(d) of this section, a
taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall make a declaration
under rules prescribed by the Commissioner.
         (c)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before
the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the taxable year
or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the taxpayer
becomes subject to tax for the first time.
         (d)   The Tax Commissioner may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.
      (3)   Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes with,
and remit estimated taxes to, the Tax Commissioner at the times and in the
amounts prescribed in division (C)(1) of this section. Remitted taxes shall be
made payable to the Treasurer of State.
         (a)   The required portion of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as follows:
            1.   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year;
            2.   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year;
            3.   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the combined tax liability for the
taxable year; and
            4.   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth month of the
taxable year, 90% of the combined tax liability for the taxable year.
         (b)   If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of estimated
taxes will not accurately reflect the taxpayer’s tax liability for the taxable
year, the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate, its subsequent
payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate payment of
estimated taxes.
         (c)   1.   Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration of estimated
taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates that it owes to
each municipal corporation for the taxable year.
            2.   Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under this
section, the Commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to the
Treasurer of State. The Treasurer shall credit the payment in the same manner
as in R.C. § 718.85(B).
      (4)   (a)   In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes, there
shall be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum
prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of
underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described
in division (I)(5) of this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be
determined as follows:
            1.   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of
the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;
            2.   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of
the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;
            3.   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of
the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment; and
            4.   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of
the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment.
         (b)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the
estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is
made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before
any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment
only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the
payment presently due.
         (c)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as
taxes collected under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations and shall be credited and
distributed to municipal corporations in accordance with R.C. § 718.83.
      (5)   An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability shall be
due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section shall not be
added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following apply:
         (a)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90%
of the combined tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due; and
         (b)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least
100% of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a municipal income tax return for
that year.
   (J)   Additional penalties.
      (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed by §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations or R.C. Chapter 5703, the following
penalties shall apply.
         (a)   If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations fails to make and file the return
within the time prescribed, including any extensions of time granted by the Tax
Commissioner, the Commissioner may impose a penalty not exceeding $25 per month
or fraction of a month, for each month or fraction of a month elapsing between
the due date, including extensions of the due date, and the date on which the
return is filed. The aggregate penalty, per instance, under this division shall
not exceed $150.
         (b)   If a person required to file a tax return electronically under
§§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations fails to do so, the Commissioner may
impose a penalty not to exceed the following:
            1.   For each of the first two failures, 5% of the amount required
to be reported on the return; and
            2.   For the third and any subsequent failure, 10% of the amount
required to be reported on the return.
         (c)   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations fails to timely pay an amount of tax
required to be paid under this section, the Commissioner may impose a penalty
equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid.
         (d)   If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return required by
§§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations that does not contain information
upon which the substantial correctness of the return may be judged or contains
information that on its face indicates that the return is substantially
incorrect, and the filing of the return in that manner is due to a position
that is frivolous or a desire that is apparent from the return to delay or
impede the administration of §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, a penalty of up to $500 may be
imposed.
         (e)   If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the reporting
or payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, a penalty may be imposed not
exceeding the greater of $1,000 or 100% of the tax required to be shown on the
return.
         (f)   If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a refund
under division (L) of this section, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the
greater of $1,000 or 100% of the claim. Any penalty imposed under this division
(J), any refund issued on the claim, and interest on any refund from the date
of the refund, may be assessed under division (K) of this section without
regard to any time limitation for the assessment imposed by division (K)(1) of
this section.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on a tax
return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or before
the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing the
return.
      (3)   Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed under this chapter. All or part of any penalty imposed
under this section may be abated by the Tax Commissioner. The Commissioner may
adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such penalties.
      (4)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered as
taxes collected under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations and shall be credited and
distributed to municipal corporations in the same proportion as the underlying
tax liability is required to be distributed to such municipal corporations
under R.C. § 718.83.
   (K)   Assessments against taxpayer.
      (1)   (a)   If any taxpayer required to file a return under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations fails to file the return within the
time prescribed, files an incorrect return, or fails to remit the full amount
of the tax due for the period covered by the return, the Tax Commissioner may
make an assessment against the taxpayer for any deficiency for the period for
which the return or tax is due, based upon any information in the
Commissioner’s possession.
         (b)   The Tax Commissioner shall not make or issue an assessment
against a taxpayer more than three years after the later of the date the return
subject to assessment was required to be filed or the date the return was
filed. Such time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer and the
Commissioner consent in writing to the extension. Any such extension shall
extend the three-year time limit in section division (L) of this section for
the same period of time. There shall be no bar or limit to an assessment
against a taxpayer that fails to file a return subject to assessment as
required by §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, or that files a fraudulent return.
The Commissioner shall give the taxpayer assessed written notice of the
assessment as provided in R.C. § 5703.37. With the notice, the Commissioner
shall provide instructions on how to petition for reassessment and request a
hearing on the petition.
      (2)   Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the Tax Commissioner within
60 days after service of the notice of assessment, either personally or by
certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed by the authorized
agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the facts, the assessment
becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due and payable from the
taxpayer to the Treasurer of state. The petition shall indicate the taxpayer’s
objections, but additional objections may be raised in writing if received by
the Commissioner prior to the date shown on the final determination. If the
petition has been properly filed, the Commissioner shall proceed under R.C. §
5703.60.
      (3)   (a)   After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the
assessment remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of the
Tax Commissioner’s entry making the assessment final may be filed in the office
of the clerk of the court of common pleas in the county in which the taxpayer
has an office or place of business in this state, the county in which the
taxpayer’s statutory agent is located, or Franklin County.
         (b)   Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the clerk shall enter
a judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The
judgment may be filed by the clerk in a looseleaf book entitled “special
judgments for municipal income taxes”, and shall have the same effect as other
judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of the Tax
Commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall apply to
sales made under the judgment.
         (c)   If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within 60 days
after the day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment
consisting of tax due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by
R.C. § 5703.47 from the day the Commissioner issues the assessment until the
assessment is paid or until it is certified to the attorney general for
collection under R.C. § 131.02, whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion of
the assessment is certified to the attorney general for collection, the entire
unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear interest at the rate per annum
prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the date of certification until the date it
is paid in its entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as the tax
and may be collected by issuing an assessment under this section.
      (4)   All money collected under this section shall be credited to the
municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to which
the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section.
      (5)   If the Tax Commissioner believes that collection of the tax will be
jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the tax are
instituted without delay, the Commissioner may issue a jeopardy assessment
against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the issuance of the
jeopardy assessment, the Commissioner shall file an entry with the clerk of the
court of common pleas in the manner prescribed by division (K)(3) of this
section. Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be served on the taxpayer
assessed or the taxpayer’s legal representative in the manner provided in R.C.
§ 5703.37 within five days of the filing of the entry with the clerk. The total
amount assessed is immediately due and payable, unless the taxpayer assessed
files a petition for reassessment in accordance with division (K)(2) of this
section and provides security in a form satisfactory to the Commissioner and in
an amount sufficient to satisfy the unpaid balance of the assessment. Full or
partial payment of the assessment does not prejudice the Commissioner’s
consideration of the petition for reassessment.
      (6)   (a)   Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is
pending, the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the
subject of the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the treasurer of state
does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the
petition.
         (b)   If upon final determination of the petition an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Commissioner, upon petition so filed or
pursuant to a decision of the board of tax appeals or any court to which the
determination or decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the
taxpayer under the corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there
shall be issued to the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal representative a refund
in the amount of the overpayment as provided by division (L) of this section,
with interest on that amount as provided by that section.
   (L)   Refund applications.
      (1)   An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes paid on
any illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations, including assessments, shall be
filed with the Tax Commissioner within three years after the date of the
illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of the tax, or within any additional
period allowed by division (K)(1) of this section. The application shall be
filed in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.
      (2)   (a)   On the filing of a refund application, the Tax Commissioner
shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is entitled. The
amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per return or
assessment. If the amount is greater than $10 and not less than that claimed,
the Commissioner shall certify that amount to the Director of Budget and
Management and the Treasurer of State for payment from the tax refund fund
created in R.C. § 5703.052. If the amount is greater than $10 but less than
that claimed, the Commissioner shall proceed in accordance with R.C. § 5703.70.
         (b)   Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the Commissioner
shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded to the taxpayer
attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be deducted from the
municipal corporation’s next distribution under R.C. § 718.83.
      (3)   Any portion of a refund determined under division (L)(2) of this
section that is not issued within 90 days after such determination shall bear
interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the ninety-
first day after such determination until the day the refund is paid or
credited. On an illegal or erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at that
rate from the date of payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment until the
day the refund is paid or credited.
   (M)   Amended returns.
      (1)   If any of the facts, figures, computations or attachments required
in an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election allowed
under this section of the city’s income tax regulations and used to determine
the tax due under §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations must be altered as the result of an
adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal income tax return, whether initiated by
the taxpayer or the Internal Revenue Service, and such alteration affects the
taxpayer’s tax liability under those sections, the taxpayer shall file an
amended return with the Tax Commissioner in such form as the Commissioner
requires. The amended return shall be filed not later than 60 days after the
adjustment is agreed upon or finally determined for federal income tax purposes
or after any federal income tax deficiency or refund, or the abatement or
credit resulting therefrom, has been assessed or paid, whichever occurs first.
If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax
return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated
return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax return, the
taxpayer shall notify the Commissioner before filing the amended return.
      (2)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a
return subject to assessment under division (K) of this section for the purpose
of assessing any additional tax due under this section, together with any
applicable penalty and interest. The amended return shall not reopen those
facts, figures, computations or attachments from a previously filed return no
longer subject to assessment that are not affected, either directly or
indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal tax return.
      (3)   In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may be
filed under this division within the sixty-day period prescribed for filing the
amended return, even if that period extends beyond the period prescribed in
division (L) of this section, if the application otherwise conforms to the
requirements of that section. An application filed under this division shall
claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts,
figures, computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return
that are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal income tax return unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in division (L) of this section. The application shall not reopen
those facts, figures, computations or attachments that are not affected, either
directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal income tax
return.
   (N)   Examination of records and other documents and persons.
      (1)   The Tax Commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee thereof,
may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax
returns of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations for the purpose of verifying the
accuracy of any return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax
due as required under those sections. Upon written request by the Commissioner
or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every taxpayer or other person
subject to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the
Commissioner, authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such
books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a
reasonable time and place designated in the request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other person
that is subject to §§
34.01 to
34.24 of the city’s income tax regulations shall be open to the Tax
Commissioner’s inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a
period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the records
or documents relate, unless the Commissioner, in writing, consents to their
destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer.
The Commissioner may require any person, by notice served on that person, to
keep such records as the Commissioner determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by a municipal corporation.
      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may examine under oath any person that the
Commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that was
or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to affect
such income. The Commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such person to
attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers, records, and
federal income tax returns in such person’s possession or control. The person
may be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other
tax practitioner at any such hearing or examination. This division does not
authorize the practice of law by a person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Commissioner compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records, or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail to comply.
   (O)   Credits.
      (1)   A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of the city pursuant
to the city’s income tax regulations, shall be available to a taxpayer that has
made the election allowed under this section, against the municipal
corporation’s tax on income. A municipal corporation shall submit the following
information to the Tax Commissioner on or before the later of January 31, 2018,
or the thirty-first day of January of the first year in which the taxpayer is
eligible to receive the credit:
         (a)   A copy of the agreement entered into by New Franklin and
taxpayer under the city’s income tax regulations; and
         (b)   A copy of the ordinance or resolution authorizing the agreement
entered into between New Franklin and the taxpayer.
      (2)   (a)   Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit, with the
taxpayer’s tax return, documentation issued by New Franklin granting the credit
that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the credit, the amount of the
credit for which the taxpayer is eligible, and the tax year to which the credit
is to be applied.
         (b)   Such documentation shall be provided in the form prescribed by
the Tax Commissioner.
         (c)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the Tax
Commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a credit, to
determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit agreement entered
into by New Franklin and taxpayer under the city’s income tax regulations, or
to modify the terms or conditions of any such existing agreement.
   (P)   Reckless violations; penalties.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (P)(2) of this section, whoever
recklessly violates division (E)(1) of this section of the city’s income tax
regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to
six months, or both.
      (2)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of division (E)
(1) of this section of the city’s income tax regulations constitutes a separate
offense.
      (3)   These specific penalties shall not be construed to prevent New
Franklin from prosecuting any and all other offenses that may apply.
(Ord. 16-O-01, passed 2-21-2018)
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever violates
§§
34.15,
34.14(A) or
34.05(A) of this chapter by failing to remit municipal income taxes deducted
and withheld from an employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term of up to six months, or both. In addition, the violation is
punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment, or both.
   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of Internal Revenue Code §§ 7213(a), 7213A or 7431
shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of prosecution, or imprisonment for a
term not exceeding five years, or both. In addition, the violation is
punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment, or both.
   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
34.14(A) of this chapter constitutes a separate offense.
   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which violation no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
on a first offense; on a second offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree; on each
subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. By way of an illustrative
enumeration, violations of this chapter shall include but not be limited to the
following acts, conduct and/or omissions:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return;
      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties and
interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Cause to not be remitted the city income tax withheld from
qualifying wages of employees to the city as required by §
34.05(A);
      (5)   Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income tax from
employees;
      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers, federal and state
income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits
of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax returns, or any
documentation relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator;
      (8)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to such person’s income or net profits, or in the case of a person
responsible for maintaining information relating to his or her employers’
income or net profits, such person’s employer’s income or net profits;
      (9)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator;
      (10)   To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income tax,
willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information as to
his or her true name, correct social security number and residence address, or
willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective employer of any
change in residence address and date thereof;
      (11)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer or other payer, to
maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total qualifying
wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the Tax
Administrator false information;
      (12)   Willfully fail, neglect or refuse to make any payment of estimated
municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any taxable year in
accordance with this chapter; or
      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the
whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
      (14)   For purposes of this section, any violation that does not specify
a culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict liability and no
culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a person to be guilty of
that violation.
      (15)   For purposes of this section, the term person shall, in addition
to the meaning prescribed in §
34.03, include in the case of a corporation, association, passthrough entity or
unincorporated business entity not having any resident owner or officer within
the city, any employee or agent of such corporation, association, pass-through
entity or unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision over or
is charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal income tax returns
and making the payments of the municipal income tax as required by this
chapter.
(Ord. 15-O-05, passed 11-18-2015)
Statutory reference:
   Violations; penalties, see R.C. § 718.99
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 50: ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION REGULATIONS
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Applicability
   
50.03   Responsibility for administration
   
50.04   Compatibility with other regulations
   
50.05   Ultimate responsibility
   
50.06   Discharge and connection prohibitions
   
50.07   Riparian zone protection
   
50.08   Monitoring of illicit discharges and illegal connections
   
50.09   Notification of spills
   
50.10   Enforcement
   
50.11   Enforcement measures after hearing
   
50.12   Cost of abatement of the violation
   
50.13   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
50.14   Remedies not exclusive
 
   
50.99   Penalty
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Employees or designees of the director of the
municipal agency designated to enforce this chapter.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
storm water, receiving waters or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating and demolition.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY. The United States Environmental Protection
Agency, including, but not limited to, the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
(Ohio EPA), or any duly authorized official of such agencies.
   FLOATABLES. Any foreign matter that may float or remain suspended in the
water column, including, but not limited to, plastic, aluminum cans, wood
products, bottles and paper products.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of,
or otherwise managed.
   ILLICIT CONNECTIONS. An illicit connection is defined as either of the
following:
      (1)   Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface that
allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not
limited to, any conveyances that allow any non-storm water discharge including
sewage, process wastewater and wash water to enter the storm drain system and
any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks,
regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed,
permitted or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or
      (2)   Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the storm drain system that has not been documented in plans, maps
or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the
storm drain system, except as exempted in §
50.06 of this chapter.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial storm water
permits as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The system of conveyances
(including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch
basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels or storm drains) owned and
operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying storm
water, and that is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORM WATER
DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the EPA or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to
an individual, group or general area-wide basis.
   NON-STORM WATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is
not composed entirely of storm water.
   OFF-LOT DISCHARGING HOUSEHOLD SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. A system designed to
treat household sewage on-site and discharge treated wastewater effluent off
the property into a storm water or surface water conveyance or system.
   OWNER/OPERATOR. Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, LLC, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting either as
the owner or on the owner’s behalf.
   PERSON. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner’s agent.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
   PREMISES. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-
made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures.
   STORM WATER. Any surface flow, runoff and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN. A document which describes the best management
practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify
sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or
reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems,
and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019)
§ 50.02 APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system
generated on any developed or undeveloped land within the city unless
explicitly exempted in §
50.06(A) of this chapter.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019)
§ 50.03 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The city through its Service Director shall administer, implement and
enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city may contract with the Summit
County Combined General Health District and the Summit County Department of
Sanitary Sewer Services to conduct inspections and monitoring, and to assist
with enforcement actions.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019)
§ 50.04 COMPATIBILITY WITH OTHER REGULATIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in
addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions
different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other
provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher
protective standards for human health or the environment shall control.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019)
§ 50.05 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution or unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019)
§ 50.06 DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of illicit discharges. No person shall discharge, or cause
to be discharged, an illicit discharge into the MS4. The commencement, conduct
or continuance of any illicit discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as
described below:
      (1)   Water line flushing; landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows;
rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration; uncontaminated
pumped ground water; discharges from potable water sources; foundation drains;
air conditioning condensate; irrigation water; springs; water from crawl space
pumps; footer drains; lawn watering; individual residential car washing; flows
from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
street wash water; and discharges or flows from firefighting activities. These
discharges are exempt until such time as they are determined by the city to be
significant contributors of pollutants to the MS4;
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to
protect public health and safety; and
      (3)   Discharges from off-lot household sewage treatment systems
permitted by the Summit County Combined General Health District for the purpose
of discharging treated sewage effluent in accordance with O.A.C. 3701-29-02(6)
until such time as the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency issues a NPDES
permitting mechanism for residential one-, two- or three-family dwellings.
These discharges are exempt unless such discharges are deemed to be creating a
public health nuisance by the Summit County Combined General Health District.
In compliance with the city’s storm water management program, discharges from
all off-lot household sewage treatment systems must either be eliminated if
found not to be eligible for an NPDES permit for existing discharges or receive
coverage under an appropriate NPDES permit issued and approved by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency. When such permit coverage is available,
discharges from off-lot discharging household sewage treatment systems will no
longer be exempt from the requirements of this regulation.
   (B)   Prohibition of illegal connections. The construction, use, maintenance
or continued existence of illegal connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
      (1)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (2)   A person is considered to be in violation of this regulation if the
person connects a line conveying illicit discharges to the MS4, or allows such
a connection to continue.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 RIPARIAN ZONE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical
integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.08 MONITORING OF ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Establishment of an illicit discharge and illegal connection
monitoring program. The city has established a program to detect and eliminate
illicit discharges and illegal connections to the MS4 including the systematic
investigation of potential residential, commercial, industrial and
institutional facilities for the sources of any dry weather flows found as the
result of these inspections.
   (B)   Inspection of residential, commercial, industrial or institutional
facilities.
      (1)   The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject
to this regulation as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with
this regulation.
      (2)   The city shall have the right to set up at facilities subject to
this regulation such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or
sampling of the facility’s storm water discharge.
      (3)   The city shall have the right to require the facility owner/
operator to install monitoring equipment as necessary. This sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in safe and proper
operating condition by the facility owner/operator at the owner/operator’s
expense.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and reasonable
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the facility’s owner/operator at the written or oral request of city and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
facility owner/operator.
      (5)   Unreasonable delay in allowing the city access to a facility
subject to this regulation for the purposes of illicit discharge inspection is
a violation of this chapter.
      (6)   If the city is refused access to any part of the facility from
which storm water is discharged, and the city demonstrates probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or that there is a need
to inspect and/or sample as part of an inspection and sampling program designed
to verify compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to
protect the public health, safety and welfare, the city may seek issuance of a
search warrant, civil remedies including, but not limited to, injunctive
relief, and/or criminal remedies from any court of appropriate jurisdiction.
      (7)   Any costs associated with these inspections, pollution source
tracking, enforcement and abatement shall be assessed to the facility owner/
operator.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.09 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility of operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the state,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment
and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous
materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of
the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of
non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement
agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day.
Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the authorized enforcement agency within three business
days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanate from
a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least three years. Failure to provide notification of a release as provided
above is a violation of these regulations.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.10 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   When the city finds that an owner/operator has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter the city may order compliance
by written notice of violation. Such notice must specify the violation and
shall be hand delivered, and/or sent by registered mail, to the owner/operator
of the facility.
   (B)   Such notice may require the following actions:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit discharges or illegal connections;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices, or operations cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; or
      (5)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (C)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the notice of violation shall set forth a deadline within which such
remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise
that, should the facility owner/operator fail to remediate or restore within
the established deadline, a legal action for enforcement may be initiated. Any
owner/operator receiving a notice of violation must meet compliance standards
within the time set forth in the notice of violation. The owner/operator may
appeal the determination by filing a notice of appeal at the city’s
Administrative Offices no later than 15 days following service of the notice of
violation.
   (D)   In the event of an appeal, or if the violation has not been corrected
within 15 days following service of the notice of violation, an administrative
hearing shall be scheduled before the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals. The
hearing shall take place no later than 45 days thereafter, the owner/operator
shall be served with notice of the hearing by hand delivery or registered mail,
and the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall thereafter be final.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator to violate any provision
or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter pursuant to R.C.
§ 3709.211. If an owner/operator has violated or continues to violate the
provisions of this chapter, in addition to any and all other available remedies
the city may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the
owner/operator from activities that would create further violations or
compelling the owner/operator to perform abatement or remediation of the
violation.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019)
§ 50.11 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER HEARING.
   Following the hearing as provided for in §
50.10, if any or all of the violations set forth in the notice of violation
have been upheld, and if the violation has not been corrected within 30 days
following the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals, then in addition to any
and all other available remedies, the city may seek injunctive relief, or if
authorized by law, may enter upon the subject private property and take any and
all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It
shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the duly authorized government agency or designated
contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.12 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
   Within 60 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property
will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the
assessment with 45 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner
as determined by the decision of the city or by the expiration of the time
within which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment
against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount
of the assessment.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019)
§ 50.13 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided for herein,
any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a threat to public health, safety
and welfare, shall be deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or
restored at the violator’s expense; and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin or
otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019)
§ 50.14 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the
discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies. The city may recover all
attorney’s fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of
this chapter, including sampling and monitoring expenses.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in R.C. §§ 3707.99 and
3709.99, and any and all other penalties, remedies, sanctions and recourse as
provided for by law.
(Ord. 19-O-11, passed 8-21-2019)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   LICENSING PROVISIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
73.   MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
      
74.   EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
      
75.   BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
      
76.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Compliance with order of police officer
   
70.03   Emergency vehicles to proceed cautiously past red or stop signal
   
70.04   Exceptions generally; emergency, public safety and coroner vehicles
exempt
   
70.05   Persons riding or driving animals upon roadways
   
70.06   Prohibitions against pedestrians and slow-moving vehicles on freeways
   
70.07   Use of private property for vehicular travel
   
70.08   Names of persons damaging real property by operation of vehicle to be
provided to owner
   
70.09   Limited access highways; barriers along; vehicles to enter and leave at
designated intersections
   
70.10   Through highways
   
70.11   Officer may remove ignition key
   
70.12   Removal of vehicles after accidents
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.30   Obeying traffic-control devices
   
70.31   Signal lights
   
70.32   Signals over reversible lanes
   
70.33   Ambiguous or non-working traffic signals
   
70.34   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.35   Unauthorized signs and signals prohibited
   
70.36   Alteration, defacement, or removal prohibited
   
70.37   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
   
70.38   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Unauthorized use of a motor vehicle, see §
131.09
Statutory reference:
   Local traffic regulations, scope and authority, see R.C. § 4511.07
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see R.C. §§
4511.092 et seq.
   Uniform application and precedence of state traffic laws, see R.C. § 4511.06
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. § 4501.01
shall apply to this title and the penal laws of the municipality. For the
purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. Every self-propelled vehicle designed or used for
drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.
   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or side of
lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose of
through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared an
“alley” by the Legislative Authority of the municipality in which the street or
highway is located.
   ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States or state numbered route, controlled-
access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or highway
designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions as part
of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
   BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.
   BICYCLE. Every device, other than a device that is designed solely for use
as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power upon
which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is more
than 14 inches in diameter.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine passengers,
and used for the transportation of persons other than in a ridesharing
arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or funeral car,
other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing arrangement,
designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine or
fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in an chauffeured
limousine. The term does not include any vehicle that is used exclusively in
the business of funeral directing. (R.C. § 4501.01(LL))
   CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. § 5104.01.
   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or used
for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right or
access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner as may
be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the street or
highway.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within
the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere,
distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the
surface;
      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a crosswalk where the Legislative Authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle.
   ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
      (1)   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
      (3)   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC BICYCLE. Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as required
by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor vehicles
when commandeered by a police officer.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is intended for
the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing and
combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety fuse matches.
   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or
partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated in
grade.
   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less, as
determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
   FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with crossroads
separated in grade and with full control of access.
   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse, while
used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load thereon.
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to
the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.
   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or road
surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road sweeper,
mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle designed
for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by which
traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does not
include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker, warning
light, or steady burning electric lamp.
   HYBRID BEACON. A type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark mode
between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and, when in
operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of
two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or
the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at
any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway
with a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the
roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (2) of
this definition:
         (a)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated
on the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated
on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and
any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure
from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the
far side of the crosswalk.
   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or more
clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal, and other local board or body
having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and laws of
this state.
   LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. Means a device weighing less than 100 pounds
that has handlebars, is propelled by an electric motor or human power, and has
an attainable speed on a paved level surface of not more than 20 miles per hour
when propelled by the electric motor.
   MEDIAN. The area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured from
edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes. The
width of a median may be different between intersections, between interchanges,
and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than muscular
power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except motorized
bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well- drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and trailers
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”, “autocycle”, “cab-
enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or
one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled, and
that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic centimeters
piston displacement that produces not more than one brake horsepower and is
capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater than 20 miles per
hour on a level surface. The terms do not include an electric bicycle.
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and used by,
a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess of eight
miles per hour.
   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that has
two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
   OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   PARKED or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road, alley,
highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a driver, but
does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the purpose of and
while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal delivery
device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly suggests
otherwise.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing vehicle by
means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing
vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular shaped loads
such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining
themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78, or
4511.84;
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through (D), or
4511.74(A);
      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.76 for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the
provision violated;
      (4)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
      (5)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described in division (1),
(2), (3), or (4) of this definition.
   PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A private toll road or road, including
any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road, within a
shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or recreation
facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to travel
without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but does not
include a road within a private gated property where access is restricted at
all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area, or a private
grade crossing.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership used for
vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied permission
from the owner, but not by other persons.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to
a municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;
      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the
Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to
provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated
by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when
used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire
department service when identified as required by the Director of Public
Safety;
      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service
to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public safety vehicle, shall
be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for the
enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified
in R.C. § 5503.34.
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed
principally on a private right-of-way.
   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for a
distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.
   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes arrangements known as carpools, vanpools, and
buspools.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:
      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in
a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in
preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different
direction into its, his or her path;
      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way” includes the
roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state,
county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes two or
more separate roadways, the term means any roadway separately, but not all the
roadways collectively.
   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United States
mail on a rural mail delivery route.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by adequate
signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers which
is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function; provided the term does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within such
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and the term does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-care
center or Type A Family Day-Care Home to transport children from the child day-
care center or Type A Family Day-Care Home to a school if the van or bus does
not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of its own
weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by another
vehicle.
   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically separated
from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within
the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A shared-use path
also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers, users of manual
and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and non-motorized
users. A shared-use path does not include any trail that is intended to be used
primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar uses,
or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically been
reserved for non-motorized use.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.
   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state route
number and so marked.
   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.
   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which stop
signs are erected.
   STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even momentarily,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.
   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open to the
use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. § 4511.65, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of travel
any highway or private road open to public travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other device
used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent to a
street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility, or
shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or property
wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle, including
any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a semitrailer and a
vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a trailer dolly, a
vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production
materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm when drawn or
towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and a
vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of more
than 25 miles per hour.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed and
used to carry property.
   TYPE A FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. §
5104.01.
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that the term does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any low-speed
micromobility device, any personal delivery device as defined in R.C. §
4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from overhead electric
trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or
any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human power.
   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE. A vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
(R.C. § 4511.01)
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (C)(5) of this section,
a violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (C)(5) of this section, a violation
of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by proof
beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender was
fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating
division (B) of this section and division (C)(5)(a) of this section applies,
the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct
for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (B) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(A) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of division (B) of this section,
the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an offense
under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other sanction imposed for
the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension as described in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving privileges to the offender
on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation of this section as set
forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any portion of the suspension
under a class one suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege
required by this division.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      MOVING VIOLATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.
      POLICE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
Cross-reference:
   Resisting arrest, see §
136.08
§ 70.03 EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY PAST RED OR STOP SIGNAL.
   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.03)
§ 70.04 EXCEPTIONS GENERALLY; EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONER VEHICLES
EXEMPT.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §§
73.01 and
73.02, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, and 4513.02, and R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C. § 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35,
4511.66, or 4513.02 or R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   As used in this section, ENGAGED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF OFFICIAL DUTIES
includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the manufacturer or
vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway maintenance vehicle,
equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(R.C. § 4511.04)
   (E)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell. This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.041)
   (F)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, and
4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to
a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle
in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. This division does not relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.042)
§ 70.05 PERSONS RIDING OR DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAYS.
   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(R.C. § 4511.05)
§ 70.06 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST PEDESTRIANS AND SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES ON FREEWAYS.
   (A)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall:
      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-
of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is separated
from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official
duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance;
      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, with: an animal-drawn vehicle; a ridden or led animal; herded animals;
a pushcart; a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from the roadway
and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for
bicycle use; an electric bicycle; a bicycle with motor attached; a motor-driven
cycle with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower; an
agricultural tractor; farm machinery; except in the performance of public works
or official duties.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.051)
Statutory reference:
   Designation of a freeway, see R.C. § 4511.011
§ 70.07 USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR VEHICULAR TRAVEL.
   The provisions of this traffic code do not prevent the owner of real
property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from
requiring additional conditions to those specified in this traffic code, or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to the owner.
(R.C. § 4511.08)
§ 70.08 NAMES OF PERSONS DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY BY OPERATION OF VEHICLE TO BE
PROVIDED TO OWNER.
   (A)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4501.01.
   (B)   If damage is caused to real property by the operation of a motor
vehicle in, or during the, violation of any section of the Ohio Revised Code or
of any municipal ordinance, the law enforcement agency that investigates the
case, upon request of the real property owner, shall provide the owner with the
names of the persons who are charged with the commission of the offense. If a
request for the names is made, the agency shall provide the names as soon as
possible after the persons are charged with the offense.
   (C)   The personnel of law enforcement agencies who act pursuant to division
(B) of this section in good faith are not liable in damages in a civil action
allegedly arising from their actions taken pursuant to that division. Political
subdivisions and the state are not liable in damages in a civil action
allegedly arising from the actions of personnel of their law enforcement
agencies if the personnel have immunity under this division.
(R.C. § 2935.28)
§ 70.09 LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS; BARRIERS ALONG; VEHICLES TO ENTER AND LEAVE AT
DESIGNATED INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall cut, injure, remove, or destroy
any fence or other barrier designed and erected to prevent traffic from
entering or leaving a limited access highway without the permission of the
Director of Transportation, except in a case of emergency where life or
property is in danger. No person, firm or corporation shall cause a vehicle of
any character to enter or leave a limited access highway at any point other
than intersections designated by the Director for such purposes, except in a
case of emergency where life or property is in danger.
(R.C. § 3767.201)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3767.99(D))
§ 70.10 THROUGH HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section. Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations. When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under his or her jurisdiction. Before the Director either installs or
removes a stop sign under this division, he or she shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways. For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway, or
portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical terminus
of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at which
vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or yield to
traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence districts, the
municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway, or portion
thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected residence
district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. Where two or
more through highways designated under this division intersect and no traffic-
control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at
one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local authorities having
jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (C)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (D)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(R.C. § 4511.65)
§ 70.11 OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway. The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the vehicle
detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may be
reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key shall be returned
to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of ownership.
(R.C. § 4549.05)
§ 70.12 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (B)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(A) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (A) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         (b)   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         (c)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d) of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         (d)   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (C)   As used in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:
      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.
      PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of a law enforcement
agency in the municipal corporation, township, port authority, conservancy
district, or township or joint police district, in which the accident occurred;
         (b)   A state highway patrol trooper;
         (c)   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         (d)   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions (a) to (c) of this definition.
(R.C. § 4513.66)
   (D)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (E)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (D) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (F)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (G)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (F) of this section.
(R.C. § 4513.68)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.30 OBEYING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular
section of this traffic code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(R.C. § 4511.12(A))
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (C) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (C)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless of
the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (D)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (E)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. parts 100 through 180.
(R.C. § 4511.121(A) - (C), (E))
   (F)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(R.C. § 4549.081(B))
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. If
the offender commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity
is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is
subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.12(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) of this
section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.121(D))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.081(C))
Statutory reference:
   Placing traffic-control devices on state highways, permission required, see
R.C. § 4511.10
   Traffic-control devices to conform to the state manual and specifications,
see R.C. § 4511.11
   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. § 4511.09
§ 70.31 SIGNAL LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (A)   Steady green signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-turn
movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of- way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (B)   Steady yellow signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing arrow
movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will be
exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (C)   Steady red signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (C)(1), (C)(2), and (C)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         (b)   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (D)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (E)   Flashing yellow signal indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination
with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such
movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same
time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or
making a u-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the
time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of- way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (F)   Flashing red signal indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of- way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing stop, do not
enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance with the
supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated point.
   (G)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (H)   This section does not apply at railroad grade- crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(R.C. § 4511.13)
§ 70.32 SIGNALS OVER REVERSIBLE LANES.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (A)   A steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (B)   A steady yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (C)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (D)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (E)   A steady red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(R.C. § 4511.131)
§ 70.33 AMBIGUOUS OR NON-WORKING TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.132)
§ 70.34 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk”, or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (A)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (B)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don’t
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (C)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (E)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(R.C. § 4511.14)
§ 70.35 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of
any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to
be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign
or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from
view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising. This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and
4511.432.
      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.16)
§ 70.36 ALTERATION, DEFACEMENT, OR REMOVAL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper
with a manhole cover.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of
this section causes serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or
controlled by a state or local authority, the offender is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses,
whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.17)
§ 70.37 UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (A)   As used in this section, TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE means any sign,
traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under R.C. § 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (B)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (C)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of R.C. § 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of R.C. § 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.18)
§ 70.38 SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic- control device.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons and division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.71(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14), or (A)(19);
      (2)   A state highway patrol officer;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3), or (E)(4).
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(R.C. § 4511.031)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for
which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one
of the following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.99)
   (B)   Violations committed while distracted.
      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division (B)
(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         (a)   “Distracted” means doing either of the following while operating
a vehicle:
            1.   Using an electronic wireless communications device, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.204, in violation of that section.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         (b)   “Distracted” does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C. §
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (c)   “Distracted” does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (B)(1)(c):
            UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E),
or (G).
            UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than $100 as follows:
         (a)   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence.
         (b)   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the additional fine of not more
than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (B)(2)(a) of this section. If the offender
elects the course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the
offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender’s payment and such written evidence.
      (3)    If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket,
citation, or summons for a violation of any of the sections of the Revised Code
listed in division (B)(2) of this section that indicates that the offender was
distracted while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was
a contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the officer shall do
both of the following:
         (a)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
         (b)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
(R.C. § 4511.991)
   (C)   Sentencing. Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with §
130.99.
Cross-reference:
   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor, see §
130.18
   Multiple sentences, see §
130.19
Statutory reference:
   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
CHAPTER 71: LICENSING PROVISIONS
Section
Motor Vehicle Licensing
   
71.01   Display of license plates or validation stickers; registration
   
71.02   Improper use of noncommercial motor vehicle
   
71.03   Operating motor vehicle ordered immobilized; forfeiture
   
71.04   Operation or sale without certificate of title
   
71.05   Display of certificate of registration
   
71.06   Use of unauthorized plates
   
71.07   Operating without dealer or manufacturer license plates
Driver’s Licenses
   
71.20   Prohibited acts
   
71.21   Permitting minor to operate vehicle prohibited; temporary instruction
permit; probationary license
   
71.22   License required as driver or commercial driver on public or private
property; nonresident exemption
   
71.23   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited
   
71.24   Restriction against owner lending vehicle for use of another
   
71.25   Suspension of driver’s licenses; license suspended by court of record
   
71.26   Display of license
   
71.27   Prohibition against false statements
   
71.28   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction
   
71.29   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license
   
71.30   Driving under OVI suspension
   
71.31   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation;
driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
   
71.32   Failure to reinstate license
Commercial Driver’s Licenses
   
71.45   Definitions
   
71.46   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating
   
71.47   Prohibited acts
   
71.48   Prerequisites to operation of commercial motor vehicle
   
71.49   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
   
71.50   Criminal offenses
   
71.51   Application of federal regulations
   
71.52   Employment of drivers of commercial vehicles
 
   
71.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Commercial driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4506
   Driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4507
   Motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. Chapter 4504
   Municipal motor vehicle license tax, see R.C. § 4504.06
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Proof of financial responsibility required; civil penalties; peace officers
as agents of Registrar of
   Motor Vehicles; procedures and rules, see R.C. §§ 4509.101 et seq.
   Suspension and revocation of driver’s licenses, see R.C. Chapter 4510
   Suspension of driver’s licenses; municipal power to suspend for a period not
to exceed time permitted or required by state law, see R.C. § 4510.05
MOTOR VEHICLE LICENSING
§ 71.01 DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS; REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the rear of the motor vehicle a license plate
that displays the distinctive number and registration mark assigned to the
motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any county
identification sticker and any validation sticker when required by and issued
under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191. However, a commercial tractor shall display
the license plate on the front of the commercial tractor.
      (2)   The license plate shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary motor vehicle license registration
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary motor
vehicle license registration in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall cover a temporary motor vehicle license
registration by any material that obstructs its visibility.
(R.C. § 4503.21(A))
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.173, 4503.41,
4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a motor
vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail to file
annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(A))
   (C)    (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (C)(1) of this section, RESIDENT means any
person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))
   (D)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (E)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(R.C. § 4549.11(A))
   (F)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(R.C. § 4549.12(A))
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (A) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4503.21(B), (C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4503.11(D))
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (G)(3)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.12(B))
§ 71.02 IMPROPER USE OF NONCOMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall use a motor vehicle registered as a noncommercial
motor vehicle for other than the purposes set forth in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4503.05)
§ 71.03 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE ORDERED IMMOBILIZED; FORFEITURE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or permit the operation of a
motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for
vehicular travel or parking knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that
the motor vehicle has been ordered immobilized pursuant to an immobilization
order issued under R.C. § 4503.233.
   (B)   A motor vehicle that is operated by a person during a violation of
division (A) of this section shall be criminally forfeited to the state in
accordance with the procedures contained in R.C. § 4503.234.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4503.236)
§ 71.04 OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter
4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the destruction or
dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it is not the
motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517, sell
at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an Ohio
certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the motor
vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title assignments
that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an odometer
disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and subchapter IV of the
“Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act”, 86 Stat. 961 (1972), 15
U.S.C. § 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4505.18)
§ 71.05 DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a “commercial car”, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, when the commercial car is required to be registered under state law,
shall, when operating the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer on the
streets, roads, or highways of this municipality display inside or on the
vehicle the certificate of registration for the commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer provided for in R.C. § 4503.19, or shall carry the certificate on
the operator’s person and display it upon the demand of any peace officer.
      (2)   Every person operating a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
required to be registered under state law shall permit the inspection of the
certificate of registration upon demand of any peace officer.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
commercial car certificate of registration violation, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.18)
§ 71.06 USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in R.C. §
4503.12(A)(4).
   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is
guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and
a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 4549.08)
§ 71.07 OPERATING WITHOUT DEALER OR MANUFACTURER LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon a public road or
highway a motor vehicle of a manufacturer or dealer unless the vehicle carries
and displays a placard, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.21, issued by the
Director of Public Safety that displays the registration number of its
manufacturer or dealer.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation of a manufacturer’s or dealer’s motor vehicle, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4549.10)
DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.20 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended, or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or any renewal, reprint, or
duplicate thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician’s
statement required under R.C. § 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be
false or fictitious.
   (B)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.30)
Statutory reference:
   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C. §
4510.33
§ 71.21 PERMITTING MINOR TO OPERATE VEHICLE PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION
PERMIT; PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a motor
vehicle upon a highway as an operator, unless the minor has first obtained a
license or permit to drive a motor vehicle under R.C. Chapter 4507.
(R.C. § 4507.31(A))
   (B)   (1)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under R.C. § 4507.05(A).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no
holder of a temporary instruction permit that is issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A)
and that is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age
of 18 years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
         (b)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under R.C. §
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposed of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder
is accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent,
guardian, or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19
(A).
(R.C. § 4507.05(F))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to division (E)(1) of this section, division (C)(1)
(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s
license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         (b)   Division (C)(1)(b) of this section does not apply to the holder
of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (C)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or
(C)(1)(b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency
existed that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to
operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this
section or the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (E)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (E)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section.
   (F)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (G)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (F) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      FAMILY MEMBER. A family member of a probationary license holder includes
any of the following:
         (a)   A spouse;
         (b)   A child or stepchild;
         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law;
         (d)   An aunt or uncle;
         (e)   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law, or a sister-in-law;
         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s
stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.
      MOVING VIOLATION. Means any violation of any statute or ordinance that
regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. The term does
not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance regulating
pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load limitations,
vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4513.263.
(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (I))
   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.31(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C)(1), (C)(4), (E)(3), or (F) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4507.05(I), 4507.071(J))
§ 71.22 LICENSE REQUIRED AS DRIVER OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
PROPERTY; NONRESIDENT EXEMPTION.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle
upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid
driver’s license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicle or a
deputy registrar under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver’s license
issued under R.C. Chapter 4506. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates this division is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle
operator’s endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card unless and until the person
surrenders to the Registrar or a deputy registrar all valid licenses, temporary
instruction permits, and identification cards issued to the person by another
jurisdiction recognized by this state.
      (3)   The Registrar shall report the cancellation of a license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card to the issuing authority, together
with information that the license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card is now issued in this state. The Registrar or a deputy
registrar shall destroy any such license, temporary instruction permit, or
identification card that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (4)   No person shall possess more than one valid license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card at any time.
(R.C. § 4507.02(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move, or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty in the
military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the peace
corps, volunteers in service to America, or the foreign service of the United
States, is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the period
of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided
such person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person commenced
the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent such a
person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application, as
provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.03)
   (C)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 through 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.
(R.C. § 4507.04)
   (D)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or identification card issued by another state to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a person intends to
operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways, the person shall
apply for a temporary instruction permit or driver’s license in this state. If
the person fails to apply for a driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit or within 30 days of becoming a resident, the person shall not operate
any motor vehicle in this state under a license or permit issued by another
state.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (D)(2)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213)
§ 71.23 EMPLOYMENT OF A MINOR TO OPERATE A TAXICAB PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Notwithstanding the definition of “chauffeur” in R.C. § 4501.01, no
person shall employ any minor for the purpose of operating a taxicab.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.321)
§ 71.24 RESTRICTION AGAINST OWNER LENDING VEHICLE FOR USE OF ANOTHER.
   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C. Chapter 4510 or
any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued under R.C. §
4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the vehicle under
that order.
   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima facie evidence that
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the
motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a
category described in division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(1), (A)(3), or (A)(5) of this section, the offender and the
operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by
consanguinity or affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C) to (H) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)
(2), or (A)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (C)(3)(c) of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(c) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.
   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from
the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at
the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the
person’s name.
(R.C. § 4511.203)
§ 71.25 SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE; LICENSE SUSPENDED BY COURT OF RECORD.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of any provision of this code that is
substantially equivalent to a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, and a court
is permitted or required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to
any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or non resident operating privileges for
the period of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of
suspension imposed for the violation of the provision of this code shall not
exceed the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for
the violation of the provision of the Ohio Revised Code to which the provision
of this code is substantially equivalent.
(R.C. § 4510.05)
   (B)   Whenever a person is found guilty under the laws of this state or any
ordinance of any political subdivision of this state, of operating a motor
vehicle in violation of any such law or ordinance relating to reckless
operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or
independent of all other penalties provided by law, may impose a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(5).
   (C)   Suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section shall
be concurrent with any period of suspension disqualification under R.C. §
3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding a
commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a driver’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the commercial
driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person whose
commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the suspension.
(R.C. § 4510.15)
§ 71.26 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a demand is
properly made, and the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or about
the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the license. A
person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person is licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the person’s license on
or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence of the person’s not
having obtained a driver’s license.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4507.35)
§ 71.27 PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE STATEMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement to any matter or
thing required by the provisions of this traffic code.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4507.36)
§ 71.28 DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (A)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, division (B)
of this section, §
71.31 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, other than R.C.
Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which
the person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by
the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality in violation of any restriction of the person’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10
(D) or 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b)2. or (A)(4)(b)3.
of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any
other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
Registrar of the termination. The Registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.11)
   (B)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58,
4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (B)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (B)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (B)(3)
(a) or division (B)(3)(b) of this section.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)(1)
of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of division (B)
(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.111)
   (C)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point suspension, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a
minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days
of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.
(R.C. § 4510.037(J))
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
§ 71.29 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a commercial
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C. §§
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be in
the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the offender’s license was
expired for more than six months at the time of the offense, the court may
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)
(7).
(R.C. § 4510.12)
§ 71.30 DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.
   (A)    No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191, or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a violation
of a municipal OVI ordinance or the equivalent New Franklin ordinance shall
operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways within this
municipality during the period of the suspension.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this
section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The
court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (C) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         (b)   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of ten consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, the court may
sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The 10-
day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (C) of
this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90
consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of
house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C. Chapter 2929, a
fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28, the court may
sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The
court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic
monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C. Chapter 2929, a fine
of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle that
is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed
shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (C)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section
unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender
will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following
the date of sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (D)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (B)(1),
(B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section shall be deposited into the municipal
Indigent Drivers Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as
created by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).
   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor’s
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the court grants
limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this section, the
privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the offender must
display restricted license plates, issued under R.C. § 4503.231, on the vehicle
driven subject to the privileges, except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
R.C. § 3123.58 or R.C. § 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver’s license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver’s license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.
   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A) of
this section;
         (b)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (A) of this section.
      JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 10, or 30
consecutive days that must be imposed under division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3)
of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of
this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 4510.14)
   (H)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.31 DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR CANCELLATION;
DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle within
this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to
be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period of the
suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter
4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this municipality, or
knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be operated by
another person in the municipality, during the period in which the person is
required by R.C. § 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial
responsibility for a violation of R.C. § 4509.101, unless proof of financial
responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (B) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in this division (D). Whoever violates division (B) of
this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension and
shall be punished as provided in this division (D).
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2) of this section,
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(R.C. § 4510.16)
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161
§ 71.32 FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the bureau of motor vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a non-
certified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a non-
certified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
130.18, §
130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(R.C. § 4510.21)
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(R.C. § 4510.04)
COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSES
§ 71.45 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION. The concentration of alcohol in a person’s blood,
breath or urine. When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of alcohol per
the following: 100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma;
210 liters of breath; or 100 milliliters of urine.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle.
   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE INFORMATION SYSTEM. The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor Vehicle
Safety Act of 1986", 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Except when used in R.C. § 4506.25, any motor
vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A
or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. part 172, subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including but not limited to a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act”, 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. § 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   CONVICTION. An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that a
person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   DISQUALIFICATION. Means any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person’s
privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. § 391.
   DOMICILED. Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to which
an individual intends to return.
   DOWNGRADE. Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   DRIVE. To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   DRIVER’S LICENSE. A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that
authorizes an individual to drive.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in R.C. §
4729.01, harmful intoxicant as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, or over-the-counter
medication that, when taken in quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can
result in impairment of judgment or reflexes.
   ELECTRONIC DEVICE. Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.
   ELIGIBLE UNIT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A village, township, or county that has a
population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent federal
census.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, including the federal government, any state, and a
political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   ENDORSEMENT. An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s license that
is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial
motor vehicle.
   FARM TRUCK. A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used for breeding,
feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the
truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the
operations of a motor carrier, as defined in R.C. § 4923.01.
   FATALITY. The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle accident
occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   FELONY. Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by death
or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   FOREIGN JURISDICTION. Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. The value specified by the manufacturer as the
maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross vehicle
weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight rating of
the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed unit.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material that has been designated as hazardous
under 49 U.S.C. § 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. part
172, subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin
in 42 C.F.R. part 73, as amended.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. The existence of a condition that presents a substantial
likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury, or a
substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or endangerment.
   MEDICAL VARIANCE. One of the following received by a driver from the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued a
medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. § 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. § 391.49.
   MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile communication device that falls under or uses any
commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20, except that
mobile telephone does not include two- way or citizens band radio services.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   OUT-OF-SERVICE ORDER. A declaration by an authorized enforcement officer of
a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that the
driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor carrier operation is out
of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. § 390.5.
   PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
   PORTABLE TANK. A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be loaded
onto or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids, mountings,
or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical means.
   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1) and
(E)(3).
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in R.C. § 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   RESIDENCE. Any person’s residence determined in accordance with standards
prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SERIOUS TRAFFIC VIOLATION. Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of R.C. § 4506.03;
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (2)(b) of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         (b)   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         (a)   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         (b)   Violations of R.C. § 4511.20 or R.C. § 4511.201 or any
substantially equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state;
         (c)   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         (d)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         (e)   Violation of R.C. § 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         (f)   Violation of R.C. § 4511.33 or R.C. § 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         (g)   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   STATE. A state of the United States and includes the District of Columbia.
   TANK VEHICLE. Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to transport any
liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are either permanently
or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and have an individual
rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate rated capacity of
1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial motor vehicle
transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed for
transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   TESTER. Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to R.C. § 4506.09(B).
   TEXTING. Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text from, an
electronic device. Texting includes short message service (SMS), e-mail,
instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
Texting does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   TEXTING WHILE DRIVING. Texting while operating a commercial motor vehicle,
with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because of
traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   UNITED STATES. The 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   UPGRADE. A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-certified
status as described in R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the ability of a
current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial motor vehicles
under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
   USE OF A HANDHELD MOBILE TELEPHONE. Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. §
393.93 and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer’s instructions.
   VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4506.01)
§ 71.46 USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(R.C. § 4506.011)
§ 71.47 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state, or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out- of-service order while the person’s driving privilege
is suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by R.C. § 4506.07.
   (B)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the state Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(R.C. § 4506.04(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under R.C. § 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under R.C. § 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(R.C. § 4506.12(I))
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of R.C. § 4507.19 apply.
(R.C. § 4506.04(C))
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (C) of this section are
strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4506.12(J))
§ 71.48 PREREQUISITES TO OPERATION OF COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B) or (C) of this section, the
following shall apply:
      (1)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in
this state unless the person holds, and has in the person’s possession, any of
the following:
         (a)   A valid commercial driver’s license with proper endorsements for
the motor vehicle being driven, issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or by
another jurisdiction recognized by this state;
         (b)   A valid examiner’s commercial driving permit issued under R.C. §
4506.13;
         (c)   A valid restricted commercial driver’s license and waiver for
farm-related service industries issued under R.C. § 4506.24;
         (d)   A valid commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
issued by the Registrar, provided that the person is accompanied by an
authorized state driver’s license examiner or tester or a person who has been
issued and has in the person’s immediate possession a current, valid commercial
driver’s license and who meets the requirements of R.C. § 4506.06(B).
      (2)   No person’s commercial driver’s license temporary instruction
permit shall be upgraded, and no commercial driver’s license shall be upgraded,
renewed, or issued to a person until the person surrenders to the registrar of
motor vehicles all valid licenses and permits issued to the person by this
state or by another jurisdiction recognized by this state. If the license or
permit was issued by any other state or another jurisdiction recognized by this
state, the Registrar shall report the surrender of a license or permit to the
issuing authority, together with information that a license or permit is now
issued in this state. The Registrar shall destroy any such license or permit
that is not returned to the issuing authority.
      (3)   No person who has been a resident of this state for 30 days or
longer shall drive a commercial motor vehicle under the authority of a
commercial driver’s license issued in another jurisdiction.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section applies to any qualified
person when engaged in the operation of any of the following:
      (1)   A farm truck;
      (2)   Fire equipment for a fire department, volunteer or nonvolunteer
fire company, fire district, joint fire district, or the State Fire Marshal;
      (3)   A public safety vehicle used to provide transportation or emergency
medical service for ill or injured persons;
      (4)   A recreational vehicle;
      (5)   A commercial motor vehicle within the boundaries of an eligible
unit of local government, if the person is employed by the eligible unit of
local government and is operating the commercial motor vehicle for the purpose
of removing snow or ice from a roadway by plowing, sanding, or salting, but
only if either the employee who holds a commercial driver’s license issued
under R.C. Chapter 4506 and ordinarily operates a commercial motor vehicle for
these purposes is unable to operate the vehicle, or the employing eligible unit
of local government determines that a snow or ice emergency exists that
requires additional assistance;
      (6)   A vehicle operated for military purposes by any member or uniformed
employee of the armed forces of the United States or their reserve components,
including the Ohio National Guard. This exception does not apply to United
States reserve technicians;
      (7)   A commercial motor vehicle that is operated for nonbusiness
purposes. “Operated for nonbusiness purposes” means that the commercial motor
vehicle is not used in commerce as “commerce” is defined in 49 C.F.R. § 383.5,
as amended, and is not regulated by the Public Utilities Commission pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 4905, 4921, or 4923;
      (8)   A motor vehicle that is designed primarily for the transportation
of goods and not persons, while that motor vehicle is being used for the
occasional transportation of personal property by individuals not for
compensation and not in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise;
      (9)   A police SWAT team vehicle;
      (10)   A police vehicle used to transport prisoners.
   (C)   Nothing contained in division (B)(5) of this section shall be
construed as preempting or superseding any law, rule or regulation of this
state concerning the safe operation of commercial motor vehicles.
(R.C. § 4506.03(A) - (C))
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may drive a
commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality if all of the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person has a valid commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit issued by any state or
jurisdiction in accordance with the minimum standards adopted by the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration under the “Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety
Act of 1986”, 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App., for issuance of commercial
driver’s licenses;
      (2)   The person’s commercial driver’s license or temporary instruction
permit is not suspended, revoked, or canceled, and the person has the
appropriate endorsements for the vehicle that is being driven;
      (3)   The person is not disqualified from driving a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (4)   The person is not subject to an out-of-service order;
      (5)   The person is medically certified as physically qualified to
operate a commercial motor vehicle in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4506.
         (a)   A person who submitted a medical examiner’s certificate to the
Registrar in accordance with R.C. § 4506.10(A)(1) and whose medical
certification information is maintained in the commercial driver’s license
information system is not required to have the medical examiner’s certificate
in the person’s possession when on duty.
         (b)   A person whose medical certification information is not
maintained in the commercial driver’s license information system shall have in
the person’s possession when on duty the original or a copy of the current
medical examiner’s certificate that was submitted to the Registrar. However,
the person may operate a commercial motor vehicle with such proof of medical
certification for not more than 15 days after the date the current medical
examiner’s certificate was issued to the person.
         (c)   A person who has a medical variance shall have in the person’s
possession the original or copy of the medical variance documentation at all
times while on duty.
   (E)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this
municipality if the person does not meet the conditions specified in division
(D) of this section.
   (F)   Except as set forth in 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.62, 391.67,
and 391.68, no person holding a commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit or a commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter
4506 may drive a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce until the
person is at least 21 years of age.
(R.C. § 4506.05(A) - (C))
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under divisions (D), (E) and (F) of this
section are strict liability offenses and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4506.03(D), 4506.05(D))
§ 71.49 PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. § 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         (a)   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to
and meets the requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the
Registrar with the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and
each subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. §§ 390.3(f), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from
all or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is
not required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         (b)   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and
is subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall
self-certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 71.50 CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath, or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal
OVI ordinance as defined in R.C. § 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under R.C. § 4506.17 or R.C. § 4511.191,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of R.C. §§ 4549.02 to
4549.03, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
R.C. §§ 4511.61 through 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance
pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in R.C. § 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute, or
dispense a controlled substance.
(R.C. § 4506.15(A))
   (B)   No person shall refuse to immediately surrender the person’s
commercial driver’s license or permit to a peace officer when required to do so
by R.C. § 4506.17.
(R.C. § 4506.17(H))
   (C)   (1)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority,
any peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating division (A)
of this section without obtaining a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to
believe that a violation of division (A) of this section has been committed and
a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or blood serum,
breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the person to an
appropriate place for testing. If a person refuses to submit to a test after
being warned as provided in R.C. § 4506.17(C), or submits to a test that
discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol concentration of
0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol concentration of .048% or
more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol concentration of .056% or
more by urine, the peace officer shall require that the person immediately
surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to the peace officer.
      (2)   As used in this division (C), JURISDICTIONAL LIMITS means the
limits within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a
warrant under R.C. § 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers
of the State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person
who, in the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a
violation of any of the provisions of this subchapter or R.C. Chapter 4506.
(R.C. § 4506.23)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.15(B), 4506.17(N))
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
R.C. § 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see R.C. § 4506.16
§ 71.51 APPLICATION OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. part 383, subpart C (Notification
Requirements and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all
commercial drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers.
No person shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by
this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4506.19)
§ 71.52 EMPLOYMENT OF DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers.
   (B)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked, or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (C)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4506.15.
   (D)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 4506.20)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no penalty
otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision violated is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. §§ 4506.99, 4507.99)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
72.001   Lanes of travel upon roadways
   
72.002   Driving through safety zone
   
72.003   Vehicles traveling in opposite directions
   
72.004   Rules governing overtaking and passing of vehicles
   
72.005   Permission to overtake and pass on the right
   
72.006   Driving to left of center line
   
72.007   Prohibition against driving upon left side of roadway
   
72.008   Hazardous zones
   
72.009   One-way highways and rotary traffic islands
   
72.010   Rules for driving in marked lanes
   
72.011   Space between moving vehicles
   
72.012   Divided roadways
   
72.013   Rules for turns at intersections
   
72.014   U-turns and turning in roadway prohibited
   
72.015   Starting and backing vehicles
   
72.016   Turn and stop signals
   
72.017   Hand and arm signals
Right-of-Way
   
72.030   Right-of-way at intersections
   
72.031   Right-of-way when turning left
   
72.032   Right-of-way at through highways; stop signs; yield signs
   
72.033   Stop at sidewalk area; stop signs on private roads and driveways
   
72.034   Right-of-way on public highway
   
72.035   Pedestrian on sidewalk has right-of-way
   
72.036   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
   
72.037   Funeral procession has right-of-way
   
72.038   Pedestrians yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle
   
72.039   Pedestrian on crosswalk has right-of-way
   
72.040   Right-of-way yielded to blind person
   
72.041   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian
Pedestrians
   
72.055   Pedestrian movement in crosswalks
   
72.056   Pedestrian walking along highway
   
72.057   Prohibition against soliciting rides; riding on outside of vehicle
   
72.058   Pedestrian on bridge or railroad crossing
   
72.059   Persons operating motorized wheelchairs
   
72.060   Intoxicated or drugged pedestrian hazard on highway
   
72.061   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
   
72.062   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and crosswalks
   
72.063   Low-speed micromobility devices
Grade Crossings
   
72.075   Stop signs at grade crossings
   
72.076   Driving vehicle across railroad grade crossing
   
72.077   Vehicles required to stop at grade crossings
   
72.078   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment crossing railroad tracks
School Buses
   
72.090   Regulations concerning school buses
   
72.091   Violation of regulations; report; investigation; citation; warning
   
72.092   Restrictions on the operation of school buses
   
72.093   School bus inspection
   
72.094   School bus not used for school purposes
   
72.095   Licensing by Department of Public Safety
   
72.096   Registration and identification of school buses
   
72.097   School bus marking
   
72.098   Flashing light signal lamps
   
72.099   Occupant restraining device for operator
Prohibitions
   
72.115   Obstruction and interference affecting view and control of driver
   
72.116   Occupying travel trailer, fifth wheel vehicle, or manufactured or
mobile home while in motion
   
72.117   Driving upon closed highway prohibited
   
72.118   Driving upon sidewalk area or paths exclusively for bicycles
   
72.119   Obstructing passage of other vehicles
   
72.120   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited; approaching
stationary public safety vehicle and certain other vehicles with caution
   
72.121   Driving over unprotected fire hose
   
72.122   Placing injurious material on highway or depositing litter from motor
vehicle
   
72.123   Transporting child not in child-restraint system prohibited
   
72.124   Occupant restraining devices
   
72.125   Use of engine brakes prohibited
   
72.126   Operating motor vehicle while wearing earphones or earplugs
   
72.127   Chauffeured limousines and livery services
   
72.128   Operating traction engine upon improved highway
   
72.129   Cracking exhaust noises; peeling out
   
72.130   Shortcutting across private property
   
72.131   Texting while driving prohibited
   
72.132   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited
Statutory reference:
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.001 LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;
         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (A)(2) of this section. This division shall
not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making a
left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.25)
§ 72.002 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.60)
§ 72.003 VEHICLES TRAVELING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.26)
§ 72.004 RULES GOVERNING OVERTAKING AND PASSING OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction:
      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction shall, except as provided in division (A)(3) of this
section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof
at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway
until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in R.C. §
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.27)
§ 72.005 PERMISSION TO OVERTAKE AND PASS ON THE RIGHT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.28)
§ 72.006 DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER LINE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic approaching from the
opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every event, the overtaking
vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as practicable, and
in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane authorized for the
traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet
of any approaching vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.29)
§ 72.007 PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.30)
§ 72.008 HAZARDOUS ZONES.
   (A)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and clearly visible,
every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or markings,
notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. § 4511.30.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.31)
§ 72.009 ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way
traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven
only to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.32)
§ 72.010 RULES FOR DRIVING IN MARKED LANES.
   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully
moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the
following rules apply:
      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for
the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center
lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is
clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance,
or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is
proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.33)
§ 72.011 SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle
more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of
the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger. This division does not prevent overtaking and passing
nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business
or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient
space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the
space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.34)
§ 72.012 DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.35)
§ 72.013 RULES FOR TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right- hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be made
in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections,
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn
the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by the
markers, buttons, or signs.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.36)
§ 72.014 U-TURNS AND TURNING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) of this section,
no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction. This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell. This division does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.37)
§ 72.015 STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or
parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
         (a)   In a rest area;
         (b)   In the performance of public works or official duties;
         (c)   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown
of a motor vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.38)
§ 72.016 TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a
highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that
the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an
appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given
either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate
to both approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right
or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped
with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the
distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the left outside
limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when
the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit
of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a
combination of vehicles.
      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on
one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal
to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.39)
§ 72.017 HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (B)   As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.40)
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 72.030 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code or
R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.41)
§ 72.031 RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.42)
§ 72.032 RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of- way.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.43)
§ 72.033 STOP AT SIDEWALK AREA; STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private
road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop the
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area
extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in the
event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street to
be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
(R.C. § 4511.431(A))
   (B)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. §
4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law. The sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by R.C. § 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   The provisions of R.C. § 4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the
driver of a vehicle on a private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed
in accordance with division (B) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing
such a road or driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (D)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (B) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (E)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying R.C. §
4511.43(A) and R.C. § 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:
      INTERSECTION. Means:
         (a)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         (b)   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet
or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      OWNER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.211.
      ROADWAY. Means that portion of a private road or driveway improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.
If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate roadways, the term
means any such roadway separately but not all such roadways collectively.
(R.C.§ 4511.432(A) - (C), (E))
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B), 4511.432(D))
   (G)   If the offender violates division (A) of this section while distracted
and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.431(B))
§ 72.034 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON PUBLIC HIGHWAY.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from any
place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all traffic
approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender violates division (A) of this section while distracted
and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.44)
§ 72.035 PEDESTRIAN ON SIDEWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.441)
§ 72.036 RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel to, and as close
as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE means a vehicle
used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a siren, exhaust
whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (E), whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree on a first offense. On a second offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree, and, on
each subsequent offense within one year after the first offense, the person is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 4511.45)
   (E)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (A) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of a report under division (E)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         (b)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (A) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         (c)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may
issue a written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section based on a
report filed under division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         (b)   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(A) of this section based on a report filed under division (E)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (E):
         LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary motor vehicle license
registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another
jurisdiction.
         PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public safety
vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other person
sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle used
by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and rules
of the public utilities commission.
(R.C. § 4511.454)
§ 72.037 FUNERAL PROCESSION HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more vehicles
accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in the
daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is displaying
a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each vehicle in
such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any
direction.
   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with R.C. §
4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when directed
otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all vehicles
shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a funeral
procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully enters
an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may continue
to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding any
traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Ohio Revised Code,
provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.
   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.451)
§ 72.038 PEDESTRIANS YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.452)
§ 72.039 PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if
required by R.C. § 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is
upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the
pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as
to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.46)
§ 72.040 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED TO BLIND PERSON.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND PEDESTRIAN means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees.
      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (B)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.47)
§ 72.041 RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic- control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.48)
PEDESTRIANS
§ 72.055 PEDESTRIAN MOVEMENT IN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.49)
§ 72.056 PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG HIGHWAY.
   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.50)
§ 72.057 PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITING RIDES; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance
of a permit to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of
the organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a
vehicle by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in R.C. §
4511.051(A)(1), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality. The permit
shall be valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the
permit, in any calendar year. The Legislative Authority also may specify the
locations where contributions may be solicited and may impose any other
restrictions on or requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations
are to be conducted that the Legislative Authority considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section, CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION
means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-exempt
status of the organization pursuant to IRC § 501(c)(3).
   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. §
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
any provision of divisions (A) through (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) through (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates any provision of
divisions (A) through (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) or (F) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.51)
§ 72.058 PEDESTRIAN ON BRIDGE OR RAILROAD CROSSING.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.511)
§ 72.059 PERSONS OPERATING MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(R.C. § 4511.491)
§ 72.060 INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED PEDESTRIAN HAZARD ON HIGHWAY.
   (A)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse,
or any combination of them to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard
shall not walk or be upon a highway.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.481)
§ 72.061 OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (C)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS”.
   (E)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park district
commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or board, as applicable.
   (F)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be fined $10;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to imposing
the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) of this section, shall do one of the
following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but not more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division. The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.    If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (F)(1)(b)1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.512)
   (G)   As used in this code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE
means a self- balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))
§ 72.062 OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ELIGIBLE ENTITY. Means a corporation, partnership, association, firm,
sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. Means an electrically powered device to which
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The device is intended primarily to transport property and cargo
on sidewalks and crosswalks.
         (b)   The device weighs less than 250 pounds excluding any property or
cargo being carried in the device.
         (c)   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour.
         (d)   The device is equipped with technology that enables the
operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without
active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active
control or monitoring by a person.
      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. Means an agent of an eligible entity
who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the navigation
and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not include, with
respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal delivery device,
the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase also does not
include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal delivery
device for a delivery or other service.
   (B)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated.
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device.
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity.
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact
information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a
unique identification number;
         (b)   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop;
         (c)   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission;
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (D)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         (a)   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         (b)   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction,
in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by
divisions (C)(1) to (C)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.513) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.063 LOW-SPEED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   A low-speed micromobility device may be operated on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and may be operated on any
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this title that by their nature could apply to a low-speed micromobility device
do apply to the device and the person operating it whenever it is operated upon
any public street, highway, sidewalk, or shared-use path, or upon any portion
of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   No operator of a low-speed micromobility device shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   No person who is under 16 years of age shall rent a low-speed
micromobility device.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device to
a person who is under 16 years of age.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly rent a low-speed micromobility device on
behalf of a person who is under 16 years of age.
   (D)   No person shall operate a low-speed micromobility device at a speed
greater than 20 miles per hour.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Unless a mens rea is otherwise specified in this section, an
offense established under this section is a strict liability offense and R.C. §
2901.20 does not apply. The designation of that offense as a strict liability
offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for which there
is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
   (F)   Notwithstanding division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality,
county, township, metropolitan park district, township park district,
recreation district, or any division of the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources if the division has the approval of the Ohio Director of Natural
Resources may do any of the following:
      (1)   Regulate or prohibit the operation of low-speed micromobility
devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and shared-use paths, and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, under its
jurisdiction;
      (2)   Include low-speed micromobility devices that are adapted to expand
access for people with various physical limitations into a shared bicycle,
shared electric bicycle, or similar vehicle sharing program, under its
jurisdiction;
      (3)   Require the owner or operator of a low-speed micromobility device
rental service or low- speed micromobility device sharing program to maintain
commercial general liability insurance related to the operation of the devices,
with limits of up to $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 per aggregate.
(R.C. § 4511.514) Penalty, see §
70.99
GRADE CROSSINGS
§ 72.075 STOP SIGNS AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE means
signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed at a
public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an electrical
circuit.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
   (C)   (1)   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs at a
railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
         (a)   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
         (b)   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013, and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
   (D)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (B) or (C) of this
section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less than
15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise due
care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.61)
§ 72.076 DRIVING VEHICLE ACROSS RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train.
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered.
         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train.
         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely
negotiate the crossing.
      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described
in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(f) of this section exist at the crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.62)
§ 72.077 VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the operator of
any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material required to
be placarded under 49 C.F.R. parts 100 through 185, before crossing at grade
any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while so stopped, shall
listen through an open door or open window, and look in both directions along
the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of
a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after stopping,
looking, and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding, the
operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure there
will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing, and
shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
   (B)   This section does not apply at grade crossings when any local
authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities Commission
requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public Utilities
Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided in R.C. §
4511.63(B).
   (C)   As used in this section:
      BUS. Means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
      EXEMPT CROSSING. Means a highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
      SCHOOL VEHICLE. Means any vehicle used for the transportation of pupils
to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned or
operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79, or
a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.63)
§ 72.078 SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon
or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with
divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped, the
person shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall
proceed only upon exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal, crossing gates, or a flagperson, or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car.
   (B)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating, or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing. Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.64)
SCHOOL BUSES
§ 72.090 REGULATIONS CONCERNING SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the state Board of Education, which shall be actuated by the driver
of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped or stopping on the
roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by
head start agencies. A school bus driver shall not actuate the visual signals
or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading areas where the bus
is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when children or persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at
buildings when children attending programs offered by head start agencies are
loading or unloading at curbside. The visual signals and stop warning sign
shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board.
   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) above.
   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs offered
by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.
   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section may be fined an
amount not to exceed $500. A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (A) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty
and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in a trial but instead
must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty provided by
law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates this section a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7). When a
license is suspended under this section, the court or mayor shall cause the
offender to deliver the license to the court, and the court or clerk of the
court immediately shall forward the license to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
together with notice of the court’s action.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.
      SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program offered
by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a head start
agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color and displays the
markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is equipped with amber and red visual
signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.77, irrespective of whether or
not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any time. The term does not
include a van owned and operated by a head start agency, irrespective of its
color, lights or markings.
(R.C. § 4511.75)
§ 72.091 VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS; REPORT; INVESTIGATION; CITATION; WARNING.
   (A)   As used in this section, LICENSE PLATE includes but is not limited to
any temporary motor vehicle license registration issued under R.C. § 4503.182
or substantially equivalent law of another jurisdiction.
   (B)   When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has
violated R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the operator shall report the license plate number and general description of
the vehicle and of the operator of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency
exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged violation occurred. The
information contained in the report relating to the license plate number and to
the general description of the vehicle and the operator of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation may be supplied by any person with first-hand
knowledge of the information. Information of which the operator of the school
bus has first-hand knowledge also may be corroborated by any other person.
   (C)   Upon receipt of the report of the alleged violation of R.C. § 4511.75
(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the law enforcement
agency shall conduct an investigation to attempt to determine the identity of
the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. If the
identity of the operator at the time of the alleged violation is established,
the reporting of the license plate number of the vehicle shall establish
probable cause for the law enforcement agency to issue a citation for the
violation of R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. However, if the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time
of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency
shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, except in the case of a leased or rented vehicle when the warning
shall be issued to the lessee at the time of the alleged violation.
(R.C. § 4511.751)
§ 72.092 RESTRICTIONS ON THE OPERATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle used for pupil transportation within
this municipality in violation of the rules of the Department of Education of
the Department of Public Safety. No person, being the owner thereof, or having
the supervisory responsibility therefor, shall permit the operation of a
vehicle used for pupil transportation within this municipality in violation of
the rules of the Department of Education or the Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   As used in this section, VEHICLE USED FOR PUPIL TRANSPORTATION means
any vehicle that is identified as such by the Department of Education by rule
and that is subject to O.A.C. Chapter 3301-83.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.76, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.76(C), (F), (G))
§ 72.093 SCHOOL BUS INSPECTION.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof,
or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation of, a
school bus within this municipality, unless there is displayed thereon the
decals issued by the state highway patrol bearing the proper date of inspection
for the calendar year for which the inspection decals were issued.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.761, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.762, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.761)
§ 72.094 SCHOOL BUS NOT USED FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person who is
the owner of a bus that previously was registered as a school bus that is used
or is to be used exclusively for purposes other than the transportation of
children shall operate the bus or permit it to be operated within this
municipality unless the bus has been painted a color different from that
prescribed for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance and painted in such a way that the words “stop” and “school
bus” are obliterated.
   (B)   Any church bus that previously was registered as a school bus and is
registered under R.C. § 4503.07 may retain the paint color prescribed for
school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance if the bus complies with all of the following:
      (1)   The words “school bus” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or obliterated and the
bus is marked on the front and rear with the words “church bus” painted in
black lettering not less than ten inches in height.
      (2)   The automatically extending stop warning sign required by R.C. §
4511.75 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is removed and the
word “stop” required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance is covered or obliterated.
      (3)   The flashing red and amber lights required by R.C. § 4511.771 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or removed.
      (4)   The inspection decal required by R.C. § 4511.761 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or removed.
      (5)   The identification number assigned under R.C. § 4511.764 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance and marked in black lettering on
the front and rear of the bus is covered or obliterated.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.762, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764, 4511.77, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.762)
§ 72.095 LICENSING BY DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY.
   (A)   No person, partnership, association, or corporation shall transport
pupils to or from school on a school bus or enter into a contract with a board
of education of any school district for the transportation of pupils on a
school bus without being licensed by the Department of Public Safety.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.763)
§ 72.096 REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof
or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation of a school
bus within this municipality unless there is displayed thereon an identifying
number in accordance with R.C. § 4511.764.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4511.63,
4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.764)
§ 72.097 SCHOOL BUS MARKING.
   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner thereof
or having supervisory responsibility therefor permit the operation of, a school
bus within this municipality unless it is painted national school bus yellow
and is marked on both front and rear with the words “school bus” in black
lettering not less than eight inches in height and on the rear of the bus with
the word “stop” in black lettering not less than ten inches in height.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.77, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, or
4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a violation
of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties provided by law, may suspend, for any period of time not exceeding
three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership, association, or
corporation issued under R.C. § 4511.763.
(R.C. § 4511.77)
§ 72.098 FLASHING LIGHT SIGNAL LAMPS.
   (A)   Every school bus shall, in addition to any other equipment and
distinctive markings required pursuant to R.C. §§ 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.764
and 4511.77, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, be equipped
with signal lamps mounted as high as practicable, which shall display to the
front two alternately flashing red lights and two alternately flashing amber
lights located at the same level and to the rear two alternately flashing red
lights and alternately flashing amber lights located at the same level, and
these lights shall be visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight. The alternately
flashing red lights shall be spaced as widely as practicable, and the
alternately flashing amber lights shall be located next to them.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.771)
§ 72.099 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE FOR OPERATOR.
   (A)   On and after May 6, 1986, no person, school board, or governmental
entity shall purchase, lease, or rent a new school bus unless the school bus
has an occupant restraining device, as defined in R.C. § 4513.263, installed
for use in its operator’s seat.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.772)
PROHIBITIONS
§ 72.115 OBSTRUCTION AND INTERFERENCE AFFECTING VIEW AND CONTROL OF DRIVER.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.70)
§ 72.116 OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER, FIFTH WHEEL VEHICLE, OR MANUFACTURED OR
MOBILE HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person shall
occupy any travel trailer, fifth wheel trailer, or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a fifth wheel
trailer when both of the following apply:
         (a)   Any child riding in the fifth wheel trailer is properly secured
in the manner provided in R.C. § 4511.81.
         (b)   The operator of the vehicle towing the fifth wheel trailer has
some means of viable communication with the passengers riding in the trailer.
      (2)   As used in this division, “viable communication” includes a
cellular or satellite telephone, a radio, or any other similar electronic
wireless communications device.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(R.C. § 4511.701)
§ 72.117 DRIVING UPON CLOSED HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(R.C. § 4511.71(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (B)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.71(B))
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required under
any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (B) of this section
shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers for the cost any
such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any cost of
transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for treatment
of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one rescuer was
involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the reimbursement
proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A financial
sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the rescuer and,
subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. § 2929.28(B), a rescuer may
collect the financial sanction in the same manner as provided in R.C. §
2929.28.
(R.C. § 4511.714(C))
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 9.60.
      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.
      RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
(R.C. § 4511.714(D))
§ 72.118 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK AREA OR PATHS EXCLUSIVELY FOR BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an
electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
      (2)   This prohibition does not apply to a law enforcement officer, or
other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, using
an electric bicycle with the motor engaged while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
(R.C. § 4511.711(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-
purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when
an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of
the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
(R.C. § 4511.713(A))
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.711(B), 4511.713(B))
§ 72.119 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.712)
§ 72.120 FOLLOWING AN EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC VEHICLE PROHIBITED; APPROACHING
STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.
   (A)   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited. The driver of any
vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle on official
business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle
traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet, or drive into or park
the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has stopped in answer to
a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer or a firefighter.
(R.C. § 4511.72(A))
   (B)   Approaching stationary public safety vehicle with caution.
      (1)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in R.C. §
4513.17, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway
that consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane that is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
         (b)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described
in division (B)(1)(a) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a
highway of that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so
would be unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of
the motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather, and traffic
conditions.
      (2)   This division (B) does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle,
vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle
inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway
maintenance vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of
all persons and property upon the highway.
      (3)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (B)(1)(a) or (B)(1)(b) of this section when so required by division
(B) of this section.
(R.C. § 4511.213(A) - (C))
   (C)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding §
130.99 or R.C. § 2929.28, upon a finding that a person operated a motor vehicle
in violation of division (B)(3) of this section, the court, in addition to all
other penalties provided by law, shall impose a fine of two times the usual
amount imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. §§ 4511.213(D), 4511.72(B))
   (D)   The offense established under division (B) of this section is a strict
liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this
offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any
other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a
strict liability offense.
(R.C. §§ 4511.213(E))
§ 72.121 DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.73)
§ 72.122 PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a
highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails,
or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal
traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed
upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (B)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles
which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or
upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway
by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
(R.C. § 4511.74(A), (B))
   (C)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (D)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road, or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (E)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste, rubbish,
ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture,
glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
(R.C. § 4511.82(A), (B), (D))
   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4511.74(C))
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.82(C))
§ 72.123 TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (B)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or day-care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (A) or (B) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. § 5104.015, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (A), (B), or (C)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in R.C. § 4513.263.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(C) or (D) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (H)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child who otherwise would be
required to be restrained under this section has a physical impairment that
makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat, or an occupant restraining
device impossible or impractical, provided that the person operating the
vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in accordance with
any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted on the affidavit.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this section.
   (J)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section
shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an operator of a
motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child restraint system,
booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by this section that
occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same location is deemed
to be a single violation of this section:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(1)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined not
less than $25 nor more than $75.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this section or of a
state law or municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent any of those
divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (J)(1) of this section shall
be forwarded to the State Treasurer for deposit in the Child Highway Safety
Fund created by R.C. § 4511.81(I).
(R.C. § 4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L))
§ 72.124 OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      AUTOMOBILE. Means any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car,
or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the “National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966", 80 Stat. 719, 15 U.S.C. § 1392.
      COMMERCIAL CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE. A seat safety belt, shoulder belt, harness,
or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator of or
passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal vehicle
safety standards established by the United States Department of Transportation.
      PASSENGER. Any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who is
occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.
      PASSENGER CAR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss to
person or property. The term includes a product liability claim, as defined in
R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. § 2307.91, but does
not include a civil action for damages for breach of contract or another
agreement between persons.
      VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE. As used in the definitions of the terms set
forth above, VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   (B)   Prohibited acts. No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         (a)   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         (b)   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         (c)   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (C)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (C)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (C)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (C)(3) or (C)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (C)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (D)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation.
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (B) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation. No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (E)   Use of fines for educational program. All fines collected for
violations of division (B) of this section shall be forwarded to the State
Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).
   (F)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (F)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (B)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non-economic loss, as defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action
that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car;
         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (G)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) shall be subject to the penalty
set forth in §
70.99(B).
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (B)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4513.263)
Cross-reference:
   Child restraint systems, see §
72.123
   Installation and sale of seat safety belts, see §
74.33
   School bus operators, restraining devices, see §
72.099
§ 72.125 USE OF ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The non-emergency use of engine brakes within the municipality is
prohibited.
   (B)   As used in this section, ENGINE BRAKES shall be defined to include but
is not limited to Jake Brakes, Jacobs Brakes, C Brakes, PacBrakes, TekBrakes,
and any other type of engine retarders commonly utilized within the trucking
industry.
   (C)   This section does not apply to emergency vehicles operated by fire,
police, or military units.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
§ 72.126 OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE WEARING EARPHONES OR EARPLUGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      EARPHONES. Any device that covers all or a portion of both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
      EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices that are
built into protective headgear.
      EARPLUGS. Any device that can be inserted into one or both ears and that
does either of the following:
         (a)   Through either a physical connection to another device or a
wireless connection, provides the listener with radio programs, music, or other
information;
         (b)   Provides hearing protection.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.
   (C)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment;
      (6)   Any person wearing earphones or earplugs for hearing protection
while operating a motorcycle.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.84)
§ 72.127 CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES AND LIVERY SERVICES.
   (A)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, and shall
not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance with
any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other similar
vehicles for hire.
   (B)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (C)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.24 and is in compliance with R.C. § 4509.80.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4511.85)
Statutory reference:
   Chauffeured limousine, motor vehicle licensing, see R.C. § 4503.24
   Proof of financial responsibility, see R.C. § 4509.80
§ 72.128 OPERATING TRACTION ENGINE UPON IMPROVED HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind. As used in this section, “traction engine” or “tractor” applies to
all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (B)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (A), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to operate.
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(R.C. § 5589.08)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 72.129 CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES; PEELING OUT.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling out”.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.130 SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No operator of a motor vehicle shall enter upon private property for the
sole purpose of driving across such property, between abutting streets or other
public ways thereof. The failure to stop on such property in connection with or
in furtherance of the enterprise or activities being conducted on the property
shall constitute prima facie evidence of the violation.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.131 TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using, holding, or
physically supporting with any part of the person’s body an electronic wireless
communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device to make
contact, for emergency purposes, with a law enforcement agency, hospital or
health care provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or
entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle while using an electronic
wireless communications device in the course of the person’s duties;
      (3)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device when
the person’s motor vehicle is in a stationary position and is outside a lane of
travel, at a traffic control signal that is currently directing traffic to
stop, or parked on a road or highway due to an emergency or road closure;
      (4)   A person using and holding an electronic wireless communications
device directly near the person’s ear for the purpose of making, receiving, or
conducting a telephone call, provided that the person does not manually enter
letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on an electronic wireless
communications device regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle;
safety-related information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or
data used primarily by the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (6)   A person using the speaker phone function of the electronic
wireless communications device, provided that the person does not hold or
support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (7)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
navigation purposes, provided that the person does not do either of the
following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (8)   A person using a feature or function of the electronic wireless
communications device with a single touch or single swipe, provided that the
person does not do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or
on behalf of a utility, if the person is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or circumstance that affects the health or safety of individuals;
      (11)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device in
conjunction with a voice- operated or hands-free feature or function of the
vehicle or of the device without the use of either hand except to activate,
deactivate, or initiate the feature or function with a single touch or swipe,
provided the person does not hold or support the device with any part of the
person’s body;
      (12)   A person using technology that physically or electronically
integrates the device into the motor vehicle, provided that the person does not
do either of the following during the use:
         (a)   Manually enter letters, numbers, or symbols into the device;
         (b)   Hold or support the device with any part of the person’s body.
      (13)   A person storing an electronic wireless communications device in a
holster, harness, or article of clothing on the person’s body.
   (C)   If a law enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (A) of this section, the officer shall do
both of the following:
      (1)   Report the issuance of the ticket, citation, or summons to the
officer’s law enforcement agency;
      (2)   Ensure that such report indicates the offender’s race.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
operating a motor vehicle while using an electronic wireless communication
device, an unclassified misdemeanor.
         (a)   Except as provided in divisions (D)(1)(b), (D)(1)(c), (D)(1)(d),
and (D)(2) of this section, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine of
not more than $150.
         (b)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one prior violation of this section, R.C. §
4511.204, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court shall
impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $250.
         (c)   If, within two years of the violation, the offender has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more prior violations of this section,
R.C. § 4511.204, or a substantially equivalent or municipal ordinance, the
court shall impose upon the offender a fine of not more than $500. The court
also may impose a suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege for 90 days.
         (d)   Notwithstanding divisions (D)(1)(a) to (D)(1)(c) of this
section, if the offender was operating the motor vehicle at the time of the
violation in a construction zone where a sign was posted in accordance with
R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other penalties provided by law,
shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times the amount imposed for the
violation under division (D)(1)(a), (D)(1)(b), or (D)(1)(c) of this section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In lieu of payment of the fine of $150 under division (D)(1)(a) of
this section and the assessment of points under division (D)(4) of this
section, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving safety
course, as described in R.C. § 4511.991. If the offender attends and
successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall not be required to pay the fine and shall not have the points assessed
against that offender’s driver’s license if the offender submits the written
evidence to the court.
      (3)   The court may impose any other penalty authorized under R.C. §§
2929.21 to 2929.28. However, the court shall not impose a fine or a suspension
not otherwise specified in division (D)(1) of this section. The court also
shall not impose a jail term or community residential sanction.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, points shall
be assessed for a violation of division (A) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
   (E)   A prosecution for an offense in violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for an offense in violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on
the same conduct. However, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (F)   (1)   A law enforcement officer does not have probable cause and shall
not stop the operator of a motor vehicle for purposes of enforcing this section
unless the officer visually observes the operator using, holding, or physically
supporting with any part of the person’s body the electronic wireless
communications device.
      (2)   A law enforcement officer who stops the operator of a motor vehicle
for a violation of division (A) of this section shall inform the operator that
the operator may decline a search of the operator’s electronic wireless
communications device. The officer shall not do any of the following:
         (a)   Access the device without a warrant, unless the operator
voluntarily and unequivocally gives consent for the officer to access the
device;
         (b)   Confiscate the device while awaiting the issuance of a warrant
to access the device;
         (c)   Obtain consent from the operator to access the device through
coercion or any other improper means. Any consent by the operator to access the
device shall be voluntary and unequivocal before the officer may access the
device without a warrant.
   (G)   As used in this section:
      ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Includes any of the following:
         (a)   A wireless telephone;
         (b)   A text-messaging device;
         (c)   A personal digital assistant;
         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
         (e)   Any device capable of displaying a video, movie, broadcast
television image, or visual image;
         (f)   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed
or used to communicate text, initiate or receive communication, or exchange
information or data.
      An “electronic wireless communications device” does not include a two-way
radio transmitter or receiver used by a person who is licensed by the federal
communications commission to participate in the amateur radio service.
      UTILITY. An entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E), or (G).
      UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE. A vehicle owned or operated by a utility.
      VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE FEATURE OR FUNCTION. A feature or function
that allows a person to use an electronic wireless communications device
without the use of either hand, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the
feature or function with a single touch or single swipe.
(R.C. § 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 72.132 USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A) of this section shall be fined $150. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (D)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (E)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(R.C. § 4511.205)
CHAPTER 73: MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES
Section
General Provisions
   
73.01   Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs
   
73.02   Implied consent
   
73.03   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence
   
73.04   Driving commercial vehicle with impaired alertness or ability; use of
drugs
   
73.05   Reckless operation of vehicles
   
73.06   Reckless operation off streets and highways; competitive operation
   
73.07   Operator to be in reasonable control
   
73.08   Immobilizing or disabling device violation
   
73.09   Street racing defined; prohibited on public highways
   
73.10   Speed limits
   
73.11   Slow speed or stopping
   
73.12   Emergency vehicles excepted from speed limitation
   
73.13   Speed regulations on bridges
   
73.14   Presenting false name or information to officer
   
73.15   Prohibition against resisting officer
   
73.16   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles
Stopping After Accident
   
73.30   Failure to stop after accident
   
73.31   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways
   
73.32   Accident involving damage to realty
   
73.33   Failure to report accident
Statutory reference:
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 73.01 DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality,
if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them.
         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         (j)   Except as provided in division (K) of this section, the person
has a concentration of any of the following controlled substances or
metabolites of a controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least ten nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least ten nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least two nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least five nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least ten nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount of
salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and salvinorin
A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s blood serum
or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of operating
any vehicle within this state, the rule is in effect, and the person has a
concentration of salvia divinorum or salvinorin A of at least that amount so
specified by rule in the person’s urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the
person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or any other
equivalent offense shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised by the
officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or submission
to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate any vehicle within this
municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (C)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be charged
with a violation of division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) and a violation of division
(B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section, but the person may not be convicted
of more than one violation of these divisions.
   (D)   (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding
for a violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section or for an equivalent
offense that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any blood or urine
withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined in R.C. §
2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered with any other
relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or innocence of the
defendant.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) or
(B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the
court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse,
controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled substance, or a combination
of them in the defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by
chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn within three hours of the time of
the alleged violation. The three-hour time limit specified in this division
regarding the admission of evidence does not extend or affect the two-hour time
limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as the maximum period of time during
which a person may consent to a chemical test or tests as described in that
section. The court may admit evidence on the concentration of alcohol, drugs of
abuse, or a combination of them as described in this division when a person
submits to a blood test at the request of a law enforcement officer under R.C.
§ 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a blood or
urine sample is obtained pursuant to a search warrant. Only a physician, a
registered nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency
medical technician- paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This
limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person
authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse to withdraw blood
under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the physical welfare of the
person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. The bodily substance
withdrawn under this division (D)(1)(b) shall be analyzed in accordance with
methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual possessing a valid
permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.
         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(b) of this section, EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this
section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if there was at
the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the
applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (A)(1)(b), (A)(1)
(c), (A)(1)(d) and (A)(1)(e) of this section or less than the applicable
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance specified for a violation of division (A)(1)(j) of this
section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in
determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. This division does not
limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (B) of this
section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis. If the chemical
test was obtained pursuant to division (D)(1)(b) of this section, the person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician,
chemist, or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical
test or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, as required under §
73.02, shall state that the person may have an independent test performed at
the person’s expense. The failure or inability to obtain an additional chemical
test by a person shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the
chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law enforcement officer.
      (4)   (a)   As used in division (D)(4)(b) and (D)(4)(c) of this section,
NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the United
States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. §
105.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in
the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally accepted field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect that were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (D)(4)(b)1. or (D)(4)(b)2. of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
         (c)   Division (D)(4)(b) of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (D)(4)(b) of this section.
   (E)   (1)   Subject to division (E)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (A)(1)(b),
(A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), (A)(1)(e), (A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g), (A)(1)(h), (A)(1)(i), or
(A)(1)(j) or (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section or for an
equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions,
a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel issued a permit by the
Department of Health authorizing an analysis as described in this division that
contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine,
or other bodily substance tested and that contains all of the information
specified in this division shall be admitted as prima facie evidence of the
information and statements that the report contains. The laboratory report
shall contain all of the following:
         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, a controlled substance, a metabolite of a controlled substance, or a
combination of them that was found;
         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director of a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         (d)   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (E)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (E)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate, emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station, or clinic at which
blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.19,
4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability
based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not a
claim of malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the
person. The immunity provided in this division also extends to an emergency
medical service organization that employs an emergency medical technician-
intermediate or emergency medical technician-paramedic who withdraws blood
under this section. The immunity provided in this division is not available to
a person who withdraws blood if the person engages in willful or wanton
misconduct.
      (2)   As used in division (F)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-
INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings
as in R.C. § 4765.01.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions (A)(1)(a) through
(A)(1)(i) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them. Whoever
violates division (A)(1)(j) of this section is guilty of operating a vehicle
while under the influence of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall sentence the offender for
either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as otherwise authorized or
required by divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) of this section:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(b), (G)(1)(c),
(G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of this section, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to
all of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i)
through (G)(1)(a)(iv).
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (A) of this section
or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) through (G)(1)(b)(v).
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (A) of this
section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor. The court
shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions provided in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) through (G)(1)(c)(vi).
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e) of this
section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division (A) of
this section or other equivalent offenses or an offender who, within 20 years
of the offense, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to five or
more violations of that nature, or an offender who previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C.
§ 2941.1413, is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
         (e)   An offender who previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony, regardless of
when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred, is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) of this section and who subsequently seeks reinstatement of the
driver’s or occupational driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege suspended under this section or R.C. § 4511.19 as a result of the
conviction or guilty plea shall pay a reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. §
4511.191(F)(2).
      (3)   (a)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term under R.C. §
4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (G)(1)(b)(ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (G)(1)(c)(ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be able
to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring,
with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic monitoring and
continuous alcohol monitoring.
         (b)   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as required by
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(3).
      (4)   If an offender’s driver’s or occupational driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under division (G) of
this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13 permits the court to
grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant the limited driving
privileges in accordance with that section. If division (A)(7) of that section
requires the court impose as a condition of the privileges that the offender
must display on the vehicle that is driven subject to the privileges restricted
license plates that are issued under R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in
division (B) of that section, the court shall impose that condition as one of
the conditions of the limited driving privileges granted to the offender,
except as provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).
      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of division (A) of
this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(5).
      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order of criminal
forfeiture under division (G)(1)(c), (G)(1)(d), or (G)(1)(e) of this section is
assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.
      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under division (G)
of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under division
(G) of this section.
      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law enforcement agency
for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a chemical test or tests
administered to the offender if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) of this section.
         (b)   The test or tests were of the offender’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, or urine.
         (c)   The test or tests indicated that the offender had a prohibited
concentration of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in the offender’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine at the
time of the offense.
      (9)   As used in division (G) of this section, ELECTRONIC MONITORING has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of operating a
motor vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be punished as
follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(2) of this section,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In addition to
any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class six
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). The court may grant
limited driving privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021
and 4510.13. The court may grant unlimited driving privileges with an ignition
interlock device relative to the suspension and may reduce the period of
suspension as authorized under R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited
driving privileges under R.C. § 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term
imposed under division (H)(1) of this section as required under that section.
      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of division (A)
of this section or other equivalent offenses, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. In addition to any other sanction imposed for
the offense, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4). The court may grant limited driving
privileges relative to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the violation of division (B) of this section.
   (I)   (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol treatment
program under this section unless the treatment program complies with the
minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C. Chapter
5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.
      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers’ intervention program or in an
alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section shall pay
the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court determines that an
offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under
this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in the program, the court
may order that the cost be paid from the court’s Indigent Drivers’ Alcohol
Treatment Fund.
   (J)   If a person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section or R.C. §
4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person’s trial or sentence,
the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.
   (K)   Division (A)(1)(j) of this section does not apply to a person who
operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the amount
specified in that division, if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
   (L)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in division (A)(1)(j) of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2923.16(D) in the
same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.
   (M)   All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to this section. If the
meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning of the
same term as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as defined in R.C.
§ 4510.01 applies to this section.
(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (M))
   (N)   As used in this section, §
73.02 and §
73.03:
      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         (b)   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;
         (c)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which the offender
was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that section;
         (d)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or R.C. § 2903.08 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either of those
divisions;
         (e)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4), R.C. §
2903.08(A)(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that former section, in a
case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found that the offender was
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (f)   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         (g)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from
operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or from
manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this
state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in physical control of
any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar
device on the waters of this state with a prohibited concentration of alcohol,
a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine;
         (h)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or R.C. § 1547.11(A);
         (i)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or R.C. § 1547.11(A).
      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. Means an equivalent offense
that is any of the following:
         (a)   A violation described in division (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) of
the definition for “equivalent offense” provided in this division (N);
         (b)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance, law of
another state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(A);
         (c)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A).
      JAIL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 6, 10, 20,
30, or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a), (G)(1)(b),
or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of that
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. § 4511.19, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21
through 2929.28 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
      MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2929.01.
      MUNICIPAL OVI ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL OVI OFFENSE. Mean any municipal
ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or prohibiting
a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
(R.C. § 4511.181)
Cross-reference:
   Endangering children, see §
135.14
   Power to suspend driver’s license, see §
33.05
Statutory reference:
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. § 4510.05
§ 73.02 IMPLIED CONSENT.
   (A)   (1)   As used in this section:
         ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Means any device that provides for
continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any immobilizing
or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that is constantly
available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person’s system, or any
other device that provides for the automatic testing and periodic reporting of
alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders a person to use as a
sanction imposed as a result of the person’s conviction of or plea of guilty to
an offense.
         COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5119.01.
         PHYSICAL CONTROL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.194.
      (2)   Any person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking within this
municipality or who is in physical control of a vehicle shall be deemed to have
given consent to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, or urine to determine the alcohol, drug of abuse,
controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination
content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine if
arrested for a violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance.
      (3)   The chemical test or tests under division (A)(2) of this section
shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having
reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical control
of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance identified in
division (A)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by which the
officer is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be administered.
      (4)   Any person who is dead or unconscious, or who otherwise is in a
condition rendering the person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed to have
consented as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, and the test or tests
may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 through 313.16.
      (5)   (a)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance and if the person if
convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (d),
or (e), the law enforcement officer shall request the person to submit, and the
person shall submit, to a chemical test or tests of the person’s whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine for the purpose of determining the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine. A law enforcement officer who makes a request
pursuant to this division that a person submit to a chemical test or tests is
not required to advise the person of the consequences of submitting to, or
refusing to submit to, the test or tests and is not required to give the person
the form described in division (C) of this section, but the officer shall
advise the person at the time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take
a chemical test the officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the
time of the arrest that the person may have an independent chemical test taken
at the person’s own expense. Divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) of this section apply
to the administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this division.
         (b)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test upon a request
made pursuant to division (A)(5)(a) of this section, the law enforcement
officer who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary
to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who acts pursuant to
this division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical test of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from criminal and civil
liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or any other claim for the
acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious purpose, in bad faith, or in a
wanton or reckless manner.
(R.C. § 4511.191(A))
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, the arresting
law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance with this section to
any person under arrest for a violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance. The officer shall
give that advice in a written form that contains the information described in
division (C) of this section and shall read the advice to the person. The form
shall contain a statement that the form was shown to the person under arrest
and read to the person by the arresting officer. One or more persons shall
witness the arresting officer’s reading of the form, and the witnesses shall
certify to this fact by signing the form. The person must submit to the
chemical test or tests, subsequent to the request of the arresting officer,
within two hours of the time of the alleged violation and, if the person does
not submit to the test or tests within that two-hour time limit, the failure to
submit automatically constitutes a refusal to submit to the test or tests.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, if a person is
under arrest as described in division (B) of this section, before the person
may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to determine the
alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine, the arresting officer shall read the following form
to the person:
You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under state law or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the person was
arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug, or a
combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance;
operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence).
If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio driving
privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a fee to
have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of OVI or
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled substance
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under state or municipal law
within the preceding 20 years, you are now under arrest for state OVI, and, if
you refuse to take a chemical test, you will face increased penalties if you
subsequently are convicted of the state OVI.
(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any chemical test
required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited amount of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set by law, your
Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay
a fee to have the privileges reinstated.
If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test taken at
your own expense.
   (D)   If the arresting law enforcement officer does not ask a person under
arrest as described in division (B) of this section or division (A)(5) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit of the person and immediately forward it
to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the charge. If the
arrested person is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is
not in the person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it
to the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after
the arrest, and, upon the surrender, the agency immediately shall forward the
license or permit to the court in which the person is to appear on the charge.
Upon receipt of the license or permit, the court shall retain it pending the
arrested person’s initial appearance and any action taken under R.C. §
4511.196.
   (E)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under arrest as
described in division (A)(5) of this section to submit to a chemical test or
tests under that division and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (B) of this section
to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this section, if
the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of the person’s refusal or submission, and if either the person
refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the
person submits to the test or tests and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, the arresting officer
shall do all of the following:
         (a)   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, notify the person
that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed upon the person, the
person’s Ohio driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the suspension will last at
least until the person’s initial appearance on the charge, which will be held
within five days after the date of the person’s arrest or the issuance of a
citation to the person, and that the person may appeal the suspension at the
initial appearance or during the period of time ending 30 days after that
initial appearance;
         (b)   Seize the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit of
the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the arrested person
is not in possession of the person’s license or permit or it is not in the
person’s vehicle, the officer shall order the person to surrender it to the law
enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24 hours after the person is
given notice of the suspension, and, upon the surrender, the officer’s
employing agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the
Registrar;
         (c)   Verify the person’s current residence and, if it differs from
that on the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, notify
the Registrar of the change;
         (d)   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the arrest of the
person, a sworn report that includes all of the following statements:
            1.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to believe that, at
the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OVI ordinance or for being
in physical control of a stationary vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   That the person was arrested and charged with a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance;
            3.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that the
officer asked the person to take the designated chemical test or tests, advised
the person in accordance with this section of the consequences of submitting
to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and gave the person the form
described in division (C) of this section;
            4.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section applies, that
either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or tests or, unless
the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the chemical test or tests and the
test results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged
offense.
            5.   If the person was under arrest as described in division (A)(5)
of this section and the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance
with that division, that the person was under arrest as described in that
division, that the chemical test or tests were performed in accordance with
that division, and that test results indicated a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time
of the alleged offense.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
arrested for a violation of §
73.03, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who
is asked by a law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests
under this section, and who submits to the test or tests, regardless of the
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance that the test results indicate is present in the person’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
   (F)   The arresting officer shall give the officer’s sworn report that is
completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of the arrest,
or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the person by
regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the report, but
not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer may give an
unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest provided the
report is complete when given to the arrested person and subsequently is sworn
to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but not later than 48 hours
after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer shall send a copy of the
sworn report to the court in which the arrested person is to appear on the
charge for which the person was arrested.
   (G)   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this section
is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it contains. It
shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the information and
statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. § 4511.197 relative to any
suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege that results from the arrest covered by the
report.
(R.C. § 4511.192)
   (H)   (1)   A suspension of a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under this section for the
time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) is effective immediately from the
time at which the arresting officer serves the notice of suspension upon the
arrested person. Any subsequent finding that the person is not guilty of the
charge that resulted in the person’s being requested to take the chemical test
or tests under division (A) of this section does not affect the suspension.
      (2)   If a person arrested for operating a vehicle in violation of §
73.01(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other municipal OVI
ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle in violation of §
73.03 or R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
regardless of whether the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is or is not suspended under R.C. §
4511.191(B) or (C) or R.C. Chapter 4510, the person’s initial appearance on the
charge resulting from the arrest shall be held within five days of the persons’
arrest or the issuance of the citation to him or her, subject to any
continuance granted by the court pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the
issues specified in that section.
(R.C. § 4511.191(D))
Statutory reference:
   Continuous alcohol monitoring, see R.C. § 4511.198
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see R.C. §
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and Indigent Drivers
Alcohol Treatment Funds, see R.C. § 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196
   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device; restricted
license, see R.C. § 4510.13
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C. § 4511.195
§ 73.03 PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, PHYSICAL CONTROL means being in the driver’s
position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the vehicle’s
ignition key or other ignition device.
   (B)   No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the time of
the physical control, any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), or (A)(1)(e).
      (3)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, the person has
a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j).
   (C)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has administered a
field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the vehicle involved
in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the
officer administered the test in substantial compliance with the testing
standards for any reliable, credible, and generally acceptable field sobriety
tests that were in effect at the time the tests were administered, including
but not limited to any testing standards then in effect what were set by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
         (b)   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field sobriety
test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal prosecution
or juvenile court proceeding.
         (c)   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section and if the testimony or
evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the
testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the
trier of fact considers to be appropriate.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not limit or preclude a court,
in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (C)(1) of this section.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having physical control of
a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In
addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
   (E)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is in
physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the
person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds
the amount specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j) if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs.
      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled substance
in accordance with the health professional’s directions.
(R.C. § 4511.194)
§ 73.04 DRIVING COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WITH IMPAIRED ALERTNESS OR ABILITY; USE OF
DRUGS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by fatigue,
illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive such
vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the driver’s
ability or alertness.
   (B)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor vehicle,
commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or otherwise
directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly permit a
driver in any such condition described in division (A) of this section to drive
such vehicle upon any street or highway.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of this section or
R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764, or
4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4511.79)
§ 73.05 RECKLESS OPERATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.20)
Cross-reference:
   License suspension, see §
71.25
§ 73.06 RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; COMPETITIVE OPERATION.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private
property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the
safety of persons or property.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation of
vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property
knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.201)
Cross-reference:
   License suspension, see §
71.25
§ 73.07 OPERATOR TO BE IN REASONABLE CONTROL.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.202)
§ 73.08 IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4510.44)
§ 73.09 STREET RACING DEFINED; PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   As used in this section, STREET RACING means the operation of two or
more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive
attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or more vehicles
over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein
timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive
accelerations or speeds. Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such
competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants. The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima facie lawful speeds established by R.C. § 4511.21(B)(1)(a) through (B)(9)
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or rapidly accelerating from
a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawful speeds
shall be prima facie evidence of street racing.
   (B)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road,
street, or highway in this municipality.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the court
shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privileges for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No judge shall
suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender’s license, permit,
or privilege imposed under this division.
(R.C. § 4511.251)
§ 73.10 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface, and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (B)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   (a)   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess
and while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected, except
that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by division (B)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-way line
fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be governed
by divisions (B)(10) and (B)(11) of this section. The end of every school zone
may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone. Nothing in this section
or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control
Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be indicated by signs
equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other special notice of the
hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         (b)   As used in this section, SCHOOL means all of the following:
            1.   Any school chartered under R.C. § 3301.16;
            2.   Any nonchartered school that during the preceding year filed
with the Department of Education in compliance with O.A.C. § 3301-35-08, a copy
of the school’s report for the parents of the school’s pupils certifying that
the school meets state minimum standards for nonchartered, nontax- supported
schools and presents evidence of this filing to the jurisdiction from which it
is requesting the establishment of a school zone;
            3.   Any special elementary school that in writing requests the
County Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon
receipt of such written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone
at that location by erecting appropriate signs;
            4.   Any preschool education program operated by an educational
service center that is located on a street or highway with a speed limit of 45
miles per hour or more, when the educational service center in writing requests
that the County Engineer create a school zone at the location of that program.
Upon receipt of such a written request, the County Engineer shall create a
school zone at that location by erecting the appropriate signs.
         (c)   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway. Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries. The distances in divisions (B)(1)(c)1. through (B)(1)(c)3.
below shall not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by
whichever of the following distances or combination thereof the Director
approves as most appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (B)
(1)(a) and (B)(1)(c) of this section.
         (e)   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the meaning given that
term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).
         (f)   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the Legislative
Authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic,
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         (g)   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or other
person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts, and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (B)(4) and (B)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality, except as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)
(14), (B)(15), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (B)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (B)(9) and (B)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (B)
(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour on freeways with paved shoulders inside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (B)(14) and (B)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty miles per hour on rural expressways with traffic control
signals and on all portions of rural divided highways, except as provided in
divisions (B)(13) and (B)(14) of this section;
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all rural expressways without traffic
control signals;
      (14)   Seventy miles per hour on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt, except as provided in division (B)(16) of this section;
      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways without traffic control signals in urbanized areas.
   (C)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)
(8) and (B)(9) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (D) of this section. No
person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the
same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section
may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and
(B)(16) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (B)(12) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (B)(13) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (B)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(B)(14) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (B)(14) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (E)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (C) of this section also the speed which division (B)(1)(a), (B)
(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (F)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (D) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4),
(B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of this section, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (D) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6),
(B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to,
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of
conviction under such division and dismiss the charge under division (D) of
this section. If it finds no violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3),
(B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the
evidence supports a conviction under division (D) of this section.
   (G)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (D) of this section in accordance with
R.C. § 4510.036.
(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (H)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.
   (I)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL BUS. Means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more than
nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
      DIVIDED. Means a roadway having two or more travel lanes for vehicles
moving in opposite directions and that is separated by a median of more than
four feet, excluding turn lanes.
      INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
      NONCOMMERCIAL BUS. Includes but is not limited to a school bus, or a
motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated with
a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate system
and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or group
of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      RURAL. Means an area outside urbanized areas and outside of a business or
urban district, and areas that extend within urbanized areas where the roadway
characteristics remain mostly unchanged from those outside the urbanized areas.
      URBANIZED AREA. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
(R.C. § 4511.21(O))
   (J)   Speed limits for private roads and driveways.
      (1)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:
         (a)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is
indicated by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be
seen by an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the
basic speed limit sign included in the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;
         (b)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road
or driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road
or driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
      (2)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway
as provided in division (J)(1) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed
limit established and posted pursuant to division (J)(1).
      (3)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (J)(1) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a
person violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of
the means described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of
determining the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person
with exceeding the speed limit.
      (4)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for
violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division
(J)(1) of this section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.
      (5)   As used in this division (J):
         OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to the
real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
         PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING UNITS. Does
not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.
(R.C. § 4511.211(A) - (E))
   (K)   Penalties.
      (1)   Divisions (A) through (I).
         (a)   A violation of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of
this section is one of the following:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(1)(a)2., (K)(1)
(a)3., (K)(1)(b), and (K)(1)(c) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of any provision of
divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of
any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any provision
of that section, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of any
provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any
provision of any other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to
any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (b)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an
hour in a business district of the municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour
in other portions of the municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a
school zone during recess or while children are going to or leaving school
during the school’s opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. This division does not apply if penalties may be imposed under division
(K)(1)(a)2. or (K)(1)(a)3. of this section.
         (c)   Notwithstanding division (K)(1)(a) of this section, if the
offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where a sign was then
posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court, in addition to all other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a fine of two times
the usual amount imposed for the violation. No court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation upon an offender if the
offender alleges, in an affidavit filed with the court prior to the offender’s
sentencing, that the offender is indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed
pursuant to this division and if the court determines that the offender is an
indigent person and unable to pay the fine.
         (d)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.21(P))
      (2)   Division (J).
         (a)   A violation of division (J)(2) of this section is one of the
following:
            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (K)(2)(a)2. and (K)
(2)(a)3. of this section, a minor misdemeanor;
            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (J)(2) of
this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of division
(J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other municipal ordinance
that is substantially equivalent to that division, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.211(F))
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of speed limits with approval of Director, see R.C. § 4511.21(H)
through (N)
   Arrest pending warrant when radar, electrical or mechanical timing device
used to determine violation, see R.C. § 4511.091
§ 73.11 SLOW SPEED OR STOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (B)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with the law. No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be
less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective
until the provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and local
authorities have obtained the approval of the Director.
   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.22)
§ 73.12 EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED FROM SPEED LIMITATION.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle. This section does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(R.C. § 4511.24)
§ 73.13 SPEED REGULATIONS ON BRIDGES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other
elevated structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater
than the maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or
structure, when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this
section.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local
authority shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of
any bridge or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if
it finds that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at
the speed otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall
determine and declare the maximum speed of traffic which such structure can
withstand, and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed
to be erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end
of the structure.
      (3)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this
section, proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and
the existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the
maximum speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.23)
§ 73.14 PRESENTING FALSE NAME OR INFORMATION TO OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally communicate a
false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 4513.361)
§ 73.15 PROHIBITION AGAINST RESISTING OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any sheriff,
constable, or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this Title VII. No person shall interfere with
any person charged under any provision of this Title VII with the enforcement
of the law relative to public highways.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.36)
   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 73.16 OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER- SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         (a)   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (E) of this section;
         (b)   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.214)
   (E)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or highways to submit the
vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (F)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(R.C. § 4511.215)
   (G)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (F) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.112.
(R.C. § 4511.216)
   (H)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (H) and divisions (E) and
(F) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini- trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (H) shall be penalized as provided
in division (D) of this section.
(R.C. § 4519.401)
STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT
§ 73.30 FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         (a)   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         (b)   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         (c)   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (A)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.02)
§ 73.31 STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (A)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (A)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six months
of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this
division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. §
2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.021)
§ 73.32 ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours after accident, shall
forward to the police department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.
(R.C. § 4549.03)
§ 73.33 FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   (A)   No person shall fail to report a motor vehicle accident as required
under state or local law.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4509.74)
CHAPTER 74: EQUIPMENT AND LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
74.01   Unsafe vehicles, prohibition against operation
   
74.02   Bumpers on motor vehicles
   
74.03   Lighted lights required
   
74.04   Headlights
   
74.05   Tail lights and illumination of rear license plate
   
74.06   Red reflectors required
   
74.07   Safety lighting of commercial vehicles
   
74.08   Stoplight regulations
   
74.09   Obscured lights on vehicles
   
74.10   Red light or flag required
   
74.11   Lights on parked vehicles
   
74.12   Lights, emblems, and reflectors on slow-moving vehicles, farm
machinery, agricultural tractors, and animal-drawn vehicles
   
74.13   Spotlight and auxiliary driving lights
   
74.14   Cowl, fender, and back-up lights
   
74.15   Two lights displayed
   
74.16   Headlights required
   
74.17   Lights of less intensity
   
74.18   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
   
74.19   Standards for lights on snow removal equipment and oversize vehicles
   
74.20   Flashing lights permitted for certain types of vehicles
   
74.21   Lights and sign on transportation for preschool children
   
74.22   Focus and aim of headlights
   
74.23   Brake equipment; specifications
   
74.24   Brake fluid
   
74.25   Minimum standards for brakes and components
   
74.26   Horns, sirens, and warning devices
   
74.27   Mufflers; excessive smoke or gas
   
74.28   Rearview mirrors
   
74.29   Windshields and wipers
   
74.30   Solid tire requirements
   
74.31   Requirements for safety glass in motor vehicles; use of tinted glass or
reflectorized material
   
74.32   Directional signals
   
74.33   Installation and sale of seat safety belts required; definition
   
74.34   Requirements for extra signal equipment
   
74.35   Display of warning devices on disabled vehicles
   
74.36   Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives
   
74.37   Studded tires; seasonal use permitted
   
74.38   Safety inspection decals for buses
   
74.39   Air bags
Loads
   
74.50   Permit required to exceed load limits
   
74.51   Limitation of load extension on left side of vehicle
   
74.52   All loads shall be properly secured
   
74.53   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
   
74.54   Weighing of vehicle; removal of excess load
   
74.55   Operation of vehicle exceeding weight limits prohibited
   
74.56   Load limits
   
74.57   Maximum width, height, and length
   
74.58   Statement of gross vehicle weight
   
74.59   Wheel protectors required on heavy commercial vehicles
   
74.60   Liability for damages; prosecution; application of monies
   
74.61   Weight exceptions for certain vehicles
Statutory reference:
   Exemption of certain vehicles from emission, noise control and fuel
standards, see R.C. § 4513.41
   Exemption of collector’s or historical vehicles from equipment standards,
see R.C. § 4513.38
   Motorcycles, protective eye devices required for operators and passengers;
helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. § 4501-17-01
   Notice of arrest of certain commercial drivers, see R.C. § 5577.14
   Snowmobiles and all-purpose vehicles, equipment, see O.A.C. § 4501-29-01
   Vehicle lighting, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-15
EQUIPMENT
§ 74.01 UNSAFE VEHICLES, PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H))
§ 74.02 BUMPERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING. Means the manufacturer’s gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.
      MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE. Means a motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is constructed
either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional off-road
operation.
      PASSENGER CAR. Means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      TRUCK. Means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating of
10,000 pounds or less.
   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the absence of
bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or modified, the
maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (C)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.
   (D)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs:
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 do not
apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.021)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 74.03 LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 to 4513.37 during all of the following
times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (B)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.03)
§ 74.04 HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped
with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of
the motor vehicle.
      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more
than two headlights.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.04)
§ 74.05 TAIL LIGHTS AND ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be
equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted,
shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear,
provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the
rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.
      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.05)
§ 74.06 RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and
operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or
semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail
lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors
as required by the regulations provided for in that section.
      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and
so maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to
50 feet from such vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.06)
§ 74.07 SAFETY LIGHTING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be lighted on any
such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where there is
sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the highway at a
distance of 500 feet.
      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinances.
      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.07)
§ 74.08 STOPLIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to
the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall
be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
R.C. § 4513.19.
      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. § 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.071)
§ 74.09 OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(R.C. § 4513.08)
§ 74.10 RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or
more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear. The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.09)
§ 74.11 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or
stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether
attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped
with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the
roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No lights need
be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the
municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person or
substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any lighted
headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(R.C. § 4513.10)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.12 LIGHTS, EMBLEMS, AND REFLECTORS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES, FARM
MACHINERY, AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS, AND ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BOAT TRAILER. Means any vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more
than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE and SMV. Mean a boat trailer, unit of farm machinery,
road construction machinery, or other machinery designed by the manufacturer to
operate at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less. The term does not include a
bicycle, motorized bicycle, electric bicycle, or animal-drawn vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.11)
   (B)   Generally.
      (1)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate
either of the following vehicles unless it is equipped with and displays the
lamps described in division (B)(2) of this section:
         (a)   A vehicle not specifically required to be equipped with lamps or
other lighting devices by R.C. §§ 4513.03 to 4513.10;
         (b)   A vehicle referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G).
      (2)   Vehicles described in division (B)(1) of this section shall be
equipped with both of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp
displaying a red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear and two red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100
feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (3)   (a)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall
operate a multi-wheel agricultural tractor model year 2001 or earlier on a
street or highway unless it is equipped with and displays reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by all of the following:
            1.   Flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the front
and the rear. The lamps need not flash simultaneously and need not flash in
conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
            2.   Amber reflectors, all visible to the front;
            3.   Red reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         (b)   Rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4513.111 governing the lamps and reflectors described in division (B)(3)(a) of
this section and their placement correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2 respectively of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT 98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (4)   At the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, no person shall operate a
unit of farm machinery model year 2002 or later on a street or highway unless
it is equipped with and displays markings and illuminated lamps that meet or
exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications
that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit's model year
specified in the American society of agricultural engineers standard ANSI/ASAE
S279.10 OCT 98, lighting and marking of agricultural equipment on highways.
      (5)   Any unit of farm machinery designed by its manufacturer to operate
at a speed of 25 miles per hour or greater or any SMV may be equipped with and
display a red flashing light that is visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. § 4513.03. When a double-
faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to
the rear.
      (6)   Lights and reflectors required under divisions (B)(3) and (B)(4) of
this section and authorized under division (B)(5) of this section are in
addition to other lights required or permitted by this division (B) or R.C. §
4513.17.
      (7)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt rules in accordance
R.C. Chapter 119 Code that establish standards and specifications for lamps and
reflectors required or authorized by this section. Lamps and reflectors
required or authorized by this section shall meet those standards and
specifications.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle, motorized bicycle,
electric bicycle, or animal- drawn vehicle.
      (9)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.111)
   (C)   Slow-moving vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall
operate an SMV on a street or highway as follows:
         (a)   At a speed exceeding 25 miles per hour;
         (b)   Without displaying the triangular SMV emblem mounted in
accordance with division (C)(2) of this section.
      (2)   The SMV emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance
of not less than 500 feet to the rear. In accordance with R.C. Chapter 119, the
Ohio Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem. The standards and
specifications for the SMV emblem correlate with and, so far as possible,
conform with those approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.
      (3)   A person may operate an SMV on a street or highway without
displaying the triangular SMV emblem when any of the following apply:
         (a)   The SMV is being used in actual construction and maintenance
work in an area guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used.
         (b)   The SMV is operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Ohio Director of Transportation, a city
engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Ohio
Director of Transportation and the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09.
      (4)   No person shall display an SMV emblem on any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle not required to use the SMV emblem by this division
(C) or R.C. § 4513.113 or 4513.114;
         (b)   An SMV being transported upon any other vehicle;
         (c)   Any stationary object on the highway.
      (5)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate an SMV, except a unit
designed to be completely mounted on a primary power unit that is manufactured
or assembled on or after April 1, 1966, unless it is equipped with an SMV
emblem mounting device.
      (6)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.112)
   (D)   Farm machinery and agricultural tractors.
      (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays both
of the following:
         (a)   The SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
         (b)   A speed identification symbol that does both of the following:
            1.   Meets the specifications contained in the American Society of
Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment:
Speed Identification Symbol (SIS);
            2.   Indicates the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
      (2)   No person operating a tractor on a street or highway that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery
while operating at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall fail to display
both of the following on the unit of farm machinery:
         (a)   The SMV emblem;
         (b)   The speed identification symbol that matches the speed
identification symbol required to be displayed on the agricultural tractor.
      (3)   No person shall operate an agricultural tractor that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless
the person possesses documentation published or provided by the manufacturer
indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer
designed the agricultural tractor to operate.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.113)
   (E)   Animal-drawn vehicles.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, both
of the following:
         (a)   At least one lamp displaying a white light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the animal-drawn vehicle;
         (b)   Two lamps displaying red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the animal-drawn vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to one hundred feet to the rear when illuminated by the
lawful lower beams of headlamps.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(4) of this section, no
person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle on a street or highway unless it
is equipped with and displays, at all times, all of the following:
         (a)   One yellow flashing lamp displaying yellow light that is visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet and that is mounted in either of
the following positions:
            1.   On the top most portion of the rear of the animal-drawn
vehicle;
            2.   On the top of the animal-drawn vehicle.
         (b)   At least one of the following:
            1.   An SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. § 4513.112(B);
            2.   Micro-prism reflective tape that is visible from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps;
            3.   Both an SMV emblem and micro-prism reflective tape, as
specified in this division.
         (c)   Lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by this section
shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Ohio Director of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.114.
      (3)   The Ohio Director of Public Safety, in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119, shall adopt rules establishing standards and specifications for the
position and mounting of the lamps and micro-prism reflective tape required by
R.C. § 4513.114. The rules permit the micro-prism reflective tape to be red,
amber, white, or silver in color.
      (4)   (a)   Divisions (E)(1) and (E)(2) of this section do not apply to
the operator of animal-drawn agricultural equipment who is not transporting any
livestock or a person other than the operator.
         (b)   No operator described in division (E)(4)(a) of this section
shall operate animal-drawn agricultural equipment unless it is equipped with
and displays, at all times, the SMV emblem mounted in accordance with R.C. §
4513.112(B).
         (c)   As used in division (E)(4) of this section, “animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” means equipment drawn by the muscular power of an
animal that is used solely for agricultural purposes. “Animal-drawn
agricultural equipment” includes any of the following:
            1.   A plow;
            2.   A manure spreader;
            3.   A thresher.
      (5)   Whoever violates this division (E) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.114)
   (F)   Strict liability offenses. The offenses established under this section
are strict liability offenses, and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.
(R.C. § 4513.115)
§ 74.13 SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one
spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side
of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three
auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle. Any such lights
which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.12)
§ 74.14 COWL, FENDER, AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender
lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light. No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.13)
§ 74.15 TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   (A)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.14)
§ 74.16 HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder
adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle,
such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that
the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has
multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator,
which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.15)
§ 74.17 LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in
R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
R.C. § 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided that
such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per hour.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.16)
§ 74.18 NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of a vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or passing.
      (2)   The prohibition in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:
         (a)   Emergency vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a
disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail
delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182, highway maintenance
vehicles, and similar equipment operated by state or local authorities,
provided such vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a street or
highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating, or rotating amber light;
         (b)   Vehicles or machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.111 to have a
flashing red light;
         (c)   Farm machinery and vehicles escorting farm machinery, provided
such machinery and vehicles are equipped with and display, when used on a
street or highway, a flashing, oscillating, or rotating amber light. Farm
machinery also may display the lights described in R.C. § 4513.111.
         (d)   A funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle, provided that the
funeral hearse or funeral escort vehicle is equipped with and displays, when
used on a street or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights,
a flashing, oscillating, or rotating purple or amber light.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to animal-drawn
vehicles subject to R.C. § 4513.114.
   (D)   (1)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in
R.C. § 4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move, or park
upon, or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or
highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a
flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light.
      (2)   Except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move, or park upon, or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment
that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue
or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating
blue light, or a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility. This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
(R.C. § 4513.17)
   (F)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle
operated by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped
with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle
or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a
distance of not less than 500 feet. Such a vehicle may display the flashing,
oscillating or rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of
the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor
vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the
stoppage of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
      (2)   This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or
coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.171)
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. §§ 4513.17(F), 4513.171(B))
§ 74.19 STANDARDS FOR LIGHTS ON SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT AND OVERSIZE VEHICLES.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway unless
the lights thereon comply with and are lighted when and as required by the
standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Transportation pursuant
to R.C. § 4513.18.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.18)
§ 74.20 FLASHING LIGHTS PERMITTED FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.
   Rural mail delivery vehicles, state highway survey vehicles, and funeral
escort vehicles are permitted to use flashing lights.
(R.C. § 4513.181)
§ 74.21 LIGHTS AND SIGN ON TRANSPORTATION FOR PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten, or day-care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution – children”,
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. The
lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the Director
of Public Safety.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(R.C. § 4513.182)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.22 FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.19)
§ 74.23 BRAKE EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on vehicles:
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels. If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4511.521.
      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
         (b)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight
of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s
gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with
hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose material.
The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring action or
by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted by the service brakes or
other source of power provided that failure of the service brake actuation
system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the parking brakes
from being applied in conformance with the foregoing requirements. The parking
brakes shall be so designed that when once applied they shall remain applied
with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of any source of energy or
leakage of any kind.
      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall,
at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped
on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
         (a)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
         (b)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be
so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels
on opposite sides of the vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.20)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.24 BRAKE FLUID.
   (A)   No hydraulic brake fluid for use in motor vehicles shall be sold in
this municipality if the brake fluid is below the minimum standard of
specifications for heavy duty type brake fluid established by the society of
automotive engineers and the standard of specifications established by 49
C.F.R. § 571.116, as amended.
   (B)   All manufacturers, packers, or distributors of brake fluid selling
such fluid in this municipality shall state on the containers that the brake
fluid meets or exceeds the applicable minimum SAE standard of specifications,
and the standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.116, as
amended.
(R.C. § 4513.201)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.25 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BRAKES AND COMPONENTS.
   (A)   No brake lining, brake lining material, or brake lining assemblies for
use as repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall be sold in this
municipality if these items do not meet or exceed the minimum standard of
specifications established by the Society of Automotive Engineers and the
standard of specifications established in 49 C.F.R. § 571.105, as amended, and
49 C.F.R. § 571.135, as amended.
   (B)   All manufacturers or distributors of brake lining, brake lining
material, or brake lining assemblies selling these items for use as repair and
replacement parts in motor vehicles shall state that the items meet or exceed
the applicable minimum standard of specifications.
   (C)   As used in this section, MINIMUM STANDARD OF SPECIFICATIONS means a
minimum standard for brake system or brake component performance that meets the
need for motor vehicle safety and complies with the applicable SAE standards
and recommended practices, and the federal motor vehicle safety standards that
cover the same aspect of performance for any brake lining, brake lining
material, or brake lining assemblies.
(R.C. § 4513.202)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.26 HORNS, SIRENS, AND WARNING DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting
sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200
feet.
      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use
upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell. Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal. Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety. Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.21)
§ 74.27 MUFFLERS; EXCESSIVE SMOKE OR GAS.
   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion
engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working
order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no
person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor
vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle
plates.
      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.22)
§ 74.28 REARVIEW MIRRORS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle. Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a clear
and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles and
motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.23)
§ 74.29 WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster, or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width. No sign, poster, or
decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to conceal
the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in accordance
with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle passenger
compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle glazing without
moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it does not conceal the vehicle
identification number.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if either of
the following apply to the device:
         (a)   It is a “vehicle safety technology” as defined in 49 C.F.R. §
393.5 and complies with 49 C.F.R. § 393.60(e)(1)(ii).
         (b)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals, and it is mounted not more than 8.5 inches
below the upper edge of the windshield.
   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield. The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.24)
§ 74.30 SOLID TIRE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every solid tire, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, on a vehicle shall
have rubber or other resilient material on its entire traction surface at least
one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery.
(R.C. § 4513.25)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.31 REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFETY GLASS IN MOTOR VEHICLES; USE OF TINTED GLASS OR
REFLECTORIZED MATERIAL.
   (A)   Safety glass.
      (1)   No person shall sell any new motor vehicle nor shall any new motor
vehicle be registered, and no person shall operate any motor vehicle, which is
registered in this state and which has been manufactured or assembled on or
after January 1, 1936, unless the motor vehicle is equipped with safety glass,
wherever glass is used in the windshields, doors, partitions, rear windows, and
windows on each side immediately adjacent to the rear window.
      (2)   As used in this section, SAFETY GLASS means any product composed of
glass so manufactured, fabricated, or treated as substantially to prevent
shattering and flying of the glass when it is struck or broken, or such other
or similar product as may be approved by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
      (3)   Glass other than safety glass shall not be offered for sale, or
sold for use in, or installed in any door, window, partition, or windshield
that is required by this section to be equipped with safety glass.
(R.C. § 4513.26)
   (B)   Tinted or reflectorized material.
      (1)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
      (2)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle, any glass or
other material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or
of any rule adopted under that section.
      (3)   (a)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to conform
to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that
section.
         (b)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in
R.C. § 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C.
Chapter 4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to
the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.
      (4)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.
      (5)   This division (B) does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or
glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance
with or permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.
      (6)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (B) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by regular
school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a school
district. As used in this division, CHILD WITH DISABILITIES has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.
      (7)   This division (B) does not apply to any school bus that is to be
sold and operated outside the municipality.
      (8)   (a)   This division (B) does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a
law enforcement agency under either of the following circumstances:
            1.   The vehicle does not have distinctive markings of a law
enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the law enforcement
agency in an authorized investigation or other activity requiring that the
presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be undisclosed.
            2.   The vehicle primarily is used by the law enforcement canine
unit for transporting a police dog.
         (b)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1),(B)(3)(b) or (B)(4) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3)(a) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of the nonconformity
at the time of sale.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an organization may not be
convicted unless the act of installation was authorized by the board of
directors, trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer acting on behalf
of the organization, and installation was performed by an employee of the
organization acting within the scope of the person’s employment.
         (b)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section,
whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is liable in a civil action to
the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the nonconforming glass or
material for any damages incurred by that person as a result of the
installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of maintaining the
civil action, and attorney fees.
         (c)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under this section, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (B)(2) of this section and the offender is a motor vehicle repair
operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor vehicle dealer licensed
under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is
subject to a registration or license suspension, as applicable, for a period of
not more than 180 days.
(R.C. § 4513.241(K))
Statutory reference:
   Recording and reporting violations, certain court requirements, see R.C. §
4513.241(L)
   Regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 74.32 DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is equipped with
electrical or mechanical directional signals.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven cycle
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the vehicle is
equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.
   (B)   As used in this section, DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS means an electrical or
mechanical signal device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn
either to the right or to the left and which shall be visible from both the
front and rear.
   (C)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating devices when
in use at the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.261)
§ 74.33 INSTALLATION AND SALE OF SEAT SAFETY BELTS REQUIRED; DEFINITION.
   (A)   As used in this section and in R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the component parts of a seat safety belt
include a belt, anchor attachment assembly, and a buckle or closing device.
   (B)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate any passenger car, as
defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this
state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1962, unless
the passenger car is equipped with sufficient anchorage units at the attachment
points for attaching at least two sets of seat safety belts to its front seat.
Such anchorage units at the attachment points shall be of such construction,
design, and strength to support a loop load pull of not less than 4,000 pounds
for each belt.
   (C)   No person shall sell, lease, or rent any passenger car, as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this state and
that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1966, unless the
passenger car has installed in its front seat at least two seat safety belt
assemblies.
   (D)   After January 1, 1966, neither any seat safety belt for use in a motor
vehicle nor any component part of any such seat safety belt shall be sold in
this municipality unless the seat safety belt or the component part satisfies
the minimum standard of specifications established by the society of automotive
engineers for automotive seat belts and unless the seat safety belt or
component part is labeled so as to indicate that it meets those minimum
standard specifications.
   (E)   Each sale, lease, or rental in violation of this section constitutes a
separate offense.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.262)
Statutory reference:
   Child restraint systems, regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-37
§ 74.34 REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA SIGNAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor truck, bus, or commercial tractor
upon any highway at any time from sunset to sunrise unless there is carried in
such vehicle, except as provided in division (B) of this section, the following
equipment which shall be of the types approved by the Director of
Transportation.
      (1)   At least three flares or three red reflectors or three red electric
lanterns, each of which is capable of being seen and distinguished at a
distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions at nighttime;
      (2)   At least three red-burning fusees, unless red reflectors or red
electric lanterns are carried;
      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than two inches square, with
standards to support them;
      (4)   The type of red reflectors shall comply with such standards and
specifications in effect on September 16, 1963, or later established by the
Interstate Commerce Commission and must be certified as meeting such standards
by Underwriters Laboratories.
   (B)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions stated in
this section any motor vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, unless there is carried in such
vehicle three red electric lanterns or three red reflectors meeting the
requirements stated in division (A) of this section. There shall not be carried
in any such vehicle any flare, fusee, or signal produced by a flame.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person who operates any motor
vehicle in a work area designated by protection equipment devices that are
displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.
(R.C. § 4513.27)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.35 DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer, or pole trailer is disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway
and connecting, entering, or exiting ramps within the municipality, at any time
when lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the operator of such vehicle shall
display the following warning devices upon the highway during the time the
vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided in division (B) of
this section:
      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the
traffic side of such vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or red reflectors
are displayed.
      (2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly as possible,
three lighted flares or pot torches, or three red reflectors or three red
electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows:
         (a)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet in
advance of the vehicle;
         (b)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the
rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this section, each in the center of
the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle;
         (c)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a highway at
any time or place mentioned in division (A) of this section, the driver of such
vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning devices:
      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be immediately
placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle;
      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or two other red reflectors shall
be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same manner prescribed
for flares in division (A) of this section.
   (C)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) of this section is
disabled, the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by flame as warning
signals is prohibited.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled
upon any freeway, expressway, thruway, and connecting, entering, or exiting
ramps within the municipality, at any time when the display of fusees, flares,
red reflectors, or electric lanterns is not required, the operator of such
vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the lane of traffic
occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distance of 40 paces or
approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a distance of 40
paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle, except as provided
in this section.
   (E)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors, and flags to be
displayed as required in this section shall conform with the applicable
requirements of R.C. § 4513.27 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (F)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a hill, or
other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector, or lantern in that
direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the
highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or approximately
100 feet nor more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from the disabled
vehicle.
   (G)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in a work
area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and used in
accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation under
R.C. § 4511.09.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.28)
§ 74.36 REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a
highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the
rear with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or
there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than
24 inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches
high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with Section 177.823 of the
United States Department of Transportation regulations.
      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.37 STUDDED TIRES; SEASONAL USE PERMITTED.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, STUDDED TIRE means any tire designed
for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-resisting
material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the tire.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   This section does not apply to the use of tire chains when there is
snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are being used, or the
immediate vicinity thereof.
(R.C. § 5589.081)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
§ 74.38 SAFETY INSPECTION DECALS FOR BUSES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      BUS.
         (a)   Means any vehicle used for the transportation of passengers that
meets at least one of the following:
            1.   Was originally designed by the manufacturer to transport more
than 15 passengers, including the driver;
            2.   Either the gross vehicle weight rating or the gross vehicle
weight exceeds 10,000 pounds.
         (b)   The term does not include a church bus as defined in R.C. §
4503.07 or a school bus unless the church bus or school bus is used in the
transportation of passengers by a motor carrier.
         (c)   The term also does not include any of the following:
            1.   Any vehicle operated exclusively on a rail or rails;
            2.   A trolley bus operated by electric power derived from a fixed
overhead wire furnishing local passenger transportation similar to street-
railway service;
            3.   Vehicles owned or leased by government agencies or political
subdivisions.
      MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01
(R.C. § 4513.50)
   (B)   Safety inspection decals.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, on and after
July 1, 2001, no person shall operate a bus, nor shall any person being the
owner of a bus or having supervisory responsibility for a bus, permit the
operation of any bus unless the bus displays a valid, current safety inspection
decal issued by the State Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4513.52.
      (2)   For the purpose of complying with the requirements of this section
and R.C. § 4513.52, the owner or other operator of a bus may drive the bus
directly to an inspection site conducted by the State Highway Patrol and
directly back to the person’s place of business without a valid registration
and without displaying a safety inspection decal, provided that no passengers
may occupy the bus during such operation.
(R.C. § 4513.51(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4513.51(D))
§ 74.39 AIR BAGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as amended.
      COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or similar to
the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the authorization of
the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:
         (a)   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         (b)   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         (c)   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (B)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (D) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(R.C. § 4549.20)
LOADS
§ 74.50 PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCEED LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
         (a)   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.
         (b)   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of municipality except
those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the vehicle
or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
         (c)   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
      (2)   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a permit
under division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality, with respect to
highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good cause
shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a permit
issued by the Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34 may move the
vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the permit on any highway that
is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly within and
partly without the corporate limits of the municipality. No local authority
shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee or other
charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system. The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality. Permits may be issued for any period of time not to exceed
one year, as the local authority in its discretion determines advisable or for
the duration of any public construction project.
   (C)   (1)   The application for a permit issued under this section shall be
in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe a
permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued. The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed a
nondivisible load.
      (3)   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the Director
under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by a vehicle,
are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules establishing
requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially similar to the
requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter 5501:2-1.
   (D)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling permit
under division (A)(1) of this section upon application and payment of the
applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (A)(2) of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the
vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
   (E)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the vehicle
or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to inspection
by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting the permit.
No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
   (F)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
   (G)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
   (H)   (1)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to gross load limits.
      (2)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
      (3)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.
   (I)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only for
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the weight,
dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not voidable
for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the operation is
upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(R.C. § 4513.34)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
Statutory reference:
   Overweight or oversized vehicles, state permit regulations, see O.A.C.
Chapter 5501:2-1
§ 74.51 LIMITATION OF LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(R.C. § 4513.30)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.52 ALL LOADS SHALL BE PROPERLY SECURED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or
water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
(R.C. § 4513.31)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
§ 74.53 TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only
of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a
white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.    
      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and
each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a
fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which
it is being drawn. These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and
strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in
case the drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged. In case
of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and
pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in R.C. §
5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed
and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side. Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby. Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
         (a)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such
vehicle;
         (b)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage. No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 4513.32)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4513.99)
   (C)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to a any of the following:
         (a)   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         (b)   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         (c)   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (C)(1)(a) of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
§ 74.54 WEIGHING OF VEHICLE; REMOVAL OF EXCESS LOAD.
   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and its load is unlawful may require the driver of the vehicle to stop
and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact, self- contained,
portable, sealed scale specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
vehicles on highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed location,
having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the wheel
loads of highway vehicles; a sealed scale, permanently installed in a fixed
location, having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the
combined load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive axles of a
highway vehicle; or a sealed scale adapted to weighing highway vehicles, loaded
or unloaded.
   (B)   The driver of the vehicle shall, if necessary, be directed to proceed
to the nearest available sealed scales to accomplish the weighing, provided the
scales are within three miles of the point where the vehicle is stopped.
   (C)   Any vehicle stopped in accordance with this section may be held by the
police officer for a reasonable time only to accomplish the weighing as
prescribed by this section.
   (D)   All scales used in determining the lawful weight of a vehicle and its
load shall be annually compared by a municipal, county or state sealer with the
state standards or standards approved by the state, and the scales shall not be
sealed if they do not conform to the state standards or standards approved by
the state.
   (E)   At each end of a permanently installed scale, there shall be a
straight approach in the same plane as the platform, of sufficient length and
width to insure the level positioning of vehicles during weight determinations.
During determination of weight by compact, self-contained, portable, sealed
scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of vehicles on
highways, they shall always be used on a level terrain of sufficient length and
width to accommodate the entire vehicle being weighed. Such terrain shall be
level, or if not level, it shall be of such elevation that the difference in
elevation between the wheels on any one axle does not exceed two inches and the
difference in elevation between axles being weighed does not exceed one-quarter
inch per foot of the distance between such axles.
   (F)   In all determinations of all weights, except gross weight, by compact,
self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the
wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all successive axles, 12 feet or less
apart, shall be weighed simultaneously by placing one such scale under the
outside wheel of each such axle. In determinations of gross weight by the use
of compact, self-contained, portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to
determining the wheel loads of vehicles on highways, all axles shall be weighed
simultaneously by placing one such scale under the outside wheel of each axle.
   (G)   Whenever an officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines that
the weight is unlawful, he or she may require the driver to stop the vehicle in
a suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed
as is necessary to reduce the weight of the vehicle to the limit permitted
under R.C. §§ 5577.01 through 5577.14 and this chapter.
(R.C. § 4513.33)
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of weight limits, approval of Director required, see R.C. §
4513.33
§ 74.55 OPERATION OF VEHICLE EXCEEDING WEIGHT LIMITS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move a traction engine, steam roller, or
other vehicle, load, object or structure, whether propelled by muscular or
motor power, over or upon the improved public streets, highways, bridges, or
culverts in this municipality, that weighs in excess of the weights prescribed
in this subchapter or R.C. §§ 5577.01 et seq., unless the person has been
issued a permit under R.C. § 4513.34, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. The prohibition in this section applies regardless of whether the
weight is moved upon wheels, rollers, or otherwise. Any weight determination
shall include the weight of the vehicle, object, structure, contrivance, and
load.
(R.C. § 5577.02)
   (B)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be fined
$80 for the first 2,000 pounds, or fraction thereof, of overload; for overloads
in excess of 2,000 pounds, but not in excess of 5,000 pounds, such person shall
be fined $100, and in addition thereto $1 per 100 pounds of overload; for
overloads in excess of 5,000 pounds but not in excess of 10,000 pounds, such
person shall be fined $130, and in addition thereto $2 per 100 pounds of
overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both. For all overloads in
excess of 10,000 pounds, such person shall be fined $160, and in addition
thereto $3 per 100 pounds of overload, or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or
both. Whoever violates the weight provisions of vehicle and load relating to
gross load limits shall be fined not less than $100. No penalty prescribed in
this division (B)(2) shall be imposed on any vehicle combination if the
overload on any one axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds, and if the immediately
preceding or following axle, excepting the front axle of the vehicle
combination, is underloaded by the same or greater amount. For purposes of this
division (B)(2), two axles on one vehicle less than eight feet apart shall be
considered as one axle.
(R.C. § 5577.99(A))
§ 74.56 LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   Weight of load; width of tire. No person, firm or corporation shall
transport over the improved public streets, alleys, intercounty highways, state
highways, bridges or culverts in this municipality, in any vehicle propelled by
muscular, motor or other power, any burden, including weight of vehicle and
load, greater than the following:
      (1)   (a)   In vehicles having metal tires three inches or less in width,
a load of 500 pounds for each inch of the total width of the tire on all
wheels;
         (b)   When the tires on such vehicles exceed three inches in width, an
additional load of 800 pounds shall be permitted for each inch by which the
total width of the tires on all wheels exceeds 12 inches.
      (2)   In vehicles having tires of rubber or other similar substance, for
each inch of the total width of tires on all wheels, as follows:
 
Tire Width  Load Limit
(in inches) (in pounds)
3.5         450
6 and over  650
 
      (3)   The total width of tires on all wheels shall be, in the case of
solid tires of rubber or other similar substance, the actual width in inches of
all such tires between the flanges at the base of the tires, but in no event
shall that portion of tire coming in contact with the road surface be less than
two-thirds the width so measured between the flanges.
      (4)   In the case of pneumatic tires, of rubber or other similar
substance, the total width of tires on all wheels shall be the actual width of
all such tires, measured at the widest portion thereof when inflated and not
bearing a load.
      (5)   In no event shall the load, including the proportionate weight of
vehicle that can be concentrated on any wheel, exceed 650 pounds to each inch
in width of the tread as defined in this division (A) for solid tires, or each
inch in the actual diameter of pneumatic tires measured when inflated and not
bearing a load.
(R.C. § 5577.03)
   (B)   Vehicles with pneumatic tires, load limits.
      (1)   The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of any vehicle, load,
object or structure operated or moved upon improved public highways, streets,
bridges or culverts shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of pneumatic
tire, measured as prescribed by division (A) of this section.
      (2)   The weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that
is part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not
exceed any of the following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;
         (b)   On any tandem axle, 34,000 pounds;
         (c)   On any two or more consecutive axles, the maximum weight as
determined by application of the formula provided in division (B)(3) of this
section.
      (3)   (a)   For purposes of division (B)(2)(c) of this section, the
maximum gross weight on any two or more consecutive axles shall be determined
by application of the following formula:
W = 500[(LN/–1) + 12N + 36]
         (b)   In this formula, W equals the overall gross weight on any group
of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L equals the
distance in rounded whole feet between the extreme of any group of two or more
consecutive axles, and N equals the number of axles in the group under
consideration. However, two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross
load of 34,000 pounds each, provided the overall distance between the first and
last axles of such consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (B)(9) of this section, the weight
of vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that is not part of the
interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not exceed any of the
following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds.
         (b)   On any two successive axles:
            1.   Spaced four feet or less apart, and weighed simultaneously,
24,000 pounds;
            2.   Spaced more than four feet apart, and weighed simultaneously,
34,000 pounds, plus 1,000 pounds per foot or fraction thereof, over four feet,
not to exceed 40,000 pounds.
         (c)   On any three successive load-bearing axles designed to equalize
the load between such axles and spaced so that each such axle of the three-axle
group is more than four feet from the next axle in the three-axle group and so
that the spacing between the first axle and the third axle in the three-axle
group is no more than nine feet, and with such load-bearing three-axle group
weighed simultaneously as a unit:
            1.   A weight of 48,000 pounds, with the total weight of the
vehicle and load not exceeding 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900 pounds for
each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle;
            2.   As an alternative to division (B)(4)(c)1. of this section,
42,500 pounds, if part of a six-axle vehicle combination with at least 20 feet
of spacing between the front axle and rearmost axle, with the total weight of
the vehicle and load not exceeding 54,000 pounds plus an additional 600 pounds
per each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle.
         (d)   The total weight of the vehicle and load utilizing any
combination of axles, other than as provided for three-axle groups in division
(B)(4) of this section, shall not exceed 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900
pounds for each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of
the vehicle.
      (5)   Notwithstanding divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, the
maximum overall gross weight of a vehicle and load imposed upon the road
surface shall not exceed 80,000 pounds.
      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between nearest axles of the respective vehicles
to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet.
      (7)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section, TANDEM AXLE means two
or more consecutive axles whose centers may be included between parallel
transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches but not more than 96
inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.
      (8)   This division (B) does not apply to passenger bus type vehicles
operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through
306.54.
      (9)   Either division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section applies to the
weight of a vehicle and its load imposed upon any road surface that is not a
part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires. As between
divisions (B)(2) and (B)(4) of this section, only the division that yields the
highest total gross vehicle weight limit shall be applied to any such vehicle.
Once that division has been determined, only the limits contained in the
subdivisions of that division shall apply to that vehicle.
(R.C. § 5577.04)
   (C)   Axle and wheel load, gross weights and towing connection length for
solid rubber tires.
      (1)   No vehicle, load, object or structure having a maximum axle load
greater than 16,000 pounds when such vehicle is equipped with solid rubber
tires shall be operated or moved upon the improved public highways, streets,
bridges or culverts. The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of such vehicle
shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of tire, measured as prescribed by
division (A) of this section, nor shall any solid tire or rubber or other
resilient material, on any wheel of any such vehicle, be less than one inch
thick when measure from the top of the flanges of the tire channel.
      (2)   The weight of vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface by any
two successive axles, spaces four feet or less apart, shall not exceed 19,000
pounds for solid tires; or by any two successive axles spaced more than four
feet but less than eight feet apart, shall not exceed 24,000 pounds for solid
tires; or by any two successive axles, spaced eight feet or more apart, shall
not exceed 28,000 pounds for solid tires; nor shall the total weight of vehicle
and load exceed, for solid rubber tires, 28,000 pounds plus an additional 600
pounds for each foot or fraction thereof of spacing between the front axle and
the rear-most axle of the vehicle; nor shall the weight of the vehicle and load
imposed upon the road surface by any vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires
exceed 80% of the permissible weight of vehicle and load as provided for
pneumatic tires.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between the nearest axles of the respective
vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12.5 feet. If the provisions of this
division (C) are held to exceed the weight limitations or other provisions set
forth in the “Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1958", 72 Stat. 902, 23 U.S.C. § 127,
this division (C) shall become null and void to the extent of such
inconsistency.
(R.C. § 5577.041)
   (D)   Penalties.
      (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates the weight provisions of this section shall be
punished as set forth in §
74.55(B).
   (E)   Modification of load limits. The load limits established in this
section may be modified or waived upon special permission granted as provided
in R.C. § 4513.34 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 74.57 MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT, AND LENGTH.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width:
      (1)   In excess of 104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.
      (2)   In excess of 102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
such other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those
roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited
by order of the Director of Transportation.
      (3)   In excess of 132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   In excess of 102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in
width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   In excess of 102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on
such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length:
      (1)   In excess of 66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and
articulated passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit
authority pursuant to R.C. §§ 306.30 through 306.54.
      (2)   In excess of 45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   In excess of 53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state highways as
the Director designates.
      (4)   In excess of 28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor- semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   (a)   In excess of 97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route,
or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a
distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route,
or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may
include one fullmount;
         (b)   In excess of 75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   In excess of 65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (C)(3) and (C)
(4), and in division (E) below.
      (7)   In excess of 45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   In excess of 50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.
   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger- steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) through (C)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers. In special cases,
vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may operate in
accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by such department in the discharge of its
functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment.
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares.
   (H)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 5577.05)
   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.
(R.C. § 5577.06)
   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a
first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 5577.99(C))
§ 74.58 STATEMENT OF GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT.
   (A)   No person shall issue or aid in issuing any bill of lading or other
document of like nature in lieu thereof, which bill or document is to accompany
a shipment of goods or property by truck, trailer, semitrailer, commercial
tractor, or any other commercial vehicle used for the transportation of
property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, with intent
to defraud by misrepresentation thereon the weight of such goods of property to
be so transported.
   (B)   Any driver or operator of a commercial car, trailer or semitrailer may
obtain from any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association,
including the owner, lessee, or operator of such commercial car, trailer or
semitrailer, owning and operating sealed scales in this state, a written
“statement of gross vehicle weight” showing the gross weight of the vehicle
including the cargo on the vehicle, the name and address of the person issuing
the statement, and the date and place where the vehicle and its cargo were
weighed. The driver or operator of the commercial car, trailer or semitrailer
shall retain such statement of gross vehicle weight on his or her person, and
any law enforcement officer may request that such driver or operator exhibit it
to him or her. If, upon examining the statement of gross vehicle weight, the
law enforcement officer has reason to believe that the information contained
therein is correct in every respect, he or she shall indorse it with his or her
name and the date and place where it was exhibited to him or her. The law
enforcement officer may then permit such driver or operator to proceed without
weighing by a law enforcement officer. No person shall willfully issue a
written statement of gross vehicle weight and knowingly give any false
information in such statement.
(R.C. § 5577.10)
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not more
than $5,000 or imprisoned for not less than 30 days nor more than six months,
or both.
(R.C. § 5577.99(D))
§ 74.59 WHEEL PROTECTORS REQUIRED ON HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated,
any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of
goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons,
upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the
municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or
substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or
combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from
throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of following
vehicles. Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance of not more
than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost axle to the
center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the vehicle, and they
shall be at least as wide as the tires they are protecting. If the vehicle is
so designed and constructed that such requirements are accomplished by means of
fenders, body construction, or other means of enclosure, then no such
protectors or flaps are required. Rear wheels not covered at the top by
fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall be covered at the top by
protective means extending at least to the center line of the rearmost axle.
(R.C. § 5577.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $25.
(R.C. § 5577.99(E))
§ 74.60 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES; PROSECUTION; APPLICATION OF MONIES.
   Any person violating any law relating to or regulating the use of the
improved public roads shall be liable for all damage resulting to any such
street, highway, bridge or culvert by reason of such violation. In case of any
injury to such street, highway, bridge or culvert, such damages shall be
collected by civil action for recovery of such damages brought by the proper
authorities of the municipality. All damages collected under this section shall
be paid into the treasury of the municipality and credited to any fund for the
repairs of streets, highways, roads, bridges or culverts.
(R.C. § 5577.12)
§ 74.61 WEIGHT EXCEPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COAL TRUCK. Means a truck transporting coal from the site where it is
mined when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      FARM COMMODITIES. Includes livestock, bulk milk, corn, soybeans, tobacco
and wheat.
      FARM MACHINERY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
      FARM TRUCK. Means a truck used in the transportation from a farm of farm
commodities when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      LOG TRUCK. Means a truck used in the transportation of timber from the
site of its cutting when the truck is operated in accordance with this section.
      SOLID WASTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3743.01.
      SOLID WASTE HAUL VEHICLE. Means a vehicle hauling solid waste for which a
bill of lading has not been issued.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under the
described conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight provisions of
R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be imposed:
         (a)   A coal truck transporting coal, from the place of production to
the first point of delivery where title to the coal is transferred;
         (b)   A farm truck or farm machinery transporting farm commodities,
from the place of production to the first point of delivery where the
commodities are weighed and title to the commodities is transferred;
         (c)   A log truck transporting timber, from the site of its cutting to
the first point of delivery where the timber is transferred;
         (d)   A solid waste haul vehicle hauling solid waste, from the place
of production to the first point of delivery where the solid waste is disposed
of or title to the solid waste is transferred.
      (2)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of
this section and operated under the conditions described in that division does
not exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
does not exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than
7.5%, no penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.
   (C)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (B)(1) of this section and
operated under the conditions described in that division exceeds the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to
the allowance provided by this division (B) of this section:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to the operation of
a farm truck, log truck, or farm machinery transporting farm commodities during
the months of February and March.
      (2)   Regardless of when the operation occurs, division (B) of this
section does not apply to the operation of a vehicle on either of the
following:
         (a)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;
         (b)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.042)
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the following vehicles under the described
conditions may exceed by no more than 7.5% the weight provisions of R.C. §§
5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and no
penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall be imposed:
      (1)   A surface mining truck transporting minerals from the place where
the minerals are loaded to any of the following:
         (a)   The construction site where the minerals are discharged;
         (b)   The place where title to the minerals is transferred;
         (c)   The place of processing.
      (2)   A vehicle transporting hot mix asphalt material from the place
where the material is first mixed to the paving site where the material is
discharged;
      (3)   A vehicle transporting concrete from the place where the material
is first mixed to the site where the material is discharged;
      (4)   A vehicle transporting manure, turf, sod, or silage from the site
where the material is first produced to the first place of delivery;
      (5)   A vehicle transporting chips, sawdust, mulch, bark, pulpwood,
biomass, or firewood from the site where the product is first produced or
harvested to first point where the product is transferred.
   (F)   In addition, if any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this
section and operated under the conditions described in that division do not
exceed by more than 7.5% the gross vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01
to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and do not
exceed the wheel or axle-load limits of those sections by more than 7.5%, no
penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, for a wheel or axle overload shall be imposed.
   (G)   If any of the vehicles listed in division (E) of this section and
operated under the conditions described in that division exceed the weight
provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, by more than the percentage allowance of either divisions
(E) or (F) of this section, both of the following apply without regard to the
allowance provided by division (E) or (F) of this section:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (H)   Divisions (E) and (F) of this section do not apply to the operation of
a vehicle listed in division (E) of this section on either of the following:
      (1)   A highway that is part of the interstate system;
      (2)   A highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.043)
   (I)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a vehicle fueled solely by compressed natural
gas or liquid natural gas may exceed by not more than 2,000 pounds the gross
vehicle weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or the axle load limits of those sections.
   (J)   If a vehicle described in division (I) of this section exceeds the
weight provisions of R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, by more than the allowance provided for in
division (I) of this section, both of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicable penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   The civil liability imposed by R.C. § 5577.12, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (K)   Division (I) of this section does not apply to the operation of a
vehicle on a highway, road, or bridge that is subject to reduced maximum
weights under R.C. § 4513.33, 5577.07, 5577.071, 5577.08, 5577.09, or 5591.42,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 5577.044)
   (L)   Fire engine weight exemptions. 
      (1)   As used in this division (L), FIRE ENGINE means a fire engine, fire
truck, or other vehicle or apparatus belonging to or used by any municipal,
township, or volunteer fire department, while in the discharge of its
functions.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 5577.02 and 5577.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a person may do both of the following without a
written permit issued under R.C. § 4513.34, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
         (a)   Operate a two-axle fire engine, with a front axle maximum weight
of 24,000 pounds and a rear axle maximum weight of 33,500 pounds and a minimum
wheelbase of 15 feet, on all roadways in the state;
         (b)   Operate a fire engine with a maximum gross vehicle weight of
86,000 pounds on the interstate highway system and within one road mile of an
interstate highway system entrance or exit ramp.
      (3)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4513.34, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for any fire engine that requires a permit, the Ohio
Director of Transportation or local authority shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Issue the permit at no cost to the municipal, township, or
volunteer fire department;
         (b)   Issue a permit that expires five years after the date of
issuance.
(R.C. § 5577.045)
CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
75.01   Bicycles; application of Title VII
   
75.02   Operation of motorized bicycle
   
75.03   Electric bicycles
   
75.04   Rules for bicycles, motorcycles, and snowmobiles
   
75.05   Prohibition against attaching bicycles and sleds to vehicles
   
75.06   Riding bicycles; motorcycles abreast
   
75.07   Equipment of bicycles
Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and All-Purpose Vehicles
   
75.25   Definitions
   
75.26   Equipment
   
75.27   Code application; prohibited operation
   
75.28   Permitted operation
   
75.29   Licensing requirements of operator
   
75.30   Maintenance of vehicles for hire
   
75.31   Accident reports
   
75.32   Impounding of vehicle
   
75.33   Local control within police power
   
75.34   Registration of vehicles
   
75.35   Certificate of title; prohibitions
Cross-reference:
   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or utility
vehicles, see §
73.16
Statutory reference:
   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. § 4511.07(A)
(8)
   Protective eye devices required for motorcycle operators and passengers;
helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. § 4501-17-01
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 75.01 BICYCLES; APPLICATION OF TITLE VII.
   (A)   The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles and
electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle or electric bicycle is operated upon
any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this title
described in division (A) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under R.C. §
4510.036.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this title described in division (A) of this
section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator when the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to violations of
R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 4511.52)
§ 75.02 OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLE.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized bicycle
license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in this
section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license, the person
is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for in this
section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (B) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license. The test shall be as near
as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the operator to
give an actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (C)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth or eighth year after the date it is issued, based on
the period of renewal requested by the applicant. No motorized bicycle license
shall be issued for a period longer than eight years. A person who is 65 years
of age or older may only apply for a motorized bicycle license that expires on
the birthday of the applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued.
   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (A)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (B) of this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A), (D), or (E) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.521)
Statutory reference:
   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see R.C.
§ 4510.34
§ 75.03 ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (A)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (B)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (C)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
      (4)   Divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this section do not apply to a law
enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic
laws of the state, using an electric bicycle while in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (D)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (C) of this
section and whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (E)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4511.522)
§ 75.04 RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES.
   (A)   As used in this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning as given that
term in R.C. § 4519.01.
   (B)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon such bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(C)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         (b)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by R.C. § 4513.03
(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily congested roadway.
      (3)   Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)(a) of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or
(C)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.53)
§ 75.05 PROHIBITION AGAINST ATTACHING BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster,
roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self
to any vehicle upon a roadway.
      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any
bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy
vehicle to attach the same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.54)
§ 75.06 RIDING BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).
(R.C. § 4511.55)
§ 75.07 EQUIPMENT OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be
equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (A) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (D)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.56)
SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
§ 75.25 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The term
does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4501.01 or any vehicle
principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft required to be
registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter 4561, and any vehicle
excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   DEALER. Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   ELECTRONIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles designates
under R.C. § 4519.511.
   ELECTRONIC RECORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any part of the interstate system of highways as defined
in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. § 103, as amended.
   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
5511.02.
   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a
seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE. Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that
is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street or highway.
   OPERATOR. Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.
   OWNER. Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having title
to a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or other
right to the possession thereof.
   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   SNOWMOBILE. Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow or
ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
(R.C. § 4519.01)
§ 75.26 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter 119,
equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles
shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the following
items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles. On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment
specified in division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not be required
on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles operated
during the daylight hours.
(R.C. § 4519.20(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, lease, rent or otherwise furnish
for hire in this municipality any new snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle that fails to comply with any rule adopted by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4519.20 after the effective date of the
rule.
(R.C. § 4519.22(A))
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (B)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever violates division (B) of this
section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not
more than three days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.20(C))
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (C) of this section shall be fined not more than $50. If the offender
within the preceding year previously has committed a violation of division (C)
of this section or of R.C. § 4519.22(A), whoever violates this section shall be
fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned not more than three
days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.22(B))
§ 75.27 CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (A)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off- highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.40)
Cross-reference:
   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or utility
vehicles, see §
73.16
§ 75.28 PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (A)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (B)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (C)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (D)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (E)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (F)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(R.C. § 4519.41)
§ 75.29 LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid,
current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (B)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (A) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on
state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, imprisoned not less than 3 nor more than 30 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.44)
§ 75.30 MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Any dealer who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire shall maintain the vehicle
in safe operating condition. No dealer, or agent or employee of a dealer, shall
rent, lease or otherwise furnish a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle for hire to any person who does not hold a license as required
by R.C. § 4519.44(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or to
any person whom the dealer or an agent or employee of the dealer has reasonable
cause to believe is incompetent to operate the vehicle in a safe and lawful
manner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $100 nor
more than $500.
(R.C. § 4519.45)
§ 75.31 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar. If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports. In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (B)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C. §§
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(R.C. § 4519.46)
§ 75.32 IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever a person is found guilty of operating a snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle in violation of any rule authorized
to be adopted under R.C. § 4519.21 or 4519.42, the trial judge of any court of
record, in addition to or independent of any other penalties provided by law,
may impound for not less than 60 days the certificate of registration and
license plate, if applicable, of that snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle. The court shall send the impounded certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles, who shall retain the certificate of registration and license plate,
if applicable, until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
   (B)   If a court impounds the certificate of registration and license plate
of an all-purpose vehicle pursuant to R.C. § 2911.21, the court shall send the
impounded certificate of registration and license plate to the Registrar, who
shall retain them until the expiration of the period of impoundment.
(R.C. § 4519.47)
§ 75.33 LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and all-
purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power,
except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under
R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.
(R.C. § 4519.48)
§ 75.34 REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B), (C) and (D) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance with R.C. §§
4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(B)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (C)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of a state not having a registration law similar to R.C. Chapter 4519 shall
comply with R.C. § 4519.09.
   (D)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (E)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapter 1547 and R.C.
Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $100.
(R.C. § 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09
§ 75.35 CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C. Chapter 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle is a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed
in R.C. Chapter 4519.
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction or
dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
described in the certificate of title.
      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 through 4519.70 for which
no penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle
or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than $200,
imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
(R.C. § 4519.66)
Statutory reference:
   Certificate of title: rules and procedures, see R.C. §§ 4519.51 et seq.
   Stolen vehicles and restrictions on sale or transfer, felony provisions, see
R.C. § 4519.67
CHAPTER 76: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
76.01   Prohibition against parking on highways
   
76.02   Condition when motor vehicle left unattended
   
76.03   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle
   
76.04   Parking prohibitions
   
76.05   Parking near curb; privileges for persons with disabilities
   
76.06   Parking on private property in violation of posted prohibition
   
76.07   Overnight parking
   
76.08   Parking during snow emergencies
   
76.09   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
   
76.10   Truck loading zones
   
76.11   Bus stops and taxicab stands
   
76.12   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
   
76.13   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
   
76.14   Waiver
Cross-reference:
   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates, see §
138.17
Statutory reference:
   Noncriminal parking infractions, local option to create, see R.C. Chapter
4521
§ 76.01 PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon any highway, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing
any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled
part of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such
vehicle off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a
clear and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle
shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such
stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.
      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.66)
§ 76.02 CONDITION WHEN MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED.
   (A)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         (b)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is
parked;
         (c)   An emergency vehicle ;
         (d)   A public safety vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.661)
§ 76.03 POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
such officer may move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or improved
or main traveled part of such highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(R.C. § 4511.67)
§ 76.04 PARKING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control
device, in any of the following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (B) of this section;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon,
stop sign, or traffic- control device;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75
feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or thruway.
   (B)   A person is permitted, without charge or restriction, to stand or park
on a sidewalk a motor- driven cycle or motor scooter that has an engine not
larger than 150 cubic centimeters, a low-speed micromobility device, or a
bicycle or electric bicycle, provided that the motor-driven cycle, motor
scooter, low-speed micromobility device, bicycle, or electric bicycle does not
impede the normal flow of pedestrian traffic. This division does not authorize
any person to operate a vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.711, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of
the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 4511.68)
§ 76.05 PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise. Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free- moving traffic.
   (B)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle
facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the
road or highway.
         (b)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in division (C)(2) of
this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution, or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or
park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the
Director of Transportation.
   (E)   Accessible parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk shall be provided and
designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and
instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is
provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at all publicly owned parking
garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting of an elevated
sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international
symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators,
and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and R.C.
§ 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign designating an accessible parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the designated accessible parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
accessible parking locations provided under division (E) of this section, or at
accessible clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or accessible license plates;
or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability and is displaying a parking card or accessible
license plates.
         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in an accessible marked parking
location in violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section
may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law
enforcement agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so towed or
removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of
ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally
imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles. If the motor
vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until the
lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the motor vehicle and
pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for
towing and storing motor vehicles.
         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that
the person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the
person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the
person meets at least one of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)    No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to an accessible parking location
provided under division (E) of this section or at an accessible clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard or accessible license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated
by or for the transport of a person with a disability and is displaying a
parking card or accessible license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to
park for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted
by local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide
otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a
traffic hazard.
   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where accessible
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (E)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the accessible parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the
accessible locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or
movable signs.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or accessible license
plates if the parking card or accessible license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      ACCESSIBLE LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD. Mean any
license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under R.C. § 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any
substantially equivalent license plates or removable windshield placard or
temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY. Means any person who has lost the use of one or
both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or unable to move without
the aid of crutches or a wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a
permanent cardiovascular, pulmonary, or other disabling condition.
      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO WALK. Has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.
   (K)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (A) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in
division (K)(2)(a) and (K)(2)(b) of this section. Except as otherwise provided
in division (K)(2)(a) of this section, an offender who violates division (F)(1)
(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined not less than $250 nor more
than $500. An offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section shall be fined not more than $100 if the offender, prior to sentencing,
proves either of the following to the satisfaction of the court:
            1.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a removable windshield placard that then was
valid or accessible license plates that then were valid but the offender or the
person neglected to display the placard or license plates as described in
division (F)(1)(a)1. of this section.
            2.   At the time of the violation of division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section, the offender or the person for whose transport the motor vehicle was
being operated had been issued a parking card that then was valid or accessible
license plates that then were valid but the offender or the person neglected to
display the card or license plates as described in division (F)(1)(a)2. of this
section.
         (b)   In no case shall an offender who violates division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.
         (c)   An arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section does not constitute a criminal record and need
not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in response to any
inquiries contained in any application for employment, license, or other right
or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s appearance as a witness.
         (d)   The clerk of the court shall pay every fine collected under
divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to the municipality. Except as
provided in division (K)(2) of this section, the municipality shall use the
fine moneys it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to
pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the signage and notice
requirements contained in division (E) of this section. The municipality may
use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of
this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy, support, and assistive
technology programs for persons with disabilities, and for public improvements
within the municipality that benefit or assist persons with disabilities, if
governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations offer the programs.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (F)(2) of this section shall be fined not
less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender who violates
division (F)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of imprisonment. An
arrest or conviction for a violation of division (F)(2) of this section does
not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application
for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection
with the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be punished as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(4) of this section,
the offender shall be issued a warning.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (H) of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the offender shall
not be issued a warning but shall be fined not more than $25 for each parking
location that is not properly marked or whose markings are not properly
maintained.
(R.C. § 4511.69)
Cross-reference:
   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates, see §
138.17
Statutory reference:
   Buildings, access for disabled persons, see R.C. § 3781.111
§ 76.06 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY IN VIOLATION OF POSTED PROHIBITION.
   (A)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 4511.681)
§ 76.07 OVERNIGHT PARKING.
   No person shall stand or park any motor vehicle on any street within the
city between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.08 PARKING DURING SNOW EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   In order to facilitate the cleaning of certain streets and to expedite
the free flow of vehicular traffic, motor vehicles shall not be parked on all
streets of the city at such times as the United States Weather Bureau records
indicate that three inches of snow have fallen and there is a prospect of a
further snowfall. All cars parked prior to the time weather conditions prohibit
parking must be removed by the owner or operator thereof. Any motor vehicle
parked in violation of the prohibition shall be removed at the order of the
Administrative Officer and/or the Chief of Police and shall subject the owner
or operator to the fines provided herein.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owners or operators of motor
vehicles to ascertain whether weather conditions require the removal of their
motor vehicles from any city street and to remove all cars parked in violation
of the provisions of this chapter. While the city will make every effort to
inform the public of the existence of weather conditions requiring removal of
parked automobiles from city streets, the owners and operators of motor
vehicles shall have full responsibility to determine existing weather
conditions and to remove parked automobiles if weather conditions are such as
to require their removal under the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   After the United States Weather Bureau records indicate that three
inches of snow have fallen and there is a prospect of further snowfall, the
Administrative Officer and/or the Chief of Police shall order the removal of
all vehicles parked on city streets which have not been removed by the owners
or operators. Such vehicles shall be removed to a motor vehicle pound as
designated by such officer and records of all vehicles removed shall be kept in
the traffic section of the Division of Police.
   (D)   No person shall violate any of the provisions of this section with
respect to failure to remove parked motor vehicles, when the weather conditions
described in this section require its removal. Failure of an owner or operator
to remove his or her motor vehicle from any city street during the snow
emergency parking ban shall subject the vehicle to a snow ban parking citation
of $20. The citation does not exclude the motor vehicle from being towed, if
conditions warrant. In addition to the penalties provided herein, when a motor
vehicle is towed to a motor vehicle pound, the motor vehicle can be removed
only upon the payment of the towing and storage charges involved.
   (E)   The Administrative Officer and/or the Chief of Police shall use all
available means of disseminating information as to the existence of weather
conditions requiring the removal of parked motor vehicles from the city
streets. Such notice shall be disseminated through the radio, newspaper and all
other available media to the extent feasible. The dissemination of the
information, however, shall not relieve owners or operators of motor vehicles
from the responsibility of ascertaining the existence of weather conditions
requiring the removal of parked motor vehicles from all city streets.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.09 SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.10 TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.11 BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (B)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (C)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of such
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (D)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.12 PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic
control signal.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.13 REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such
ownership.
§ 76.14 WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for such alleged violation. Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
CHAPTER 77: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
      
I.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   The city is hereby authorized and directed to post signs on the roads set
forth giving notice of the authorized speed.
 
Road                   Restricted Area         Speed Limit Ord.    Passage Date
Comet Road             From Grove Road west to 40 mph      05-40   4-6-2005
                       the Clinton line
                       From the Stark County
Kepler Road            line north to Comet     35 mph      10-O-03 12-1-2010
                       Road
Manchester Road (State From Stark County north 45 mph      05-40   4-6-2005
Route 93)              to Yager Road
                       From Serfass Road north
Taylor Road            to the city line north  35 mph      05-40   4-6-2005
                       of Vanderhoof Road
                       From the Clinton line
Van Buren Road         north to the Barberton  40 mph      05-40   4-6-2005
                       line
                       From Manchester Road
Vanderhoof Road        west to Cleveland       40 mph      05-40   4-6-2005
                       Massillon Road
 
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   NOISE
      
91.   WEEDS
      
92.   SPECIAL EVENTS
      
93.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
94.   SMOKING PROHIBITIONS
      
95.   CEMETERY RULES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90: NOISE
Section
   
90.01   Noisy advertising
   
90.02   Noisy machinery
   
90.03   Noise-producing instruments
   
90.04   Noise-producing vehicles
   
90.05   Sound amplifying devices
   
90.06   Noisy animals
   
90.07   Time limitations
   
90.08   Violation
   
90.09   Excessive idling
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 NOISY ADVERTISING.
   No person shall, by ringing a bell or gong, or by using phonograph or other
instrument for producing or reproducing sounds, or by using loud or boisterous
language or by any unusual or unreasonable noise, advertise goods, wares or
other merchandise for sale, either at auction or in any other manner, or by any
such means advertise any show, theater, exhibition or entertainment to the
annoyance and discomfort of persons of ordinary sensibilities.
(Ord. 05-65, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 19-O-09, passed 7-3-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 NOISY MACHINERY.
   No person shall maintain, run or operate any steam, gas, gasoline or other
engine, boiler, press, machine or other apparatus so constructed or operated as
to make excessive noise, to the annoyance and discomfort of persons of ordinary
sensibilities.
(Ord. 05-65, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 19-O-09, passed 7-3-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 NOISE-PRODUCING INSTRUMENTS.
   The use of any device, apparatus, radio ticker or other noise-making and
noise-emitting device for general advertising purposes, or for the purpose of
soliciting trade or attracting attention to any wares, goods, merchandise,
instrument or device offered for sale is prohibited.
(Ord. 05-65, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 19-O-09, passed 7-3-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.04 NOISE-PRODUCING VEHICLES.
   No person shall operate on private property or permit to be operated on
private property a snowmobile, all-purpose vehicle, off-highway motorcycle or
other similar vehicles which creates such a noise, smoke or dust, as to cause
inconvenience, annoyance or discomfort to any person of ordinary sensibilities.
(Ord. 05-65, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 19-O-09, passed 7-3-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.05 SOUND AMPLIFYING DEVICES.
   No person shall generate or permit to be generated an unreasonable noise or
sound which is likely to cause inconvenience or annoyance to a person of
ordinary sensibilities by means of a radio, phonograph, television, tape
player, loud speaker or any other sound amplifying device, or by any horn,
drum, piano or any other musical or percussion instrument. This section is not
intended to apply to any person, association, firm or corporation who operates,
pursuant to a permit or license issued by a governmental agency, a restaurant,
hotel, summer garden or other place of refreshment or entertainment in the
municipality.
(Ord. 05-65, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 14-O-01, passed 5-21-2014; Ord. 19-O-09,
passed 7-3-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 NOISY ANIMALS.
   No person shall keep, harbor or maintain any animal out of doors within the
municipality which, by loud, frequent or habitual barking, yelping or howling,
disturbs the peaceful living of any person or makes such a noise as is likely
to cause inconvenience or annoyance to persons of ordinary sensibilities. This
section is not intended to apply to any person, association, firm or
corporation who keeps, harbors or maintains livestock animals as part of a farm
or other agricultural business.
(Ord. 05-65, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 19-O-09, passed 7-3-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 TIME LIMITATIONS.
   It is prima facie unlawful for a person to generate or permit to be
generated sound in violation of §§
90.01 through
90.06 between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day in a
predominantly residential area where the sound is audible ten feet from the
property line on which the source of the sound is located.
(Ord. 05-65, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 19-O-09, passed 7-3-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 VIOLATION.
   No person, being the owner or person in possession of a premises, or being
the person in control of the premises by reason of employment, agency or
otherwise, whether such ownership, possession, or control is exclusive or
joint, shall permit a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-65, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 19-O-09, passed 7-3-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.09 EXCESSIVE IDLING.
   Except as provided in division (D) of this section:
   (A)   The owner or operator of a vehicle shall not cause or allow a vehicle
to idle for more than five minutes;
   (B)   The owner or operator of a vehicle that is loading or unloading at a
loading dock or loading/unloading area, and the owner or operator of the
loading dock or loading/unloading area, shall not cause or allow a vehicle to
idle in that loading/unloading area for more than ten minutes;
   (C)   As used in this section, VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4511.01; and
   (D)   The provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not apply
when:
      (1)   The outdoor temperature is below 32°F or above 85°F, provided
idling under these circumstances shall be limited to 20 minutes;
      (2)   To prevent a safety or health emergency, a vehicle is idling when
operating defrosters, heaters, or air conditioners, or when installing
equipment;
      (3)   A vehicle idles while forced to remain motionless because of on-
highway traffic, an official traffic control device or signal, or the direction
of a law enforcement official;
      (4)   A police, fire, ambulance, public safety, military, other emergency
law enforcement vehicle or any vehicle being used in an emergency capacity, is
idling while in an emergency or training mode, or to maintain communications or
other essential on board equipment, and not solely for the convenience of the
vehicle operator;
      (5)   The primary propulsion engine is idling for maintenance, servicing,
repair or diagnostic purposes if idling is required for such activity, or is
idling as part of a state or federal inspection to verify that all equipment is
in good working order, provided idling is required as part of the inspection;
      (6)   Idling of the primary propulsion engine is necessary to power work-
related mechanical. or electrical operations other than propulsion (e.g.,
mixing or processing cargo or straight truck refrigeration). This exemption
does not apply when idling for cabin comfort or to operate non-essential on-
board equipment;
      (7)   An armored vehicle is idling when a person remains inside the
vehicle to guard the contents, or while the vehicle is being loaded or
unloaded;
      (8)   A vehicle is idling due to mechanical difficulties over which the
driver has no control; and
      (9)   A vehicle is idling while actively engaged in work upon the surface
of a street or highway, including construction, cleaning and snow removal
activities, and the operator is in the vehicle.
(Ord. 19-O-09, passed 7-3-2019) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor for a first offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for each
subsequent offense.
(Ord. 05-65, passed 10-5-2005; Ord. 19-O-09, passed 7-3-2019)
CHAPTER 91: WEEDS
Section
   
91.01   Offensive grass and weeds defined
   
91.02   Removal of offensive weeds and grass by owner
   
91.03   Exemptions
   
91.04   Procedure for removal by city
   
91.05   Procedure upon failure to comply with notice
   
91.06   Costs as lien
§ 91.01 OFFENSIVE GRASS AND WEEDS DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OFFENSIVE WEEDS AND GRASS. Weeds and grass that have attained a height of
over eight inches.
(Ord. 05-64, passed 9-7-2005)
§ 91.02 REMOVAL OF OFFENSIVE WEEDS AND GRASS BY OWNER.
   (A)   No owner or person in possession or control of any lot or parcel of
land situated within the city, whether the same is improved or unimproved,
vacant or occupied, shall fail to keep such lot or parcel of land, or any
public right of way abutting such lot or parcel of land, free from all
offensive weeds and grass.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator may exempt lots or parcels of land of five
acres or more in size, either in whole or in part, from the requirements of
this section.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator shall cause an annual notice to be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the city notifying residents of the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 05-64, passed 9-7-2005) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.03 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   In order to retain certain properties in their natural states, parks,
greenways, street rights-of-way and streambeds or banks are exempt from the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Heavily wooded lots or areas that are densely wooded with trees,
shrubs or overgrowth where equipment cannot maneuver because of the density of
the area, are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   Steep slopes that are covered with low growing vegetation for the
purpose of conservation or to prevent erosion are exempt from the requirements
of this chapter.
   (D)   The city recognizes that the use of wildflowers and other native
plants in managed landscape design can be economical, low-maintenance,
effective in soil and water conservation, and may avoid the excessive use of
pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers. The desirable aspects of permitting and
encouraging managed natural vegetation must be balanced against preventing
public nuisances and maintaining public health, safety and welfare. Therefore,
the requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the managed growth of
wildflowers and vegetation native to the state. This exception applies only to
managed growth and shall not apply where plant growth provides either a direct
health hazard or a demonstrated breeding ground for fauna known to create a
safety or health hazard. The term MANAGED as used here means a planned and
designed yard or landscape with the intent to control, direct and maintain the
growth of natural vegetation.
(Ord. 05-64, passed 9-7-2005)
§ 91.04 PROCEDURE FOR REMOVAL BY CITY.
   (A)   Upon receipt of information that offensive weeds or grass, as defined
in §
91.01, are growing or present on a lot or parcel of land within the city, the
Zoning Administrator is authorized to determine if in fact such offensive weeds
or grass are growing or present. After a determination had been made that such
offensive weeds or grass are growing or present, it shall be the duty of the
Zoning Administrator to cause written notice to be served upon the owner or
person in possession or control of such lot or parcel of land that the
offensive weeds or grass must be cut and destroyed and that such destruction
must be completed within ten days after service of the notice.
   (B)   If the owner or person in possession or control of such lot or parcel
of land is a nonresident whose address is known, such notice shall be sent to
his or her address by certified mail.
   (C)   If the address of the owner or person in possession or control of such
lot or parcel of land is unknown, or if service by ordinary mail pursuant to
division (A) of this section is incomplete, it shall be sufficient for the
Zoning Administrator to publish a notice of violation once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the city.
   (D)   Only one notice per calendar year under divisions (A) and (B) of this
section is required for a lot or parcel of land. If, after a notice has been
served in accordance with this division (D), the Zoning Administrator
determines that a subsequent violation has occurred, the city may proceed with
the remedy set forth in §
91.05.
   (E)   The owner or person in possession or control of property determined by
the Zoning Administrator to be in violation of this chapter may appeal that
determination to the Mayor. The appeal must be made in writing and must be
delivered to the city’s Zoning Department within ten days after notice is
perfected pursuant to this section. Upon receipt of an appeal request, the
Mayor shall conduct a hearing as soon as practicable to review the Zoning
Administrator determination. The decision of the Mayor shall be made in writing
and sent to the appealing party by regular mail. Any further appeals by the
owner or person in possession or control shall be made in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 05-64, passed 9-7-2005)
§ 91.05 PROCEDURE UPON FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH NOTICE.
   (A)   If the owner or person in possession or control of such lot or parcel
of land, as provided in §
91.02(A) fails to comply with the notice within ten days, the Zoning
Administrator shall cause written notice to be served upon such owner or person
in possession or control that the city will order the destruction of the
offensive weeds or grass and shall require the owner or person in possession or
control to reimburse the city for all expenses incurred in connection with the
destruction of such weeds or grass.
   (B)   After serving notice of the city’s intentions, the Zoning
Administrator shall cause the offensive weeds or grass to be cut and destroyed
and may employ the necessary labor to perform the task.
   (C)   Upon performance of the labor mentioned in division (B) above, the
Zoning Administrator shall bill the owner or person in possession or control of
the lot or parcel of land for the cost of cutting and destroying the weeds,
including therein the costs of inspection, record research, notification and
billing. A schedule of such costs shall be on file in the Zoning
Administrator’s office.
(Ord. 05-64, passed 9-7-2005)
§ 91.06 COSTS AS LIEN.
   (A)   If the bill is not paid withing 30 days or if the address of the owner
or person in possession or control is not known, the Zoning Administrator shall
refer the matter to the Clerk/Treasurer, including a statement of all charges
for the city services, the amount paid for the performance of the labor and the
fees of the officers who made the service of the notice and return.
   (B)   Upon receipt of such statement of expenses incurred, the Clerk/
Treasurer shall make written return to the Auditor of the county of the action
taken pursuant to this section, with a statement of the charges for the city’s
services, the amount paid for the performance of the labor, the fees of the
officers who made the service of the notice and return, and a proper
description of the premises, to be entered upon the tax duplicate of the county
for the purpose of making the same a lien upon such lands, to be collected as
other taxes and returned to the city with the General Fund in accordance with
R.C. § 731.54.
(Ord. 05-64, passed 9-7-2005)
CHAPTER 92: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
92.01   Special event definition
   
92.02   Permit required
   
92.03   Permit applications
   
92.04   Police protection
   
92.05   Emergency medical protection
   
92.06   Other city personnel
   
92.07   Permit conditions
   
92.08   Standards for issuance
   
92.09   Notice of issuance or denial
   
92.10   Revocation of permit
§ 92.01 SPECIAL EVENT DEFINITION.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      SPECIAL EVENT. Any event that a sponsoring individual or organization
wishes to conduct and promote within the municipal limits. Events include, but
are not necessarily limited to, races, walks, bicycle events, parades,
carnivals, festivals, fireworks displays, concerts and car shows.
   (B)   This special event definition is not intended to apply to events such
as graduation parties, birthday parties, anniversary parties or similar
activities that do not involve the need for city safety forces or other
municipal support. However, if an event will have an impact on public roads or
normal travel within the city limits, then a special event permit will be
necessary. By way of example only, a neighborhood block party that involves the
closing of public roads would require a special event permit.
   (C)   This special event definition is not intended to apply to events held
entirely on the grounds of Craftsman Park, the Rotary Camp, Portage Lakes State
Park, city parks, any public or private school property, any city church
property or any city business when the event does not involve the need for city
safety forces or other municipal support and does not have an impact on public
roads or normal travel within city limits.
(Ord. 12-O-02, passed 6-20-2012)
§ 92.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit is required for any special event conducted wholly, or in
part, within the municipal limits. The purpose of the special event permit is
to provide the city with adequate information and time to provide for
appropriate emergency provisions or other municipal support if needed.
   (B)   A special event permit application form shall be adopted by the
Director of Public Service and is to be provided to all individuals or
organizations who want to conduct a special event in the city. No organizer of
a special event shall promote or conduct a special event without first having
obtained a permit.
   (C)   Any event sponsored solely by the city is exempt from the permit
requirement and process.
(Ord. 12-O-02, passed 6-20-2012)
§ 92.03 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The individual or organization requesting the special event permit
shall file an application on the form provided by the city not less than 90
days nor more than one year before the date on which the special event is to be
conducted. The Director of Public Service, where good cause is shown, shall
have the authority to consider any application which is filed less than 90 days
before the date the special event is proposed to be conducted.
   (B)   The individual or organization requesting the special event permit
shall pay a fee of $50 along with the application. For events that the city has
agreed to co-sponsor, the Mayor shall have the authority to waive the
application fee.
(Ord. 12-O-02, passed 6-20-2012)
§ 92.04 POLICE PROTECTION.
   The Director of Public Service, along with the Police Chief, shall determine
whether, and to what extent, police protection is reasonably necessary for the
event for purposes of traffic control and public safety. This decision shall be
based on the size, location, duration, time and date of the event, the expected
sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets, sidewalks and
intersections, if any, to be blocked, and the need to detour or pre-empt
ordinary citizen travel and use of the streets and sidewalks. If police
protection for the event is deemed necessary by the Director of Public Service
and the Police Chief, they shall inform the applicant for the permit. The
applicant then shall have the duty to secure the police protection deemed
necessary by the Director of Public Service and the Police Chief at the sole
expense of the applicant.
(Ord. 12-O-02, passed 6-20-2012)
§ 92.05 EMERGENCY MEDICAL PROTECTION.
   The Director of Public Service, along with the Fire Chief, shall determine
whether, and to what extent, emergency medical personnel and equipment is
reasonably necessary for the event for purposes of public safety. This decision
shall be based on the size, location, duration, time and date of the event, and
the expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages. If emergency medical
personnel or equipment for the event is deemed necessary by the Director of
Public Service and the Fire Chief, they shall inform the applicant for the
permit. The applicant then shall have the duty to secure the emergency medical
personnel and equipment deemed necessary by the Director of Public Service and
the Fire Chief at the sole expense of the applicant.
(Ord. 12-O-02, passed 6-20-2012)
§ 92.06 OTHER CITY PERSONNEL.
   Applicants shall pay the cost of city personnel who are required by the city
to work overtime hours or other than regular shift hours during, or as a result
of, the special event.
(Ord. 12-O-02, passed 6-20-2012)
§ 92.07 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   Any special event permit granted under this chapter may contain conditions
reasonably calculated to reduce or minimize any inconvenience or danger to the
health, safety, tranquility or welfare of the general public. The conditions
may include, but are not limited to, changes in time, duration, number of
participants or sound emanating from the event.
(Ord. 12-O-02, passed 6-20-2012)
§ 92.08 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   A permit shall be issued by the Director of Public Service when, after
consideration of the application and from such other information that may
otherwise be obtained, the Director of Public Service finds that all of the
following circumstances exist:
   (A)   The applicant has not knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statements of material fact in the application for a permit or in
any other documents required pursuant to the permit process;
   (B)   The applicant has met the standards in this chapter and has agreed to
pay any costs and fees required and has agreed to any conditions that are
imposed on the permit;
   (C)   The time, duration and size of the event will not substantially
disrupt the orderly and safe movement of other traffic;
   (D)   The event is of a size or nature such that it will not require the
diversion of so great a number of police officers so as to prevent normal
police protection to the city;
   (E)   The concentration of persons will not unduly interfere with proper
police and fire protection of, or ambulance service, to areas contiguous to the
special event;
   (F)   The event will not interfere with the movement of firefighting
equipment en route to a fire;
   (G)   The event will not unduly interfere with the orderly operation of
churches, schools or other public and quasi-public institutions in the city;
   (H)   The applicant has provided reasonable means for informing all persons
participating in the special event of the terms and conditions of the permit
and the laws applicable to the event; and
   (I)   The event will not conflict with, or interfere with, another special
event for which a permit has been granted.
(Ord. 12-O-02, passed 6-20-2012)
§ 92.09 NOTICE OF ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   Written notice of the issuance or denial of a special event permit shall be
provided within 30 days of receipt of an application, or as soon as
practicable, if received less than 90 days in advance of the proposed date of
the event.
(Ord. 12-O-02, passed 6-20-2012)
§ 92.10 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   Any permit for a special event issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked by the Director of Public Service at any time when, by reason of
emergency, disaster, calamity, disorder, riot, traffic conditions, violation of
this chapter or of any permit conditions or undue burden on public services,
the Director of Public Service determines that the health, safety, tranquility
and welfare of the public requires such revocation.
(Ord. 12-O-02, passed 6-20-2012)
CHAPTER 93: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
93.01   Permit fees for athletic fields
§ 93.01 PERMIT FEES FOR ATHLETIC FIELDS.
   The City Council hereby establishes permit fees for the use of city athletic
fields.
Activity Fee
Activity                                               Fee
Baseball/Softball                                       
   Community Teams (80% of rosters reside in the cit 
      Regular league schedule                    $2,000
      Tournaments with outside teams             $250 for both complexes
      Fall leagues                               $5 per field per game
   Non-Community Teams
      Regular league schedule                    $15 per field per game
      Tournaments with outside teams             $250 per complex
   Individual Teams                                 $25 per field per game
   City School Teams                                $10 per field per game
   Field maintenance: The city will drag but not line each field at the
beginning of each day. Further service during the day of the event is
available at a cost to be agreed upon. Other than city employees, no motorized
equipment may be used on the fields during rentals.
Football                                                
   Community Teams (80% of rosters reside in the cit 
      Regular league schedule                    $2,000
Soccer                                                  
   Community Teams (80% of rosters reside in the cit$10 per player
   Non-Community Teams                              $15 per player
 
(Res. 18-R-23, passed 5-16-2018)
CHAPTER 94: SMOKING PROHIBITIONS
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Smoking prohibitions
   
94.03   Restrictions on smoking on city owned property
   
94.04   Areas where smoking is not regulated
   
94.05   Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking
   
94.06   Posting of signs; prohibition of ashtrays; responsibilities of
proprietors
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ENCLOSED AREA. An area with a roof or other overhead covering of any kind
and walls or side coverings of any kind, regardless of the presence of openings
for ingress and egress, on all sides or on all sides but one.
   OUTDOOR PATIO. An area that is either: Enclosed by a roof or other overhead
covering and walls or side coverings on not more than two sides; or has no roof
or other overhead covering regardless of the number of walls or other side
coverings.
   PROPRIETOR. An employer, owner, manager, operator, liquor permit holder, or
person in charge or control of a public place.
   PUBLIC PLACE. An enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which
the public is permitted and that is not a private residence.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail establishment that derives more than 80% of
its gross revenue from the sale of lighted or heated tobacco products and
related smoking accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental. RETAIL TOBACCO STORE does not include a tobacco department or
section of a larger commercial establishment or of any establishment with a
liquor permit or of any restaurant.
   RETAIL VAPOR STORE. A retail establishment that derives more than 80% of its
gross revenue from the sale of vapor products, electronic smoking devices, or
other electronic smoking product accessories and for which the sale of other
products is merely incidental. RETAIL VAPOR STORE does not include a section of
a larger commercial establishment or of an establishment with a liquor license
or that is a restaurant.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated
tobacco product or plant product intended for inhalation in any manner or in
any form. SMOKING includes the use of an electronic smoking device and a vapor
product. SMOKING does not include the burning of incense in a religious
ceremony.
   VAPOR PRODUCT and ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2927.02.
(Ord. 05-118, passed 1-18-2006)
§ 94.02 SMOKING PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No proprietor of a public place, except as permitted in § 94.03, shall
permit smoking in the public place or in the areas directly or indirectly under
the control of the proprietor immediately adjacent to locations of ingress or
egress to the public place.
   (B)   A proprietor of a public place shall ensure that tobacco smoke does
not enter any area in which smoking is prohibited under this chapter through
entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means.
   (C)   No person shall refuse to immediately discontinue smoking in a public
place, or establishment, facility or outdoor area declared nonsmoking under §
94.05 when requested to do so by the proprietor or any employee of an employer
of the public place, place of employment or establishment, facility or outdoor
area.
   (D)   Lack of intent to violate a provision of this chapter shall not be a
defense to a violation.
(Ord. 05-118, passed 1-18-2006)  Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 RESTRICTIONS ON SMOKING ON CITY OWNED PROPERTY.
   Except in designated smoking areas, smoking is prohibited on any city
property and in any city building or portion thereof.
(Ord. 05-118, passed 1-18-2006) Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 AREAS WHERE SMOKING IS NOT REGULATED.
   The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Private residences, except during the hours of operation as a child
care or adult care facility for compensation, during the hours of operation as
a business by a person other than a person residing in the private residence,
or during the hours of operation as a business, when employees of the business,
who are not residents of the private residence or are not related to the owner,
are present.
   (B)   Any nursing home, as defined in division (A) of R.C. § 3721.10, but
only to the extent necessary to comply with division (A)(18) of R.C. § 3721.13.
If indoor smoking area is provided by a nursing home for residents of the
nursing home, the designated indoor smoking area shall be separately enclosed
and separately ventilated so that tobacco smoke does not enter, through
entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means, any areas where
smoking is otherwise prohibited under this chapter. Only residents of the
nursing home may utilize the designated indoor smoking area for smoking. A
nursing home may designate specific times when the indoor smoking area may be
used for such purpose. No employee of a nursing home shall be required to
accompany a resident into a designated indoor smoking area or perform services
in such area when being used for smoking.
   (C)   Any retail tobacco store if located in a freestanding structure
occupied solely by the business and smoke from the business does not migrate
into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this
chapter.
   (D)   Outdoor patios. All outdoor patios shall be physically separated from
an enclosed area. If windows or doors form any part of the partition between an
enclosed area and the outdoor patio, the openings shall be closed to prevent
the migration of smoke into the enclosed area. If windows or doors do not
prevent the migration of smoke into the enclosed area, the outdoor patio shall
be considered an extension of the enclosed area and subject to the prohibitions
of this chapter.
   (E)   Private clubs as defined in division (B)(13) of R.C. § 4301.01,
provided all of the following apply: The club is organized as a not-for-profit
entity; only members of the club are present in the club's building; no persons
under the age of 18 are present in the club's building; the club is located in
a freestanding structure occupied solely by the club; smoke from the club does
not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under the
provisions of this chapter; and, if the club serves alcohol, it holds a valid
D4 liquor permit.
   (F)   A retail vapor store, insofar as the provisions of this chapter apply
to smoking via vapor products and electronic smoking devices. The provisions of
this chapter apply to retail vapor stores with regard to all other forms of
smoking.
(Ord. 05-118, passed 1-18-2006)  Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 DECLARATION OF ESTABLISHMENT AS NONSMOKING.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the owner, manager,
operator, or other person in charge or control of an establishment, facility,
or outdoor area which does not otherwise qualify as a public place or place of
employment may declare such establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a
nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place declared nonsmoking
under this section where a sign conforming to the requirements of §
94.06 is posted.
(Ord. 05-118, passed 1-18-2006)  Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 POSTING OF SIGNS; PROHIBITION OF ASHTRAYS; RESPONSIBILITIES OF
PROPRIETORS.
   In addition to the prohibitions contained in §
94.02, the proprietor of a public place or place of employment shall comply
with the following requirements:
   (A)   "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a
red circle with a red bar across it) shall be conspicuously posted in every
public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this
chapter, including at each entrance to the public place or place of employment.
Signs shall be of sufficient size to be clearly legible to a person of normal
vision throughout the areas they are intended to mark. All signs shall contain
a telephone number for reporting violations.
   (B)   All ashtrays and other receptacles used for disposing of smoking
materials shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this
chapter.
(Ord. 05-118, passed 1-18-2006)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or possess lighted
smoking material in any area restricted by the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Each day on which a violation of any provision of this chapter
occurs is a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable as such.
   (B)   Whoever violates §
94.02 shall be fined as follows:
      (1)   For the first offense: $25;
      (2)   For the second offense: $50; and
      (3)   For each offense thereafter: $100.
CHAPTER 95: CEMETERY RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
95.01   Introduction
   
95.02   Purchasing and deeds
   
95.03   General rules
   
95.04   Hours of operation
   
95.05   Interments
   
95.06   Foundations, monuments, markers, and gravestones
   
95.07   Monument, base, and foundation specifications
   
95.08   Flowers, plants and adornments
   
95.09   Responsibility of maintenance
   
95.10   Indigent cremation
   
95.11   Disinterment
   
95.12   Enactment
   
95.13   Fee schedule
§ 95.01 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   Manchester, Grill and Kyser Cemeteries are tax supported, owned and
operated by the City of New Franklin.
   (B)   Manchester Cemetery located at 1030 West Nimisila Road, is the city's
largest cemetery located on 8.93 acres, just 1/8-mile west of the intersection
of West Nimisila and Manchester Road. One of the oldest sections of this
cemetery was donated by Mr. Jacob Balmer for the burial of his wife, in 1815.
Mrs. Balmer had passed away after having been bitten by a rattlesnake. In the
years since, the city has acquired several adjacent properties to enlarge the
cemetery. The most recent addition is the former site of the Lutheran Church -
one of the city’s earliest landmarks - built in 1880 and lost to a fire in
1992.
   (C)   Kyser Cemetery located at 1418 Swigart Road was purchased on November
28, 1861, from John and Rebecca Kyser. The Kyser Family was paid the sum of
$.25 for the Kyser Burial Ground. Situated near Tweed Lake Estates, this
historic, 0.45-acre cemetery is closed to all burials, and graves are no longer
available for purchase.
   (D)   Grill Cemetery located at 6395 South Cleveland-Massillon Road, is on
one acre of land.
   (E)   Any additional structure or space will be subject to new rules and
regulations outlined at the time of completion.
§ 95.02 PURCHASING AND DEEDS.
   (A)   All cemetery land is property of the City of New Franklin. Cemetery
deeds convey the right to use a portion of the land for graves. A cemetery deed
does not grant ownership of property, nor is it a deed of conveyance in fee
simple. Instead, it is an easement for the purpose of burial only. The city
issues a deed in which the grant of rights is made to the grave holder, subject
to the rules and regulations existing at the time of the purchase of the deed,
as well as any subsequent changes thereafter. As part of the agreement to
purchase from the city, grave holders, and the parties for whom they have
responsibility, have agreed to comply with all rules and regulations
established by the city.
   (B)   Deeds are issued by the city. Each grave shall be issued a separate
deed. The deed to all graves will be issued in the name of natural persons
only. Business names and trusts are strictly prohibited on the deed of any
grave.
   (C)   No more than ten graves shall be sold to any legal resident of New
Franklin and no more than five graves shall be sold to any non-resident. The
purchase of a grave for a non-resident at resident pricing is strictly
prohibited. At no time shall any graves be purchased for resale with intent to
profit.
   (D)   Inherited and previously purchased graves cannot be exchanged for any
other grave location.
   (E)   The city reserves the right to repurchase any grave from the grave
holder, at any time, at the current price. Graves may be donated back to the
city at will.
   (F)   Under the following circumstances a deed transfer may be issued by the
Service Director or Deputy Service Director: Inheritance, gift, or private
sale. The original deed may be required to be presented to an authorized
representative of the city prior to the transfer and may be subject to a deed
transfer fee. See §
95.13 for details.
   (G)   In the event of inheritance, the heir or executor must contact the
Service Department. A new deed may be issued upon the receipt of appropriate
documentation or the order by the Probate Court.
   (H)   In the event of a private sale, the grave holder may determine the
purchase price. For any private sale or gift, the grave holder must notify the
city for a transfer of the deed.
   (I)   In the event of deed transfer from a resident to a non-resident, both
the standard and resident-to-non-resident fees shall apply to each grave. See §
95.13 for details.
   (J)   To purchase a grave please contact the Service Department at
330.882.3824.
§ 95.03 GENERAL RULES.
   (A)   All rules and regulations defined herein will apply uniformly.
   (B)   All cemetery property is sacred ground devoted to the burial of loved
ones. A respectful atmosphere shall be maintained at all times. For the mutual
protection of every grave holder these rules and regulations have been
established as the guiding elements of the operation of Manchester, Grill and
Kyser Cemeteries. It is expected that these rules will be duly appreciated and
respected.
   (C)   The city reserves the right at any time to change, amend, alter,
repeal, rescind or adopt new rules and regulations with respect to the
cemeteries.
   (D)   The following actions are strictly prohibited within the city’s
cemeteries and are subject to prosecution according to law:
      (1)   Presence on cemetery property outside of normal visitation hours
without reasonable cause or permission from the Deputy Service Director.
      (2)   Playing, loitering, or parking any vehicle without official
business in the cemetery.
      (3)   Parking or driving vehicles on grass.
      (4)   Speeds exceeding five miles per hour within the cemetery.
      (5)   Picking or cutting of any flowers or plants not owned by the
individual.
      (6)   Damaging, defacing, removing, sitting, or standing on any monument,
headstone, or equipment.
      (7)   Performing any act of disrespect to property or object displayed in
memory of the deceased.
      (8)   Pets of any kind.
§ 95.04 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   The hours of the cemetery grounds are dawn to dusk daily. The Service
Department office hours are Monday through Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
   (B)   All services must arrive at the cemetery prior to the indicated time.
 
AVAILABLE SERVICE TIMES
Standard Graveside Services  Monday - Friday 8:00 a.m. - 1:00 p.m.
Afternoon Services           Monday - Friday 1:01 p.m. - 4:00 p.m.
Weekend Services             Saturdays       8:00 a.m. - 1:00 p.m.
Weekend - Afternoon Services Saturdays       1:01 p.m. - 4:00 p.m.
 
   (C)   Afternoon and weekend services are subject to additional fees. See §
95.13 for details.
   (D)   Multiple burials outside of standard operating hours will be charged
independently.
   (E)   No interments shall take place on Sundays, any holiday, or the day
after Thanksgiving. An exception may be made if ordered by the Board of Health
or other governing body.
§ 95.05 INTERMENTS.
   (A)   To arrange an interment please contact the Service Department at
330.882.3824. The Service Department will schedule and supervise all
interments. At least 72 hours' notice, exclusive of Sundays and holidays is
required for any interment.
   (B)   Prior to burial, the city requires a grave holder or family
representative to complete a burial position confirmation form when more than
one grave has been purchased. This uniformly applies to the burial of multiple
cremains in one grave. Forms must be returned to the Service Department no less
than 24 hours before the service. The burial position confirmation form will be
provided at the time of purchase or upon request for internment.
   (C)   During severe weather conditions, the Deputy Service Director or
designated individual may contact the Funeral Director to postpone funeral
services until the grave can be properly opened and closed.
   (D)   Prior to interment, payment in full shall be made and the burial
permit provided to the city.
   (E)   Interment will commence 30 minutes after the conclusion of the
graveside service.
   (F)   A maximum of three cremains will be permitted in a single grave.
Cremains may be added to an existing burial site containing a casket in a
container no larger than 12 inches high by 12 inches wide and 12 inches long. A
casket, however, may not be added to a grave with existing burial cremains. No
cremains shall be buried inside of a casket. Each internment will be charged
independently. See §
95.13 for details.
§ 95.06 FOUNDATIONS, MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND GRAVESTONES.
   (A)   Foundations, monuments, markers, and gravestones are not installed by
the city and must receive approval from the Deputy Service Director prior to
installation. Foundations are not to be installed between November 1st and
April 1st.
   (B)   All foundations for monuments, markers and gravestones must be built
in accordance with the specifications outlined by this chapter at the expense
of the grave owner. Any foundation that does not meet the required criteria
will be replaced at the expense of the grave holder. See §
95.07 for details.
   (C)   Foundation, monument, and gravestone mark-outs will be completed by
the Deputy Service Director or designated individual and charged directly to
the monument company of choice. See §
95.13 for details.
   (D)   Monuments, markers, and gravestones must be composed of granite or
bronze.
   (E)   Monuments, markers, and gravestones are to be placed in the center of
single graves on the west end, or head, of the grave. Two or more names on any
one monument qualify as a family monument and shall be placed on the centerline
of double graves.
   (F)   All primary engraving will face the grave and will be displayed toward
the foot of the grave.
   (G)   Government markers are to be placed on the backside of the gravestone
when possible. In the instance that the backside of the gravestone is not
available, the marker may be placed on the east end, or foot, of the grave,
flush with the ground and shall have no flowers, plants, or adornments. Any
government marker must have its own foundation. For government marker
information please contact the funeral home that will be performing the
service.
   (H)   The construction of any mausoleum or building structure is strictly
prohibited on any grave unless initiated by the city for burial purposes.
   (I)   Local companies include but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Monuments:
         (a)   Summit Memorial - 330.773.2385;
         (b)   North Hill Memorial - 330.253.2179;
         (c)   Pertee Memorial - 330.345.8811;
         (d)   Chislers Monuments and Stone - 330.753.2210;
         (e)   Midwest Everlasting Memorial - 330.334.1988;
         (f)   Bethel-Miller Memorials - 330.452.0697.
      (2)   Foundation installation: Ohio Monument - 330.418.5388.
§ 95.07 MONUMENT, BASE, AND FOUNDATION SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Standing monument.
Single Grave - 4 ft. x 12 ft. Double Grave - 8 ft. x 12 ft.
Single Grave - 4 ft. x 12 ft.           Double Grave - 8 ft. x 12 ft.
Monument Maximum Dimensions             Monument Maximum Dimensions
Height: 4 ft.                           Height: 6 ft.
Length: 38 in.                          Length: 62 in.
Width: 18 in.                           Width: 18 in.
Base Dimensions                         Base Dimensions
Length: 2” less than length of        Length: 2” less than length of
foundation                              foundation
Width: 2” less than width of foundatioWidth: 2” less than width of foundation
Foundation Maximum Dimensions           Foundation Maximum Dimensions
Depth: 36 in. (minimum - 32 in.)        Depth: 36 in. (minimum - 32 in.)
Length: 42 in.                          Length: 66 in.
Width: 22 in.                           Width: 22 in.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1899.jpg]
 
Any structure placed on top of the foundation must be at least two inches
smaller than the foundation dimensions on all sides.
   (B)   Flat marker. Flat markers may be stacked on top of or encompassed by
the foundation.
Single Grave - 4 ft. x 12 ft. Double Grave - 8 ft. x 12 ft.
Single Grave - 4 ft. x 12 ft.          Double Grave - 8 ft. x 12 ft.
Marker Maximum Dimensions              Marker Maximum Dimensions
Length: 38 in.                         Length: 62 in.
Width: 18 in.                          Width: 18 in.
Foundation Minimum Dimensions          Foundation Minimum Dimensions
Depth: 32 in.                          Depth: 32 in.
Length: 3” greater than length of    Length: 3” greater than length of marker
marker
Width: 3” greater than width of markeWidth: 3” greater than width of marker
Foundation Maximum Dimensions          Foundation Maximum Dimensions
Depth: 36 in.                          Depth: 36 in.
Length: 42 in.                         Length: 66 in.
Width: 22 in.                          Width: 22 in.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1901.jpg]       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/IMAGES/0-0-0-1903.jpg]
 
         Frontal View                                  Radial View
Any marker placed on or in the foundation must be at least three inches smaller
than the foundation dimensions on all sides.
§ 95.08 FLOWERS, PLANTS AND ADORNMENTS.
   (A)   Flowers, plants, and adornments are permitted. To maintain a neat
appearance, the following rules and regulations have been established for the
planting, placement, and care of any flower, plant, or adornment. The Deputy
Service Director reserves the right to direct ground crews to remove or mow any
flowers, plants or adornments that have become unsightly. In no way shall the
city personnel be responsible for the placement or maintenance of any flower,
plant, or adornment.
   (B)   All flowers, plants and adornments must be located on the gravesite.
Items may be no wider than the gravestone and must be placed within 12 inches
of any monument or marker. Any items outside of this area will be removed.
   (C)   Potted plants are permitted in a pot no larger than eight inches in
diameter.
   (D)   The following items are strictly prohibited and subject to removal:
      (1)   Spreading plants, vines, and grasses;
      (2)   Rose bushes;
      (3)   Trees, shrubs, or bushes of any kind;
      (4)   Urns;
      (5)   Walls, borders, fences, or enclosures of any kind;
      (6)   Plant hangers;
      (7)   Glass vases;
      (8)   Flags larger than 18 inches in height;
      (9)   Bird feeders;
      (10)   Pin wheels;
      (11)   Garland;
      (12)   Yard decorations;
      (13)   Solar lights;
      (14)   Clothing;
      (15)   Toys of any kind;
      (16)   Statues; and
      (17)   Balloons.
   (E)   Any adornment deemed inappropriate is subject to removal.
   (F)   All seasonal flowers and adornments will be removed on April 1st and
November 1st each year.
   (G)   Live flowers and plants will be checked weekly for freshness and
disposed of as needed.
   (H)   Artificial flowers and plants will be removed at the discretion of the
city.
§ 95.09 RESPONSIBILITY OF MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The city reserves the exclusive right to do all landscape work,
grading, and necessary improvements within the cemetery. The city maintains
responsibility for all tree work including trimming, planting, and removal,
cleaning, and maintenance of roadways, paths, walkways, and buildings. All
improvements or alterations of graves shall be under the direction of and
subject to approval by the city. Any alteration made without prior consent of
the city is subject to removal/restoration at the expense of the grave holder
or next of kin.
   (B)   The city is not responsible for settled, tipped, or crooked monuments,
or the repair or reconstruction of granite, bronze, or concrete work.
§ 95.10 INDIGENT CREMATION.
   When the body of a deceased person is found in New Franklin, and such person
was not an inmate of a correctional, benevolent, or charitable institution of
this state, and the body is not claimed by any person (other than an indigent
person) for private cremation or burial at the person's own expense, or
delivered for the purpose of medical or surgical study or dissection in
accordance with R.C. § 1713.34, it shall be disposed of as follows:
   (A)   If the person was a legal resident of New Franklin, the city shall
cause the person to be cremated at the expense of New Franklin. LEGAL RESIDENCE
is defined as a permanent place of abode used or occupied as living quarters at
the time of a person's death. INDIGENT PERSON means a person whose income does
not exceed 150% of the federal poverty line, as revised annually by the United
States Department of Health and Human Services in accordance with section 673
(2) of the "Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981," 95 Stat. 511, 42 U.S.C.
9902, as amended, for a family size equal to the size of the person's family.
The city is not relieved of its duty to cremate a person at its expense when
the body is claimed by an indigent person.
   (B)   The city shall make a determination as to indigence based upon the
information provided by the indigent applicant.
   (C)   The city's obligation hereunder is not supplemental and shall be
limited to a total expense of $750. The funeral home shall make every effort to
locate funds from other resources, including but not limited to social
security, veterans’ benefits, charitable/benevolent organizations, and
insurance from any source. New Franklin shall be responsible for the difference
between $750 and the total amounts received by the funeral home from all
sources. If the amount received is equal to or in excess of $750, then the city
shall have no responsibility for payment of any fees.
   (D)   Following services by the funeral home, the funeral home shall submit
a bill indicating a total charge of $750 less funds received from all other
sources. The city shall then process payment to the funeral home in accordance
with this policy.
Statutory reference:
   Burial or cremation of body at expense of township or municipal corporation,
see R.C. § 9.15
§ 95.11 DISINTERMENT.
   (A)   Disinterment is the act of removing a casket or cremains from its
current burial location. Disinterment rights and responsibilities shall be as
those set forth in R.C. Chapter 517.
   (B)   Cemetery right to disinter. Pursuant to R.C. § 517.23(D), the city may
disinter, reinter, and grant permission to disinter or reinter any remains
buried in the cemetery to correct any interment error.
§ 95.12 ENACTMENT.
   The rules now governing the City of New Franklin cemeteries set forth in
this chapter were adopted effective May 6, 1998, and revised August 7, 2024, by
the Service Director of the City of New Franklin, Summit County, Ohio.
§ 95.13 FEE SCHEDULE.
 RESIDENT NON-RESIDENT
                                         RESIDENT NON-RESIDENT
Standard Grave Purchase                  $1,000   $3,000
Burial Vault Interment                   $800     $1,500
Baby Grave Purchase                      $500     $1,500
Baby Interment                           $500     $1,500
Cremain Interment                        $500     $1,000
Grave Mark-out                           $100     $100
Monument, Marker, or Foundation Mark-out $100     $100
Burial Vault Disinterment                $2,000   $2,000
Cremain Disinterment                     $800     $800
Afternoon Graveside Service              Additional $500
Weekend Graveside Service                Additional $500
Weekend Afternoon Graveside Service      Additional $700
Deed Transfer- Standard                  $150
Deed Transfer- Resident to Non-Resident  $2,000
 
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   TRANSIENT VENDORS
CHAPTER 110: TRANSIENT VENDORS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Certificate of registration required
   
110.03   Application for certificate of registration
   
110.04   Issuance of certificate
   
110.05   Do not knock registry and display of registration
   
110.06   Restrictions
   
110.07   Sales from a fixed location or temporary place of business
   
110.08   Revocation of certificate
 
   
110.99   Penalty
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOODS. Any goods, wares, services, merchandise, periodicals and other
articles or publications. GOODS does not include noncommercial literature
expressing religious or political views.
   PEDDLING. Any actions by which a person (other than a representative of an
entity that is exempted from taxation under R.C. § 5709.04 or any person
licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707, travels door to door either by foot or by
vehicle, or calls upon any business places, private residences or other persons
or entities within the city, with the intent to sell or offer for sale any
goods, solicit orders for future delivery of goods, arrange an appointment for
a future estimate or sales call.
   SOLICITING. Any actions by which a person (other than a representative of an
entity that is exempted from taxation under R.C. § 5709.04 or any person
licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707) travels door to door, either by foot or by
vehicle, or calls upon any business places, private residences, or other
persons or entities within the city, with the intent to obtain funds or
commitments for any cause whatsoever.
   TRANSIENT VENDOR. Any person who opens a temporary place of business for the
sale of goods or who, on the streets or while traveling about the city, sells
or offers for sale goods, solicits orders for future delivery of goods or
attempts to arrange an appointment for a future estimate or sales call.
TRANSIENT VENDOR does not include any persons, or persons who represent an
entity that is exempted from taxation under section R.C. § 5709.04, and does
not include any person licensed as an auctioneer under R.C. Chapter 4707.
(Ord. 20-O-02, passed 8-19-2020)
§ 110.02 CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   No transient vendor shall peddle or solicit any persons within the city
without first obtaining a certificate of registration from the city. A separate
registration must be made for each transient vendor employed by, or acting as
an agent or representative of, any business or entity intending to peddle or
solicit within the city.
(Ord. 20-O-02, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.03 APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   Each applicant seeking a certificate of registration shall, not less
than 14 days prior to the commencement of any peddling or solicitation within
the city, present the city with an application form provided by the city
containing the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address and phone number of the transient vendor
applicant;
      (2)   The name, address, phone number and description of any person,
organization or entity that the transient vendor applicant is employed by,
represents or will act as an agent of, in connection with any peddling or
soliciting to be conducted;
      (3)   A description of any goods, services, funds or commitments to be
sold or obtained in connection with any peddling or soliciting conducted by the
transient vendor applicant;
      (4)   A description of the proposed dates, times and locations of the
peddling or soliciting activities to be conducted by the transient vendor
applicant;
      (5)   A description of the year, make, model, color and license plate
number for any vehicle to be used in connection with any peddling or soliciting
conducted by the transient vendor applicant, and a copy of the applicant’s
driver's license (if any vehicle will be used in connection with the
applicant’s peddling or soliciting);
      (6)   A description of any clothing, uniforms or identifying marks,
brands or logos that will be worn or displayed in connection with any peddling
or soliciting conducted by the transient vendor applicant;
      (7)   The names of any other municipalities, territories or locations
within the state in which the transient vendor applicant is currently, or has
previously conducted, peddling or soliciting activities during the past 12
months;
      (8)   A disclosure as to whether the transient vendor applicant has ever
been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor offense, and if so, a description
of the nature of the offense, and the date and location of the same;
      (9)   A disclosure as to whether the transient vendor applicant has ever
been denied a permit or license related to any peddling or soliciting
activities, or had a license or permit related to such activities revoked, and
if so, a description of the nature of any denial or revocation, and the date
and location of the same; and
      (10)   Any such other information as the city may request at the time of
application.
   (B)   Each transient vendor application shall be accompanied by a non-
refundable fee of $100 for registration of one vendor and an additional fee of
$25 for each additional vendor who will be canvassing on behalf of the initial
registrant. Any persons, groups of persons or organizations acting on behalf of
a tax-exempt organization (as defined by I.R.C. § 501) shall be exempt from
such application fee.
(Ord. 20-O-02, passed 8-19-2020)
§ 110.04 ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   Within 14 days of the receipt of an application form and non-
refundable fee as provided hereinabove, the city shall issue a certificate of
registration to the applicant in person or by U.S. Mail, unless one or more of
the following circumstances exist:
      (1)   The transient vendor applicant is determined in the reasonable
judgment of the city, to have made an incomplete, false, misleading or
deceptive statement with regard to the information requested by the
application;
      (2)   The transient vendor applicant has been convicted of a felony or
convicted of a misdemeanor violation involving moral turpitude within the last
five years;
      (3)   The transient vendor applicant has had a permit or license related
to peddling or soliciting activities revoked by any municipality, township or
governing body in the state within the past five years; or
      (4)   The goods, services, funds or commitments to be sold or obtained in
connection with the peddling or soliciting conducted by the transient vendor
applicant is determined in the reasonable judgment of the city to be harmful,
offensive, distasteful, harassing, fraudulent or deceptive, in any manner, to
the citizens of the city.
   (B)   Each certificate of registration shall be valid for a period of 90
days, and shall expire on the date set forth on the certificate. No certificate
issued may be assigned or transferred to any other person.
   (C)   In the event an application is denied, a letter will be mailed to the
transient vendor applicant in lieu of the certificate of registration, and will
include a brief explanation for the city’s reason(s) for denial.
(Ord. 20-O-02, passed 8-19-2020)
§ 110.05 DO NOT KNOCK REGISTRY AND DISPLAY OF REGISTRATION.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, it shall be unlawful
for any solicitor or peddler to enter any premise and knock at the door or ring
the doorbell of any residence, house, apartment or other dwelling in the city
that appears on the do not knock registry or upon which there is posted at the
entrance a notice which reads “no solicitors,” a “do not knock” sticker or
words of similar import, which clearly prohibit peddlers or solicitors on the
premises, unless such peddler or solicitor has previously been invited upon the
premises by the owner, lessee or an adult occupant thereof.
   (A)   If requested by the city, and for as long as the Northeast Ohio Public
Energy Council (“NOPEC”) shall agree to do so, NOPEC shall establish and
maintain for the city a do not knock registry (“registry”) and is authorized to
contact individuals on the registry to distribute do not knock stickers to them
at no cost to the city or the individuals, and contact individuals to update
the list each year.
   (B)   The decision of whether to place a residence, house, apartment or
other dwelling on the do not knock registry shall be solely that of the lawful
possessor and occupant thereof.
   (C)   Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment or other dwelling in the city may request NOPEC to place and maintain
his or her residence, house, apartment or other dwelling on the do not knock
registry by submitting a request on form(s) supplied by the city, or by
submitting a request online at www.blocktheknock.com or at a Block the Knock
community event, which shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and signature of the person completing the form(s), unless
the submission is done electronically;
      (2)   The complete address of the residence, house, apartment or other
dwelling to be placed on the do not knock registry;
      (3)   A valid e-mail address of the person completing the form(s);
      (4)   The date the form was completed; and
      (5)   A statement that no solicitors or peddlers shall call at this
address or words of similar import.
   (D)   A residence, house, apartment or other dwelling, after being lawfully
placed on the do not knock registry, shall remain on said registry until the
earliest of any of the following:
      (1)   The city or NOPEC receives notice of removal pursuant to division
(E) of this section; or
      (2)   The city or NOPEC receives formal notice that the person who
submitted the form pursuant to division (C) of this section is not or is no
longer a lawful possessor and occupant of the premises.
   (E)   Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment or other dwelling may request the city or NOPEC to remove his or her
residence, house, apartment or other dwelling from the do not knock registry by
submitting a notice of removal form(s) supplied by the Director of Public
Safety, or by submitting a request online to www.blocktheknock.com which shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and signature of the person completing the form;
      (2)   The complete address of the residence, house, apartment or other
dwelling to be removed from the registry;
      (3)   The date the form was completed; and
      (4)   A statement that the residence be removed from the do not knock
registry.
   (F)   A copy of the do not knock registry shall be made available for public
inspection at all times during normal business hours at the office of the
Director of Public Safety of the city and shall be given to every person who
applies for a license pursuant to this chapter or registers as a solicitor or
peddler pursuant to that ordinance.
   (G)   Each registered transient vendor shall carry a copy of his or her
current certificate of registration at all times while engaged in any
activities relating to, or in connection with, peddling or soliciting within
the city, and shall exhibit it to any citizen, police officer or city official
upon request.
   (H)   Each registered transient vendor shall wear a badge identifying his or
her full name, and the name of any person, organization or entity that the
individual is employed by, represents, or will act as an agent of, in
connection with any peddling or soliciting, at all times while engaged in any
activities relating to, or in connection with, peddling or soliciting within
the city.
   (I)   Each registered transient vendor shall be issued by the city a copy of
the city’s do not knock registry, consisting of a list of residents who have
declined to allow transient vendors to enter upon their property.
(Ord. 20-O-02, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.06 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Every registered transient vendor shall be governed by the following
regulations.
      (1)   No registered transient vendor shall be permitted to engage in or
conduct any peddling or solicitation activities, or do so on behalf of any
other persons, organizations or entities, other than as specified on the
person’s application;
      (2)   No registered transient vendor shall be permitted to engage in or
conduct any peddling or solicitation activities except during reasonable
business hours, being between 10:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday. In addition, no registered transient vendor shall be permitted to
peddle or solicit on a Sunday or any legal holidays.
      (3)   No registered transient vendor shall enter, or attempt to enter the
residence of any citizen without an express invitation from the head of the
household, or an occupant adult over the age of 18.
      (4)   No registered transient vendor engaged in or conducting any
peddling or solicitation activities shall make any false, fraudulent,
misleading or deceptive statements to any persons.
      (5)   No registered transient vendor shall peddle or solicit, or attempt
to peddle or solicit, any occupants or persons in residences or buildings
displaying signage on or around the front of the residence or building which
prohibits or purports to prohibit peddling or soliciting activities at the
premises, or at any residence listed on the do not knock registry on file at
the city, unless such registered transient vendor was previously expressly
invited onto the premises by the owner, lessee or an occupant adult over the
age of 18.
   (B)   Any violation of one or more of the above restrictions may subject the
transient vendor to the penalty provisions in this chapter and may result in
the immediate revocation of a transient vendor’s certificate of registration.
(Ord. 20-O-02, passed 8-19-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.07 SALES FROM A FIXED LOCATION OR TEMPORARY PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   A transient vendor who sells, offers for sale or solicits orders for future
delivery of goods, wares, food or merchandise, and who establishes a fixed
location or a temporary place of business shall, in addition to the other
requirements mandated herein:
   (A)   Establish the temporary place of business in an area zoned for the
same;
   (B)   Conform with any zoning regulations regarding signage;
   (C)   Refrain from the sale or solicitation of orders for goods, wares, food
or merchandise between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.; and
   (D)   Otherwise comply with all existing zoning regulations and all
municipal, county, state and federal licensing requirements.
(Ord. 20-O-02, passed 8-19-2020)
§ 110.08 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   A transient vendor’s certificate of registration may be revoked by the
city, after notice and a hearing, for any of the following causes:
      (1)   The existence of any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement
contained in a transient vendor’s application for registration or
identification badge;
      (2)   The registered transient vendor is convicted of a felony violation
or misdemeanor violation involving moral turpitude;
      (3)   Any conduct of the registered transient vendor while engaged in or
conducting any peddling or solicitation activities which disturbs the peace,
health, safety or general welfare of the public; and
      (4)   Any other violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Notice of hearing for the revocation of a certificate of registration
shall be given in writing setting forth the time and place of the hearing.
Notice shall be mailed to the registrant’s address listed on the certificate of
registration at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. Personal
service of the notice may be provided in lieu of, or in addition to, any notice
provided by mail. The hearing shall be conducted by the city, at a time
scheduled during reasonable business hours, and at a location within the city,
as designated in the notice. At the hearing, the registrant shall be provided
with an explanation of the grounds for revocation, and the registrant shall be
provided with an opportunity to respond prior to a decision.
(Ord. 20-O-02, passed 8-19-2020)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates this chapter is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first
offense, and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on any subsequent offenses.
(Ord. 20-O-02, passed 8-19-2020)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
      
133.   SEX OFFENSES
      
134.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
      
135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
137.   WEAPONS CONTROL
      
138.   DRUG OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Application of Title XIII
   
130.02   Definitions
   
130.03   Classification of offenses
   
130.04   Common law offenses abrogated
   
130.05   Rules of construction
   
130.06   Limitation of criminal prosecutions
   
130.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication
   
130.08   Culpable mental states
   
130.09   Organizational criminal liability
   
130.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct
   
130.11   Attempt
   
130.12   Complicity
   
130.13   Presumption of innocence; proof of offense; affirmative defense
   
130.14   Battered woman syndrome
   
130.15   Delinquency adjudications deemed convictions
   
130.16   Criminal law jurisdiction
   
130.17   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department
   
130.18   Imposing sentence for misdemeanor
   
130.19   Multiple sentences
   
130.20   Apprehension, detention, or arrest of persons on bond
   
130.21   Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
 
   
130.99   Penalty for Title XIII
Statutory reference:
   Mayor’s Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1905
   Municipal Court generally, see R.C. Chapter 1901
   Trials, Magistrate Courts, see R.C. Chapter 2938
§ 130.01 APPLICATION OF TITLE XIII.
   (A)   Title XIII of this code of ordinances embodies and prescribes
penalties for offenses against the municipality not classifiable in previous
titles and chapters. The word “misdemeanors”, as used in this title, is not
exhaustive and does not imply that offenses found elsewhere in this code of
ordinances are not also misdemeanors and punishable as such.
   (B)   Each act or omission for which a fine, imprisonment, or both is
provided under this Title or elsewhere in this code, or each act or omission
which is declared a violation of this code, is unlawful and is hereby made a
misdemeanor. Upon conviction, the penalty or penalties so provided shall be
imposed by the court.
§ 130.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or possess
under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose history,
character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will be a
danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences.
   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by any
means upon or against a person or thing.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:
      (1)   A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, Marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to aid a sheriff
in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the person is
called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C.§ 737.10 as a special
patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and during the
time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to R.C. §
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms;
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is “not guilty by reason of
insanity” relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of the
offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.18, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01,
2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03,
2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31,
2917.321, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division (A)(1)
of R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or
of division (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition;
      (5)   A violation of division (C) of R.C. § 959.131.
   PERSON.
      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, the term includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that
does not set forth a criminal offense, the term includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth. “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in no case
shall the portion of the definition of the term “person” that is set forth in
division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal offense in any
of the following manners:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02,
2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13,
2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under this division if it is
of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. § 2919.12.
         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby;
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying;
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human;
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human;
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to property
that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or
enjoyment. The term does not include wear and tear occasioned by normal use.
   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or bestowed by
express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office, or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property. The term includes but is not limited to
cable television service, other telecommunications service, telecommunications
devices, information service, computers, data, computer software, financial
instruments associated with computers, other documents associated with
computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or human-readable
form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and property protected by
a trademark, copyright or patent. “Financial instruments associated with
computers” include but are not limited to checks, drafts, warrants, money
orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters of credit,
bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization mechanisms,
marketable securities, or any computer system representations of any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information service”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in
this section, “cable television service”, “computer”, “computer network”,
“computer software”, “computer system”, “data”, and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal activity
and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she will
commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person is a repeat
offender if any of the following applies:
      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of violence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent offense of
violence;
      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent sexually oriented
offense;
      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as defined in
R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for one or more
of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent theft offense;
      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent felony drug abuse
offense;
      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and having been
imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she commits a
subsequent offense;
      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any type or
degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses, or minor
misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such
offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.
   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
   SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the State
Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school premises,
school activity, and school bus.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that does
either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2935.36(E))
§ 130.03 CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this title:
   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.
   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100;
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under R.C. § 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.
(R.C. § 2901.02)
§ 130.04 COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED.
   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this code.
   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this code state a
positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty for
violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty.
   (C)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(R.C. § 2901.03)
§ 130.05 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) or (D) of this section,
sections of this code defining offenses or penalties shall be strictly
construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of the
accused.
   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this code providing for
criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair, impartial,
speedy, and sure administration of justice.
   (C)   Any provision of a section of this code that refers to a previous
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of this code, the
Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code shall be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of
guilty to a substantially equivalent offense under an existing or former law of
this municipality, state, another state, or the United States or under an
existing or former municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or
to an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or
ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a
substantially equivalent offense.
(R.C. § 2901.04)
§ 130.06 LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5)
of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall
be barred unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense
is committed:
         (a)   For a felony, six years;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         (c)   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 or for the prosecution of a conspiracy to
commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a violation of R.C. §
2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) through (J) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24, 2909.26,
2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, or 2917.02, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace officer, a
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of former R.C. §
2907.12.
         (b)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (A)(3)(a) of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D) to (L) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (A)(5)(b) and (E)
to (I) of this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.13 shall be
barred unless it is commenced within five years after the offense is committed.
         (b)   Prosecution that would otherwise be barred under division (A)(5)
(a) of this section may be commenced within five years after the date of the
discovery of the offense by either an aggrieved person or the aggrieved
person’s legal representative who is not a party to the offense.
         (c)   As used in division (A)(5)(b) of this section, “aggrieved
person” includes any of the following individuals with regard to a violation of
R.C. § 2907.13:
            1.   A patient who was the victim of the violation;
            2.   The spouse or surviving spouse of a patient who was the victim
of the violation;
            3.   Any child born as a result of the violation.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public
servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter;
         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   As used in this division:
         OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A PUBLIC
SERVANT. The phrase includes but is not limited to a violation of R.C. §
101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or
(B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense involving
misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any municipal
ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code sections listed
in this division (C)(2).
         PUBLIC SERVANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (D)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is
determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if
the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined to
match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time of
the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, DNA RECORD has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.573.
   (E)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs. In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (F)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same. A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation, or other process unless reasonable diligence
is exercised to execute the same.
   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (I)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the prosecution
is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or process are
set aside or reversed on appeal.
   (J)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Title XIII or Title
XXIX of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to
have occurred.
   (K)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (L)   (1)   The amendments to divisions (A) and (D) of this section that
took effect on July 16, 2015, apply to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
committed on and after July 16, 2015, and apply to a violation of either of
those sections committed prior to July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that
violation was not barred under this section as it existed on July 16, 2015.
      (2)   The amendment to division (A)(2) of this section that took effect
on April 4, 2023, applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 if the
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity is committed on or after April 4, 2023, and
applies to a conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation of either of those sections if the conspiracy, attempt,
or complicity was committed prior to April 4, 2023, and prosecution for that
conspiracy, attempt, or complicity was not barred under this section as it
existed on the day prior to April 4, 2023.
(R.C. § 2901.13)
Statutory reference:
   Limitation for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.12
§ 130.07 REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense. Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CULPABILITY. Means purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.
      INTOXICATION. Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting from
the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      INVOLUNTARY ACTS. Means reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are involuntary acts.
      POSSESSION. Means a voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(R.C. § 2901.21)
§ 130.08 CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature. A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element. When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element. When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element.
(R.C. § 2901.22)
§ 130.09 ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent,
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer,
agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the
scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except
that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or
employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the
circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated, or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent, or employee acting in behalf of the
organization and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or
employment.
   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission. This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (D)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity. The term does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(R.C. § 2901.23)
§ 130.10 PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined in R.C.
§ 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization, if
he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of the
offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(R.C. § 2901.24)
§ 130.11 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense. An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted. In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an attempt
is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.
In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of any provision of R.C.
Chapter 3734, other than R.C. § 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an
attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under
this section.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
(R.C. § 2923.02)
Statutory reference:
   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01
   Solid and hazardous wastes, see R.C. Chapter 3734
§ 130.12 COMPLICITY.
   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of R.C. §
2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with R.C.
§ 2923.03(D).
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender. A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(R.C. § 2923.03)
Statutory reference:
   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01
§ 130.13 PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE; PROOF OF OFFENSE; AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE.
   (A)   Every person accused of an offense is presumed innocent until proven
guilty beyond a reasonable doubt, and the burden of proof for all elements of
the offense is upon the prosecution. The burden of going forward with the
evidence of an affirmative defense, and the burden of proof by a preponderance
of the evidence, for an affirmative defense other than self-defense, defense of
another, or defense of the accused’s residence presented as described in
division (B)(1) of this section, is upon the accused.
   (B)   (1)   A person is allowed to act in self-defense, defense of another,
or defense of that person’s residence. If, at the trial of a person who is
accused of an offense that involved the person’s use of force against another,
there is evidence presented that tends to support that the accused person used
the force in self-defense, defense of another, or defense of that person’s
residence, the prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
accused person did not use the force in self-defense, defense of another, or
defense of that person’s residence, as the case may be.
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(3) of this section, a person is presumed to
have acted in self-defense or defense of another when using defensive force
that is intended or likely to cause death or great bodily harm to another if
the person against whom the defensive force is used is in the process of
unlawfully and without privilege to do so entering, or has unlawfully and
without privilege to do so entered, the residence or vehicle occupied by the
person using the defensive force.
      (3)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section does
not apply if either of the following is true:
         (a)   The person against whom the defensive force is used has a right
to be in, or is a lawful resident of, the residence or vehicle.
         (b)   The person who uses the defensive force uses it while in a
residence or vehicle and the person is unlawfully, and without privilege to be,
in that residence or vehicle.
      (4)   The presumption set forth in division (B)(2) of this section is a
rebuttable presumption and may be rebutted by a preponderance of the evidence,
provided that the prosecution’s burden of proof remains proof beyond a
reasonable doubt as described in divisions (A) and (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   As part of its charge to the jury in a criminal case, the court shall
read the definitions of “reasonable doubt” and “proof beyond a reasonable
doubt”, contained in division (E) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSE. An affirmative defense is either of the following:
         (a)   A defense expressly designated as affirmative;
         (b)   A defense involving an excuse or justification peculiarly within
the knowledge of the accused, on which the accused can fairly be required to
adduce supporting evidence.
      DWELLING. Means a building or conveyance of any kind that has a roof over
it and that is designed to be occupied by people lodging in the building or
conveyance at night, regardless of whether the building or conveyance is
temporary or permanent or is mobile or immobile. As used in this division, a
building or conveyance includes but is not limited to an attached porch, and a
building or conveyance with a roof over it includes but is not limited to a
tent.
      RESIDENCE. Means a dwelling in which a person resides either temporarily
or permanently or is visiting as a guest.
      VEHICLE. Means a conveyance of any kind, whether or not motorized, that
is designed to transport people or property.
   (E)   “Reasonable doubt” is present when the jurors, after they have
carefully considered and compared all the evidence, cannot say they are firmly
convinced of the truth of the charge. It is a doubt based on reasonable and
common sense. Reasonable doubt is not mere possible doubt, because everything
relating to human affairs or depending on moral evidence is open to some
possible or imaginary doubt. “Proof beyond a reasonable doubt” is proof of such
character that an ordinary person would be willing to rely and act upon it in
the most important of the person's own affairs.
(R.C. § 2901.05)
§ 130.14 BATTERED WOMAN SYNDROME.
   (A)   The municipality hereby declares that it recognizes both of the
following, in relation to the “battered woman syndrome”: that the syndrome
currently is a matter of commonly accepted scientific knowledge, and that the
subject matter and details of the syndrome are not within the general
understanding or experience of a person who is a member of the general populace
and are not within the field of common knowledge.
   (B)   If a person is charged with an offense involving the use of force
against another and the person, as a defense to the offense charged, raises the
affirmative defense of self defense, the person may introduce expert testimony
of the “battered woman syndrome” and expert testimony that the person suffered
from that syndrome as evidence to establish the requisite belief of an imminent
danger of death or great bodily harm that is necessary, as an element of the
affirmative defense, to justify the person’s use of force in question. The
introduction of any expert testimony under this division shall be in accordance
with the Ohio Rules of Evidence.
(R.C. § 2901.06)
§ 130.15 DELINQUENCY ADJUDICATIONS DEEMED CONVICTIONS.
   (A)   If a person is alleged to have committed an offense and if the person
previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or juvenile traffic offender
for a violation of a law or ordinance, except as provided in division (B) of
this section, the adjudication as a delinquent child or as a juvenile traffic
offender is a conviction for a violation of the law for purposes of determining
the offense with which the person should be charged and, if the person is
convicted of or pleads guilty to an offense, the sentence to be imposed upon
the person relative to the conviction or guilty plea.
   (B)   A previous adjudication of a person as a delinquent child or juvenile
traffic offender for a violation of a law or ordinance is not a conviction for
a violation of the law or ordinance for purposes of determining any of the
following:
      (1)   Whether the person is a repeat violent offender, as defined in R.C.
§ 2929.01, or whether the person should be sentenced as a repeat violent
offender under R.C. § 2929.14(B)(2) and R.C. § 2941.149;
      (2)    Whether the person is a violent career criminal as defined in R.C.
§ 2923.132, whether the person has committed unlawful use of a weapon by a
violent career criminal in violation of R.C. § 2923.132 or should be sentenced
for that offense under that section, or whether the person should be sentenced
under R.C. § 2929.14(K) as a violent career criminal who had a firearm on or
about the person’s person or under the person’s control while committing a
violent felony offense and displayed or brandished the firearm, indicated that
the offender possessed a firearm, or used the firearm to facilitate the
offense.
(R.C. § 2901.08)
§ 130.16 CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (A)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (B)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (C)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction.
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (D)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (E)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (F)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (G)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (H)   For purposes of division (A)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (I)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER NETWORK,
INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 2913.01.
(R.C. § 2901.11)
Statutory reference:
   State criminal law jurisdiction, see R.C. § 2901.11
§ 130.17 DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Safekeeping of property in custody.
      (1)   (a)   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         (b)   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any
of the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C. Title 45, except as
provided in division (B)(1)(f) of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of, or that is identified by the department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under R.C. § 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the municipality
has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in division (B)
(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance shall pay 25%
of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’ reward
program.
      (2)   (a)   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include but not be limited to both of the following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold, and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
Law Enforcement Trust Fund or similar fund created under that section.
         (b)   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section is a public record open for inspection under
R.C. § 149.43.
      (3)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed of
under this section or R.C. §§ 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county and to briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         CITIZENS’ REWARD PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 9.92.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Includes correctional institutions.
         TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY. Means an organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(R.C. § 2981.11)
   (B)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (A)(1)(b) of this
section, shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has
territorial jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         (a)   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 3719.11 or placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         (b)   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         (c)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         (d)   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or otherwise
forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or R.C. § 4301.53
shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division determines that
it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the Investigations Unit
in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for training relating to
law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public Safety, with the
assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution to state or local law
enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43
has not been paid in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any
moneys acquired from the sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All other
money collected under this division (B)(1)(d) shall be paid into the State
Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division
determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         (e)   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from
an unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the Inmates’ Industrial and Entertainment
Fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         (f)   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under R.C. Chapter
2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized the
mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency wants
the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile instrumentality
subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under R.C. §§ 4549.61 to
4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         (g)   Computers, computer networks, computer systems, and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (B)(2) of this section.
         (h)   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(B)(1) of this section or division (A)(1)(b) of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (B)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the General Revenue Fund of the state, or the General Fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider, except
as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the same
county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no services provider is
located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a services
provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds or cash shall be
applied as provided in division (B)(3) of this section.
      (5)   (a)   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police Department
of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring that
recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a citizens’
reward program and the county includes a part, but not all, of the territory of
the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department of the
recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the county contains the
highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         (b)   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
county or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the county from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to pay
any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (B)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. §
5101.87.
(R.C. § 2981.12)
   (C)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as contraband,
proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981 shall be disposed
of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) of this section or R.C. § 2981.12.
If the property is to be sold under division (B) of this section or R.C. §
2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed sale to be given in
accordance with law.
(R.C. § 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 130.18 IMPOSING SENTENCE FOR MISDEMEANOR.
   (A)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be imposed by R.C. §
1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that imposes a sentence under
this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor has
discretion to determine the most effective way to achieve the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
130.99(B).
      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or is
precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or the
penalty for an offense or by any provision of §
130.99 or
133.99 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 through 2929.28, a court that imposes a
sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any
sanction or combination of sanctions under §
130.99(C) through (G). The court shall not impose a sentence that imposes an
unnecessary burden on local government resources.
   (B)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, the
court shall consider all of the following factors:
         (a)   The nature and circumstances of the offense or offenses;
         (b)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of persistent criminal
activity and that the offender’s character and condition reveal a substantial
risk that the offender will commit another offense;
         (c)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender and the offense
or offenses indicate that the offender’s history, character, and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to others and that
the offender’s conduct has been characterized by a pattern of repetitive,
compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to the
consequences;
         (d)   Whether the victim’s youth, age, disability, or other factor
made the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made the impact of
the offense more serious;
         (e)   Whether the offender is likely to commit future crimes in
general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions (B)(1)(b) and
(B)(1)(c) of this section;
         (f)   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or physical
condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed forces of
the United States and that was a contributing factor in the offender’s
commission of the offense or offenses;
         (g)   The offender’s military service record.
      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a misdemeanor, in
addition to complying with division (B)(1) of this section, the court may
consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the purposes and
principles of sentencing set forth in §
130.99(B).
   (C)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a court
shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control sanction or
a combination of community control sanctions under §
130.99(D), (E), (F), and (G). A court may impose the longest jail term
authorized under §
130.99(C) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or upon
offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior offenses
demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is necessary to deter
the offender from committing a future criminal offense.
   (D)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral and written
statement made by the victim, the victim’s representative, the victim’s
attorney, if applicable, the defendant, the defense attorney, and the
prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This division
does not create any rights to notice other than those rights authorized by R.C.
Chapter 2930.
      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon as possible
after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the offense of the
victim’s right to file an application for an award of reparations pursuant to
R.C. §§ 2743.51 through 2743.72.
(R.C. § 2929.22)
§ 130.19 MULTIPLE SENTENCES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, R.C. § 2929.14(C),
or R.C. § 2971.03(D) or (E), a prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment shall be served concurrently with any other prison term, jail
term, or sentence of imprisonment imposed by a court of this municipality, this
state, another state, or the United States. Except as provided in division (B)
(2) of this section, a jail term or sentence of imprisonment for misdemeanor
shall be served concurrently with a prison term or sentence of imprisonment for
felony served in a state or federal correctional institution.
   (B)   (1)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment for a misdemeanor shall
be served consecutively to any other prison term, jail term, or sentence of
imprisonment when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively or when it is imposed for a misdemeanor violation of R.C. §
2907.322, 2921.34 or 2923.131. When consecutive sentences are imposed for
misdemeanors under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the
consecutive terms imposed, except that the aggregate term to be served shall
not exceed 18 months.
      (2)   A jail term or sentence of imprisonment imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.14, 4510.16, 4510.21, or 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be served consecutively to
a prison term that is imposed for a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.06,
2903.07, 2903.08 or 4511.19 or a felony violation of R.C. § 2903.04 involving
the operation of a motor vehicle by the offender and that is served in a state
correctional institution when the trial court specifies that it is to be served
consecutively. When consecutive jail terms or sentences of imprisonment and
prison terms are imposed for one or more misdemeanors and one or more felonies
under this division, the term to be served is the aggregate of the consecutive
terms imposed, and the offender shall serve all terms imposed for a felony
before serving any term imposed for a misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2929.41)
§ 130.20 APPREHENSION, DETENTION, OR ARREST OF PERSON ON BOND.
   (A)   No person, other than a law enforcement officer, shall apprehend,
detain, or arrest a principal on bond, wherever issued, unless that person
meets all of the following criteria:
      (1)   The person is any of the following:
         (a)   Qualified, licensed, and appointed as a surety bail bond agent
under R.C. §§ 3905.83 through 3905.95;
         (b)   Licensed as a surety bail bond agent by the state where the bond
was written;
         (c)   Licensed as a private investigator under R.C. Chapter 4749;
         (d)   Licensed as a private investigator by the state where the bond
was written;
         (e)   An off-duty peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2921.51.
      (2)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or arresting the
principal, has entered into a written contract with the surety or with a
licensed surety bail bond agent appointed by the surety, which contract sets
forth the name of the principal who is to be apprehended, detained, or
arrested. For purposes of this division (A)(2), SURETY has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 3905.83.
      (3)   The person, prior to apprehending, detaining, or arresting the
principal, has notified the local law enforcement agency having jurisdiction
over the area in which such activities will be performed and has provided any
form or identification or other information requested by the law enforcement
agency.
   (B)   No person shall represent the person’s self to be a bail enforcement
agent or bounty hunter, or claim any similar title, in this municipality.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal bail bond agent
practices.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of division (A) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of division (B) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.27)
 
§ 130.21 SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2901.05.
   (B)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person has no duty to retreat before using force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence if that person is in
a place in which the person lawfully has a right to be.
   (C)   A trier of fact shall not consider the possibility of retreat as a
factor in determining whether or not a person who used force in self-defense,
defense of another, or defense of that person’s residence reasonably believed
that the force was necessary to prevent injury, loss, or risk to life or
safety.
(R.C. § 2901.09)
§ 130.99 PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII.
   (A)   Generally. Except where otherwise specifically classified within the
body of the section of a chapter of this title, a violation of such section
shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more
than $500, imprisonment of not more than six months, or both.
(R.C. § 715.67)
   (B)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (B)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (B)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender,
or religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) through (B)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(R.C. § 2929.21)
   (C)   Misdemeanor jail terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
130.18 or
133.99 of this code or R.C. § 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (C)(5) of this
section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if
the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (C) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (E)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01, has filed a
notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (C)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a county jail that has
established a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the county jail industry program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (C) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to R.C. §
2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in which
the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to R.C. §
307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or
2947.19 and R.C. § 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence:
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is required
to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(C)(4)(a)1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
R.C. § 2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (C)(4)(a)2. of this section.
      (5)   (a)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (C)(5)(a)2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days;
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C. § 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one or more
of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         (b)   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (C)(5)(a) of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (C)(5)(a) of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24,
2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
any residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (E) of this
section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (D) of
this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and all provisions of this code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (6)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that charges that the
victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at the
time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory jail
term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (7)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(C), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (E) or (F) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(R.C. § 2929.24)
   (D)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.
      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in §§
130.18 and
133.99 of this code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (E), (F), or (G) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (C) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (E), (F), or (G) of this section.
         (b)   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         (c)   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)
(1)(a)1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions;
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (C) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (D)(1)(a)1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   (a)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a department of
probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the municipal court or county court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the municipal court or the
county court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         (b)   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   (a)   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the department of probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the department of probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         (b)   Except as provided in division (D)(4)(c) of this section, if an
offender violates any condition of a community control sanction, the sentencing
court may impose upon the violator one or more of the following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         (c)   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. § 2925.11(B)(2)(b),
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a related provision
under R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14, or R.C. § 2925.141, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and in so doing violated the conditions of a
community control sanction based on a minor drug possession offense, as defined
in R.C. § 2925.11, or violated R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. §
2925.141, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the sentencing
court shall not impose any of the penalties described in division (D)(4)(b) of
this section based on the violation.
         (d)   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (D)(4)(b) of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (D)(4)(b) of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (E), (F), or (G) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (G) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.25)
   (E)   Community residential sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (E). Community residential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;
         (b)   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (E)
(1)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (E) may do either or both of the following:
         (a)   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family;
         (b)   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (E)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (G) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (E)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including
but not limited to hepatitis A, B, and C, and other contagious diseases. The
person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community alternative
sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other
place at which the offender will serve the residential sanction may cause a
convicted offender in the halfway house, community alternative sentencing
center, district community alternative sentencing center, or other place who
refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including but not limited to hepatitis A, B, and C, or another contagious
disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (E)(1)(a) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.26)
   (F)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. Nonresidential
sanctions include but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   A term of day reporting;
         (b)   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         (c)   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor
of the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third, or
fourth degree;
         (d)   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         (e)   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         (f)   A term of basic probation supervision;
         (g)   A term of monitored time;
         (h)   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         (i)   A curfew term;
         (j)   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         (k)   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         (l)   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         (m)   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         (n)   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian, or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (F)(1)(c) of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (F)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (F)(2) of this section.
(R.C. § 2929.27)
   (G)   Financial sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. § 2947.23, the
court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a minor
misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or combination
of financial sanctions authorized under this division (G) and, if the offender
is being sentenced for a criminal offense as defined in R.C. § 2930.01, shall
sentence the offender to make restitution pursuant to this division (G) and
R.C. § 2929.281. If the court, in its discretion or as required by this
division (G), imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial sanctions
that may be imposed pursuant to this division (G) include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         (a)   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense could be disposed of by the
traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution
by the offender to the victim of the offender’s crime or the victim’s estate,
in an amount based on the victim’s economic loss. The court may not impose
restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if the offense could be
disposed of by the traffic violations bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order that the
restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult probation
department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court on behalf of
the victim.
            2.   The court shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid
by the offender. The victim, victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if
applicable, the prosecutor or the prosecutor’s designee, and the offender may
provide information relevant to the determination of the amount of restitution.
The amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of the
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court imposes restitution for the cost of
accounting or auditing done to determine the extent of economic loss, the court
may order restitution for any amount of the victim’s costs of accounting or
auditing provided that the amount of restitution is reasonable and does not
exceed the value of property or services stolen or damaged as a result of the
offense. If the court decides to or is required to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
victim’s representative, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or victim’s estate
disputes the amount of restitution. The court shall determine the amount of
full restitution by a preponderance of the evidence.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or the
victim’s estate against the offender. No person may introduce evidence of an
award of restitution under this division (G) in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.
            4.   The court may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not
more than 5% of the amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity
responsible for collecting and processing restitution payments.
            5.   The victim, victim’s attorney, if applicable, or the attorney
for the victim’s estate may request that the prosecutor in the case file a
motion, or the offender may file a motion, for modification of the payment
terms of any restitution ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify
the payment terms as it determines appropriate but shall not reduce the amount
of restitution ordered, except as provided in R.C. § 2929.281(A).
         (b)   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (G)(1)(b)1. and
(G)(1)(b)2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by
law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. § 2949.111.
         (c)   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including but not limited to the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under R.C. § 2951.021 and the
costs of global positioning system device monitoring;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including but not limited to a per diem fee for room and
board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of repairing
property damaged by the offender while confined;
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under R.C. § 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (G)(1)(c)1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in accordance with that section.   
      (2)   (a)   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         (b)   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (F)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (F)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (G) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (F)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   (a)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F),
or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section to the county
treasurer. The county treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section.
         (b)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (E), (F),
or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section to the
treasurer of the municipal corporation. The treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund. The municipal
corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the costs
incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section.
         (c)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(c) of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed under this
division (G), the court imposing sentence upon an offender for misdemeanor
domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of not less than
$70 nor more than $500, which shall be transmitted to the Treasurer of Ohio to
be credited to the address confidentiality program fund created by R.C. §
111.48.
      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (G)(5), a
financial sanction imposed under division (G)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction,
and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(a) of this section is an order in favor of the victim of the
offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a certificate of judgment
as described in division (G)(5)(b)1. of this section, through execution as
described in division (G)(5)(b)2. of this section or through an order as
described in division (G)(5)(b)3. of this section and the offender shall be
considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment debtor.
         (b)   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order
under this division, the victim, private provider, state, or political
subdivision may do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered, at no charge, a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in R.C. §
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (G)(5) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude,
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (G) may designate the clerk of the court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         (a)   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G), a court shall
comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 through 307.92.
         (b)   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a county court or
a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just, except that the
maximum time permitted for payment shall not exceed five years. If the court is
a county court or a municipal court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the board of county commissioners of the county pursuant to R.C. §
301.28. If the court is a municipal court not operated by a county, the clerk
may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of public
money or may charge the fee to the offender.
         (c)   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (G) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
      (9)   If the court imposes restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration
costs on a business or corporation, it is the duty of the person authorized to
make disbursements from assets of the business or corporation to pay the
restitution, fines, fees, or incarceration costs from those assets.
      (10)   If an offender is sentenced to pay restitution, a fine, fee, or
incarceration costs, the clerk of the sentencing court, on request, shall make
the offender’s payment history available to the victim, victim’s
representative, victim’s attorney, if applicable, the prosecutor, the probation
department, and the court without cost.
(R.C. § 2929.28)
   (H)   Organizational penalties.
      (1)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in this section, an
organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
130.09 shall be fined by the court as follows:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
         (e)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
         (f)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000;
         (g)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more
than $1,000.
      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty plainly indicates a
purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon organizations, then
such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty provided in this section.
      (3)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not specifically
classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than that provided
in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to the penalty
provided for violation of the section defining the offense.
      (4)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
130.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2929.31)
Cross-reference:
   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators; registration,
see §
133.99
Statutory reference:
   Citation issuance and limitations on arrest for minor misdemeanors, see R.C.
§ 2935.26
   Crime Victim’s Reparations Fund, see R.C. § 2929.32
   Habitual sex offender and sexual predator registration, see R.C. Chapter
2950
   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.
   Reports to health care licensing boards of criminal offenses, see R.C. §
2929.42
   Restitution, see R.C. § 2929.281
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Arson; determining property value or amount of physical harm
   
131.03   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
   
131.04   Criminal mischief
   
131.05   Damaging or endangering aircraft or airport operations
   
131.06   Criminal trespass; aggravated trespass
   
131.07   Tampering with coin machines
   
131.08   Theft
   
131.09   Unauthorized use of a vehicle
   
131.10   Unauthorized use of property, including telecommunication property and
computers; possession of municipal property
   
131.11   Passing bad checks
   
131.12   Misuse of credit cards
   
131.13   Making or using slugs
   
131.14   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud
   
131.15   Tampering with records
   
131.16   Securing writings by deception
   
131.17   Defrauding creditors
   
131.18   Receiving stolen property
   
131.19   Value of stolen property
   
131.20   Degree of offense when certain property involved
   
131.21   Injuring vines, bushes, trees, or crops
   
131.22   Detention and arrest of shoplifters and those committing motion
picture piracy; protection of institutional property
   
131.23   Insurance fraud; workers’ compensation fraud; Medicaid fraud
   
131.24   Injury to property by hunters
   
131.25   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental
services; evidence of lack of capacity to consent
   
131.26   Forgery of identification cards
   
131.27   Criminal simulation
   
131.28   Personating an officer
   
131.29   Trademark counterfeiting
   
131.30   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
   
131.31   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
   
131.32   Prosecutions for theft of utilities
   
131.33   Motion picture piracy
   
131.34   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism
   
131.35   Desecration
Statutory reference:
   Cable television service devices, unauthorized sale or possession, felony,
see R.C. § 2913.041
   Deceptive acts or practices in connection with consumer transactions, see
O.A.C. Chapter 109:4-3
   Disrupting public services, felony, see R.C. § 2909.04
   E-mail advertisements, civil offenses and felony forgery offense, see R.C. §
2307.64
   E-mail spam, civil offenses and felony offenses, see R.C. § 2913.421
   Food stamps, illegal use, see R.C. § 2913.46
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
   Terrorism involving agricultural products or equipment, see R.C. § 901.511
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the United
States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any services provided by or through the facilities
of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit coaxial cable
communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission service used in
connection with any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system.
   COIN MACHINE. Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of the
following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license.
   COMPUTER. An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and memory
functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. The term
includes but is not limited to all input, output, processing, storage, computer
program, or communication facilities that are connected, or related, in a
computer system or network to an electronic device of that nature.
   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to modify,
damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized access
to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information within a computer,
computer system, or computer network without the express or implied consent of
the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of a type or
kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of a type or
kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self- replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy,
record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   COMPUTER HACKING.
      (1)   The term means any of the following:
         (a)   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system, or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         (b)   Misusing computer or network services including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         (c)   1.   Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system, or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system, or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services, or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system, or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)
(c)1. of this definition does not include standard computer software used for
the normal operation, administration, management, and test of a computer,
computer system, or computer network including but not limited to domain name
services, mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer
programs commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         (d)   The intentional use of a computer, computer system, or a
computer network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by
the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent.
      (2)   The term does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program, or computer network.
   COMPUTER NETWORK. A set of related and remotely-connected computers and
communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has
the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   COMPUTER PROGRAM. An ordered set of data representing coded instructions or
statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the computer to process
data.
   COMPUTER SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to the use of a computer
system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer
use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer network.
   COMPUTER SOFTWARE. Computer programs, procedures, and other documentation
associated with the operation of a computer system.
   COMPUTER SYSTEM. A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including but not limited to data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. A telecommunications device that,
alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed,
manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or otherwise
facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information service
without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications
service or information service. The phrase includes but is not limited to a
clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or tumbler microchip; a
wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving, or
otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information
service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or
software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the electronic
serial number in a wireless telephone.
   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON. Includes
the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any emergency
personnel.
   CREDIT CARD. Includes but is not limited to a card, code, device, or other
means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining money,
property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic fund
transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a cash
dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued under
R.C. § 301.29.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   DATA. A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.
   DECEPTION. To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived by
any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by
preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act, or
omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in another,
including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other
objective or subjective fact.
   DEFRAUD. To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or
another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   DEPRIVE. To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   DISABLED ADULT. A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.
   ELDERLY PERSON. A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER. Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. § 1693a, as amended.
   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision, or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C. § 9.60, or a
volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned or
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal, or an
assistant state fire marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
   FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
   FORGE. To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any
spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or otherwise
purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   GAIN ACCESS. To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.
   INFORMATION SERVICE.
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   The term does not include any use of a capability of a type
described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control, or
operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure, vehicle, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is actually
present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   OWNER. Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other
than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who
has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership,
possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.321.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   RENTED PROPERTY. Personal property in which the right of possession and use
of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return for
consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession of the
property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of
consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the
property.
   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services, rental
services, public utility services including wireless service as defined in R.C.
§ 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink, transportation,
entertainment, and cable television services and, for purposes of R.C. §
2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, includes cable
services as defined in that section.
   SLUG. An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or other
quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an
improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that purpose.
   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.
   TELECOMMUNICATION. The origination, emission, dissemination, transmission,
or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other intelligence or
equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any communications system by any
method, including but not limited to a fiber optic, electronic, magnetic,
optical, digital or analog method.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Any instrument, equipment, machine, or other
device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   THEFT OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, 2911.13,
2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11, 2913.21,
2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43, 2913.44,
2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. § 2913.47 or 2913.48, or R.C. § 2913.51,
2915.05, or 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of R.C. §
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   UTTER. To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation,
deliver, or display.
   WRITING. Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note, paper,
plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written, type-
written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card, badge,
trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license, or
identification.
(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 131.02 ARSON; DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE OR AMOUNT OF PHYSICAL HARM.
   (A)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (B)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1)
or (B)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1) or (B)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.03)
   (E)   Determining property value or amount of physical harm.
      (1)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of division (A)(1)
or (B)(1) of this section:
         (a)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item,
antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that is
either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial
time, effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical
harm involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
         (b)   If the property is not covered under division (B)(1)(a) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
         (c)   If the property is not covered under division (B)(1)(a) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
      (2)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2913.61.
      (3)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in R.C.
§ 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to this
section.
(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D))
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Arson offender registration, see R.C. §§ 2909.13, 2909.14 and 2909.15
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.71
§ 131.03 CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (A)   Criminal damaging or endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         (a)   Knowingly, by any means; or
         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of this
division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property involved
in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2909.06)
   (B)   Vehicular vandalism.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         ALLEY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         HIGHWAY. Means any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or any lane,
road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.
         STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
         VESSEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.
         WATERS IN THIS STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway;
         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (B) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04
   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05
§ 131.04 CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         (a)   The property of another;
         (b)   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation
station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of
another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety
of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land;
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.
      (7)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly destroy or improperly tamper
with a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      IMPROPERLY TAMPER. Means to change the physical location or the physical
condition of the property.
      SAFETY DEVICE. Means any fire extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or
any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape equipment, or any life
line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm,
light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of danger or emergency,
or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard railing or safety
barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign,
signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment, or any other device,
apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or preserving the safety of
persons or property.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (C)(2), (C)(3), or (C)(4) of this
section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
property involved in the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(7) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.07)
§ 131.05 DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT OR AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AIR GUN. Means a hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.
      AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE. Means any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is
actually being used for any of those purposes.
      FIREARM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.
      SPRING-OPERATED GUN. Means a hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.
   (B)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun, or spring-operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface. This division does not apply
to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk of serious
harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction
imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a person who
violates division (C) of this section while hunting shall be suspended or
revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.
(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E))
§ 131.06 CRIMINAL TRESPASS; AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes, or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either;
      (5)   Knowingly enter or remain on a critical infrastructure facility.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal trespass.
Criminal trespass in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Criminal trespass in
violation of division (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in committing the
violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount
imposed for the violation.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in committing each violation,
used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court,
in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation,
may impound the certificate of registration of that snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle or the certificate of registration and license plate of that all-
purpose vehicle for not less than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47
applies.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.
   (F)   As used in divisions (A) through (E) of this section:
      ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE. Have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Means:
         (a)   One of the following, if completely enclosed by a fence or other
physical barrier that is obviously designed to exclude intruders, or if clearly
marked with signs that are reasonably likely to come to the attention of
potential intruders and that indicate entry is forbidden without site
authorization:
            1.   A petroleum or alumina refinery;
            2.   An electric generating facility, substation, switching
station, electrical control center, or electric transmission and distribution
lines and associated equipment;
            3.   A chemical, polymer, or rubber manufacturing facility;
            4.   A water intake structure, water treatment facility, waste
water facility, drainage facility, water management facility, or any similar
water or sewage treatment system and its water and sewage piping;
            5.   A natural gas company facility or interstate natural gas
pipeline, including a pipeline interconnection, a natural gas compressor
station and associated facilities, city gate or town border station, metering
station, above-ground piping, regulator station, valve site, delivery station,
fabricated assembly, or any other part of a natural gas storage facility
involved in the gathering, storage, transmission, or distribution of gas;
            6.   A telecommunications central switching office or remote
switching facility or an equivalent network facility that serves a similar
purpose;
            7.   Wireline or wireless telecommunications infrastructure,
including telecommunications towers and telephone poles and lines, including
fiber optic lines;
            8.   A port, trucking terminal, or other freight transportation
facility;
            9.   A gas processing plant, including a plant used in the
processing, treatment, or fractionation of natural gas or natural gas liquids;
            10.   A transmission facility used by a federally licensed radio or
television station;
            11.   A steel-making facility that uses an electric arc furnace to
make steel;
            12.   A facility identified and regulated by the United States
Department of Homeland Security’s Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Standards
Program under 6 C.F.R. part 27;
            13.   A dam that is regulated by the state or federal government;
            14.   A crude oil or refined products storage and distribution
facility, including valve sites, pipeline interconnections, pump station,
metering station, below- or above-ground pipeline, or piping and truck loading
or off-loading facility;
            15.   A video service network and broadband infrastructure,
including associated buildings and facilities, video service headends, towers,
utility poles, and utility lines such as fiber optic lines. As used in this
division, “video service network” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
            16.   Any above-ground portion of an oil, gas, hazardous liquid or
chemical pipeline, tank, or other storage facility;
            17.   Any above-ground portion of a well, well pad, or production
operation;
            18.   A laydown area or construction site for pipe and other
equipment intended for use on an interstate or intrastate natural gas or crude
oil pipeline;
            19.   Any mining operation, including any processing equipment,
batching operation, or support facility for that mining operation.
         (b)   With respect to a video service network or broadband or wireless
telecommunications infrastructure, the above-ground portion of a facility
installed in a public right-of-way on a utility pole or in a conduit;
         (c)   Any railroad property;
         (d)   An electronic asset of any of the following:
            1.   An electric light company that is a public utility under R.C.
§ 4905.02;
            2.   An electric cooperative, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            3.   A municipal electric utility, as defined in R.C. § 4928.01;
            4.   A natural gas company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            5.   A telephone company that is a public utility under R.C. §
4905.02;
            6.   A video service provider, including a cable operator, as those
terms are defined in R.C. § 1332.21.
      ELECTRONIC ASSET. Includes, but is not limited to, the hardware,
software, and data of a programmable electronic device; all communications,
operations, and customer data networks; and the contents of those data
networks.
      LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or place
belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
      PRODUCTION OPERATION, WELL, and WELL PAD. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 1509.01.
(R.C. § 2911.21)
   (G)   Aggravated trespass.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
that person.
         (b)   No person shall enter or remain on a critical infrastructure
facility with purpose to destroy or tamper with the facility.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass.
Aggravated trespass in violation of division (G)(1)(a) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Aggravated trespass in violation of division
(G)(1)(b) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   As used in this division (G), CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2911.21.
(R.C. § 2911.211)
   (H)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT means a
stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (H)(4)(a)
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include but is not limited to a playing field, an
athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting
event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This
division does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force
beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement,
an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a
place of public amusement.
      (4)   (a)   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         (b)   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (H)(4)(a) of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (H)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         (b)   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other sentence, penalty,
or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (H)(5)(a) of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(R.C. § 2911.23)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
§ 131.07 TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2911.32)
§ 131.08 THEFT.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, a violation of this section is misdemeanor theft, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult,
active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member;
      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance;
      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;
      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the offender
previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;
      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance
dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police
dog or horse or an assistance dog;
      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or
      (9)    If the property stolen is a special purchase article as defined in
R.C. § 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in R.C. §
4737.012.
   (C)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
      (1)   Unless division (C)(2) of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offenders driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident
operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to division (C)(1)
of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state or local law,
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s license, permit, or privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension
shall be at least six months;
      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (C)
(1) or (C)(2) of this section, instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
   (D)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but is
not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or the
cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting from
deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less than
or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.
   (E)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (C) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.
(R.C. § 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)
§ 131.09 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat, or other motor- propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner
or person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a violation
of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and if the victim
incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of division (A) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.03)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving a motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see R.C. § 2913.82
§ 131.10 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY, INCLUDING TELECOMMUNICATION PROPERTY AND
COMPUTERS; POSSESSION OF MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
   (C)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10 without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to R.C. §
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Means any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      CABLE SERVICE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (a)
of this definition;
         (c)   Any cable television service.
      CABLE SYSTEM. Means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (b)   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         (c)   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. § 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(7);
         (d)   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. § 573;
         (e)   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(R.C. § 2913.04)
   (K)   Possession of municipal property.
      (1)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his or her
control or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other property
belonging to the municipality.
(R.C. § 5589.12)
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (K) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 5589.99(B))
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 131.11 PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or
similar negotiable or non- negotiable instrument;
         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.
      ISSUE A CHECK. Means causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (D)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (E)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (B) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or
instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person
for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other
negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple
vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.11)
§ 131.12 MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (A), (B)(1), or (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (D)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative retail value of the
property and services involved in one or more violations of division (B)(2),
(B)(3), or (B)(4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit
card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on
the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.21)
§ 131.13 MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2913.33)
§ 131.14 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(R.C. § 2913.41)
§ 131.15 TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data, or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (A)(1) of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   If division (B)(1)(b) of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (A) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.42)
§ 131.16 SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception. Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property or
the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If the victim of the
offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty service member, or
spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings by deception is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.43)
§ 131.17 DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount, or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property involved is
$1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.45)
§ 131.18 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(R.C. § 2913.51)
§ 131.19 VALUE OF STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or
2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or 2913.43 involving
a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the
offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or relationship to
another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. When a
series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of violations of, attempts
to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations
of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is an active duty service
member or spouse of an active duty service member, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is committed by the
offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or relationship to
another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single offense. The value of
the property or services involved in the series of offenses for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value
of all property and services involved in all offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense. If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A),
R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. §
2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more than one
victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, pursuant
to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a
single offense. If an offender is being tried for the commission of a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed
against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active
duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a
scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single
offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the
property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value as
required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. § 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property
and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or more
offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2) or
(B)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series. Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in division (B)
(1) or (B)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in division (B)(2) of this section. While it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of
this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to
prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is the amount which
would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (C)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
such property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, and the value of services, is
the fair market value of the property or services. As used in this section,
FAIR MARKET VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a
seller would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is
willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed
as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any
compulsion to act.
   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry, or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is established
by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E))
§ 131.20 DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
131.08 or §
131.18 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (A)   A credit card;
   (B)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (C)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.22, a temporary motor vehicle license registration as prescribed by R.C. §
4503.182, or any comparable temporary motor vehicle license registration as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (D)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;
   (E)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.
(R.C. § 2913.71)
§ 131.21 INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES, OR CROPS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or
crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(R.C. § 901.51)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
(R.C. § 901.99(A))
§ 131.22 DETENTION AND ARREST OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION
PICTURE PIRACY; PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION. Means any public or private building, structure, or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored
to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available
for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a
particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2913.07.
      FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.07.
      MUSEUM. Means any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. Means a rehabilitative, educational program
designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that is at
least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in this
state.
   (B)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (C)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (D) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival institution, if the
officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent
of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (D)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or archival
institution pursuant to division (C) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief, or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (E)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (F)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions (B), (C) or
(E) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (G)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above, that the officer has probable cause to
believe has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that
the officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by
R.C. § 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable
time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(R.C. § 2935.041)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest without a warrant generally, see R.C. § 2935.03
   Probable cause, see R.C. § 2933.22
§ 131.23 INSURANCE FRAUD; WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD; MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (A)   Insurance fraud.
      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written
or oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for
insurance, a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other
benefit pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the
statement, is false or deceptive;
         (b)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of insurance fraud.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is
$1,000 or more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   This division (A) shall not be construed to abrogate, waive, or
modify R.C. § 2317.02(A).
      (4)   As used in this division (A):
         DATA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts,
or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
         DECEPTIVE. Means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause
another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation,
withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other
conduct, act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression,
including but not limited to a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
         INSURER. Means any person that is authorized to engage in the business
of insurance in this state under R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan Underwriting
Association created under R.C. § 3929.43, any health insuring corporation, and
any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to its employees or
members.
         POLICY. Means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is issued
by an insurer.
         STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test
result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer-generated
document; and data in any form.
(R.C. § 2913.47)
   (B)   Workers’ compensation fraud.
      (1)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is
not entitled;
         (b)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure workers’
compensation benefits;
         (c)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any record or
document that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed
with, or necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and
services for which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from
the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under R.C.
Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;
         (d)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
         (e)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false
statement concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
         (f)   Alter, forge, or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
         (g)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of Workers’
Compensation.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of workers’
compensation fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’
compensation fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of
premiums and assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in divisions (B)
(1)(e), (B)(1)(f), or (B)(1)(g) of this section, or goods, services, property,
or money stolen is $1,000 or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this division (B), the court
shall order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the
governmental body its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case. These
costs are in addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal,
state or local law.
      (4)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (B) are not
exclusive remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other
criminal or civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this
division (B).
      (5)   As used in this division (B):
         CLAIM. Means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation,
an independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under R.C. § 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
         EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         EMPLOYER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         EMPLOYMENT. Means participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service, or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
         FALSE. Means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
         GOODS. Includes but is not limited to medical supplies, appliances,
rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or
used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for workers’
compensation benefits.
         RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial, or business
record relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services
provided to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any
person, or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires
pursuant to rule.
         REMUNERATION. Includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates, and any other reward or consideration.
         SELF-INSURING EMPLOYER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4123.01.
         SERVICES. Includes but is not limited to any service provided by any
health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and any
and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
         STATEMENT. Includes but is not limited to any oral, written,
electronic, electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice, letter,
memorandum, receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement, or bill
for services; a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical, or
dental chart or other record; and a computer generated document.
         WORKERS’ COMPENSATION BENEFITS. Means any compensation or benefits
payable under R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.
(R.C. § 2913.48)
   (C)   Medicaid fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
      (2)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
         (a)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement,
charge, solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person
provides under the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration
in addition to the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the
person’s provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing
expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
         (b)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
      (3)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or
services under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a
period of at least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
         (a)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
         (b)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (C) is guilty of Medicaid fraud.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, Medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained
in violation of this section is $1,000 or more, Medicaid fraud is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate State law.
      (5)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case. The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, R.C. § 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
      (6)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
      (7)   As used in this division (C):
         PROVIDER. Means any person who has signed a provider agreement with
the Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the
Medicaid program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such
a provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
         PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         RECIPIENT. Means any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
         RECORDS. Means any medical, professional, financial or business
records relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or
services provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services
provided to any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of
the Medicaid Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
         STATEMENT or REPRESENTATION. Means any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
(R.C. § 2913.40)
   (D)   Medicaid eligibility fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         (a)   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         (b)   Conceal an interest in property;
         (c)   1.   Except as provided in division (D)(1)(c)2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (D) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (D) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         (b)   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (D) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (D).
      (3)   This division (D) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (D) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
General Revenue Fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   As used in this division (D):
         MEDICAID SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         PROPERTY. Means any real or personal property or other asset in which
a person has any legal title or interest.
(R.C. § 2913.401)
§ 131.24 INJURY TO PROPERTY BY HUNTERS.
   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing a wild
animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to injure
property.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) through (E)
§ 131.25 EVIDENCE OF INTENT TO COMMIT THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY OR RENTAL
SERVICES; EVIDENCE OF LACK OF CAPACITY TO CONSENT.
   (A)   Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental
services.
      (1)   As used in this division (A):
         RENTER. Means a person who owns rented property.
         RENTEE. Means a person who pays consideration to a renter for the use
of rented property.
      (2)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services:
         (a)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious,
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment, or other
relevant information.
         (b)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (A)(3) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
      (3)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (A)(2)(b) above, a renter may issue
a notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property. The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
      (4)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a
prerequisite for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or
rental services. The evidence specified in division (A)(2) above does not
constitute the only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to
commit theft of rented property or rental services.
(R.C. § 2913.72)
   (B)   Evidence of lack of capacity to consent.
      (1)   In a prosecution for any alleged violation of §
131.08 through 131.20, 131.23, 131.25 through 131.29, or 132.11, if the lack of
consent of the victim is an element of the provision that allegedly was
violated, evidence that, at the time of the alleged violation, the victim
lacked the capacity to give consent is admissible to show that the victim did
not give consent.
      (2)   As used in this section, LACKS THE CAPACITY TO CONSENT means being
impaired for any reason to the extent that the person lacks sufficient
understanding or capacity to make and carry out reasonable decisions concerning
the person or the person’s resources.
(R.C. § 2913.73)
§ 131.26 FORGERY OF IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (B)   As used in this section, IDENTIFICATION CARD means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity”, “identification”, “identification card”, or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (A) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
      (2)    If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(R.C. § 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2913.31(A) and (C)(1)
   Forgery of originating address or other routing information in connection
with the transmission of an electronic mail advertisement, felony provisions,
see R.C. § 2307.64
§ 131.27 CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or fraudulently
cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any wrapper,
label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under
R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper, label, stamp,
cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under R.C. Chapters
4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or
(A)(3) of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, criminal
simulation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2913.32)
§ 131.28 PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2913.44)
Cross-reference:
   Impersonating an officer (non-fraud offense), see §
132.12
§ 131.29 TRADEMARK COUNTERFEITING.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Attach, affix, or otherwise use a counterfeit mark in connection
with the manufacture of goods or services, whether or not the goods or services
are intended for sale or resale.
      (2)   Possess, sell, or offer for sale tools, machines, instruments,
materials, articles, or other items of personal property with the knowledge
that they are designed for the production or reproduction of counterfeit marks.
      (3)   Purchase or otherwise acquire goods, and keep or otherwise have the
goods in the person’s possession, with the knowledge that a counterfeit mark is
attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with the goods and
with the intent to sell or otherwise dispose of the goods.
      (4)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise dispose of goods with the
knowledge that a counterfeit mark is attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used
in connection with the goods.
      (5)   Sell, offer for sale, or otherwise provide services with the
knowledge that a counterfeit mark is used in connection with that sale, offer
for sale, or other provision of the services.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of trademark counterfeiting.
      (1)   A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)    Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
circumstances of the violation indicate that the tools, machines, instruments,
materials, articles, or other items of personal property involved in the
violation were intended for use in the commission of a felony, a violation of
division (A)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of
division (A)(3), (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the cumulative sales price of the goods or services to which or in
connection with which the counterfeit mark is attached, affixed or otherwise
used in the offense is $1,000 or more, a violation of division (A)(3), (A)(4)
or (A)(5) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   A defendant may assert as an affirmative defense to a charge of a
violation of this section defenses, affirmative defenses, and limitations on
remedies that would be available in a civil, criminal or administrative action
or proceeding under the Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127, as
amended, the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as
amended, R.C. Chapter 1329 or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or
common law.
   (D)   (1)   Law enforcement officers may seize pursuant to Criminal Rule 41,
R.C. Chapter 2933, or R.C. Chapter 2981 either of the following:
         (a)   Goods to which or in connection with which a person attached,
affixed, otherwise used, or intended to attach, affix or otherwise use a
counterfeit mark in violation of this section.
         (b)   Tools, machines, instruments, materials, articles, vehicles or
other items of personal property that are possessed, sold, offered for sale, or
used in a violation of this section or in an attempt to commit or complicity in
the commission of a violation of this section.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of R.C. Chapter 2981, if a
person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, an
attempt to violate this section, or complicity in a violation of this section,
the court involved shall declare that the goods described in division (D)(1)(a)
of this section and the personal property described in division (D)(1)(b) of
this section are contraband and are forfeited. Prior to the court’s entry of
judgment under Criminal Rule 32, the owner of a registered trademark or service
mark that is the subject to the counterfeit mark may recommend a manner in
which the forfeited goods and forfeited personal property should be disposed
of. If that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition, the
court is not bound by the recommendation. If that owner makes a timely
recommendation of a manner of disposition, the court may include in its entry
of judgment an order that requires appropriate persons to dispose of the
forfeited goods and forfeited personal property in the recommended manner. If
the owner fails to make a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition or
if that owner makes a timely recommendation of a manner of disposition but the
court determines to not follow the recommendation, the court shall include in
its entry of judgement an order that requires the law enforcement agency that
employs the law enforcement officer who seized the forfeited goods or the
forfeited personal property to destroy them or cause their destruction.
   (E)   This section does not affect the rights of an owner of a trademark or
service mark, or the enforcement in a civil action or in administrative
proceedings of the rights of an owner or a trademark or service mark under the
Lanham Act, being 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051 through 1127, as amended, the Trademark
Counterfeiting Act of 1984, being 18 U.S.C. § 2320, as amended, R.C. Chapter
1329, or another section of the Ohio Revised Code, or common law.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      COUNTERFEIT MARK.
         (a)   Except as provided in division (b) of this definition, the term
means a spurious trademark or a spurious service mark that satisfies both of
the following:
            1.   It is identical with or substantially indistinguishable from a
mark that is registered on the principal register in the United States Patent
and Trademark Office for the same goods or services as the goods or services to
which or in connection with which the spurious trademark or spurious service
mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise used, or from a mark that is registered
with the Secretary of State pursuant to R.C. §§ 1329.54 through 1329.67 for the
same goods or services as the goods or services to which or in connection with
which the spurious trademark or spurious service mark is attached, affixed, or
otherwise used, and the owner of the registration uses that registered
trademark, whether or not the offender knows that the mark is registered in a
manner described in this division (a)1.
            2.   Its use is likely to cause confusion or mistake or to deceive
other persons.
         (b)   The term does not include a mark or other designation that is
attached to, affixed to, or otherwise used in connection with goods or services
if the holder of the right to use the mark or other designation authorizes the
manufacturer, producer, or vendor of those goods or services to attach, affix,
or otherwise use the mark or other designation in connection with those goods
or services at the time of their manufacture, production or sale.
      CUMULATIVE SALES PRICE. Means the product of the lowest single unit sales
price charged or sought to be charged by an offender for goods to which or in
connection with which a counterfeit mark is attached, affixed, or otherwise
used or of the lowest single service transaction price charged or sought to be
charged by an offender for services in connection with which a counterfeit mark
is used, multiplied by the total number of those goods or services, whether or
not units of goods are sold or are in an offender’s possession, custody or
control.
      REGISTERED TRADEMARK OR SERVICE MARK. Means a trademark or service mark
that is registered in a manner described in division (a) of the definition of
“counterfeit mark”.
      SERVICE MARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.
      TRADEMARK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1329.54.
(R.C. § 2913.34)
§ 131.30 DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C. Chapter
2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2981.07)
§ 131.31 RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (A)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(R.C. § 1349.17)
   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 1349.99(A))
§ 131.32 PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (B)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      TAMPER. Means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
      UTILITY. Means any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
(R.C. § 4933.18)
   (D)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by R.C. § 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees or
receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(R.C. § 4933.19)
§ 131.33 MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION. Means the capability of a device to
record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of
any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      FACILITY. Means a movie theater.
   (B)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (D)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (E)   Division (B) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (B) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(R.C. § 2913.07)
§ 131.34 RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (C)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (A), (B), or
(C) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (E) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
§ 131.35 DESECRATION.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute, or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing, or site of great historical or
archaeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the second degree. A violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   As used in this section, “cemetery” means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
(R.C. § 2927.11)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Section
   
132.01   Riot
   
132.02   Failure to disperse
   
132.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
   
132.04   Disorderly conduct
   
132.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting
   
132.06   Misconduct at an emergency
   
132.07   Telecommunications harassment
   
132.08   Inducing panic
   
132.09   Making false alarms
   
132.10   Inciting to violence
   
132.11   Unlawful display of law enforcement emblem
   
132.12   Impersonating a peace officer
   
132.13   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
   
132.14   Misconduct involving a public transportation system
   
132.15   Impeding public passage of an emergency service responder
   
132.16   Dog at large
   
132.17   Animals at large
Cross-reference:
   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see §
131.28
Statutory reference:
   Misuse of “Block Parent” or “McGruff House” symbol, see R.C. § 2917.46
§ 132.01 RIOT.
   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede,
or obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2917.03)
   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(R.C. § 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02
§ 132.02 FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence creates
the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious public
inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other public
official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. No
person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) of this section,
failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.
      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if the
failure to obey the order described in division (A) of this section creates the
likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
(R.C. § 2917.04)
§ 132.03 JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (A)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (B)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(R.C. § 2917.05)
§ 132.04 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway, or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he
or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(B) of this section.
   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2) and (E)(3) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if any of
the following applies:
         (a)   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after reasonable
warning or request to desist.
         (b)   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a school or in a
school safety zone.
         (c)   The offense is committed in the presence of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the person’s duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
         (d)   The offense is committed in the presence of any emergency
facility person who is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility.
      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to three or more violations of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 2917.11(B),
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation
of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2925.01.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.11)
§ 132.05 DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession, or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting. Except as otherwise provided in this division, disturbing a lawful
meeting is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Disturbing a lawful meeting is a
misdemeanor of the first degree if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The violation is committed with the intent to disturb or disquiet
any assemblage of people met for religious worship at a tax-exempt place of
worship, regardless of whether the conduct is within the place at which the
assemblage is held or is on the property on which that place is located and
disturbs the order and solemnity of the assemblage.
      (2)   The violation is committed with the intent to prevent, disrupt, or
interfere with a virtual meeting or gathering of people for religious worship,
through use of a computer, computer system, telecommunications device, or other
electronic device or system, or in any other manner.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      VIRTUAL MEETING OR GATHERING. A meeting or gathering by interactive video
conference or teleconference, or by a combination thereof.
(R.C. § 2917.12)
§ 132.06 MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section creates a risk
of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an emergency is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      EMERGENCY FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
(R.C. § 2917.13)
§ 132.07 TELECOMMUNICATIONS HARASSMENT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)
(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10), or (A)(11) or (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of division (A)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or agent’s provision of information,
facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section. A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s,
employee’s, or agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in
accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (F)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (G)   As used in divisions (A) through (D) of this section:
      CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
      CALLER. Means the person described in division (A) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means all direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         (a)   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(A)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
division (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law marital
relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who otherwise
has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date of the
alleged commission of the act in question.
      SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act”, 15 U.S.C. § 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act”, 47 U.S.C. § 227, as amended.
(R.C. § 2917.21)
§ 132.08 INDUCING PANIC.
   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If a violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1) is a school or an
institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a
purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, inducing
panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      BIOLOGICAL AGENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.
      ECONOMIC HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. “Economic harm” as described
in this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as
a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that
constituted the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all
costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue
personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subdivision.
      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2133.21.
      INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A state university or college as defined in R.C. § 3345.12(A)
(1), community college, state community college, university branch, or
technical college;
         (b)   A private, nonprofit college, university or other post-secondary
institution located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to R.C. Chapter 1713;
         (c)   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of registration
issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 3332.
      SCHOOL. Means any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C.
§ 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a violation of
this section is committed.
      WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or
serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or
radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;
         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine, or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
(d)1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(R.C. § 2917.31)
§ 132.09 MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur;
      (4)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to impede the operation of a critical
infrastructure facility.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
$1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If a violation of this section pertains to a purported,
threatened, or actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or this code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2911.21.
      ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION. Have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2917.31.
(R.C. § 2917.32)
§ 132.10 INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence. If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2917.01)
§ 132.11 UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEM.
   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2913.441)
§ 132.12 IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Means an employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      IMPERSONATE. Means to act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND INVESTIGATION.
Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.
      PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, member
of the organized police department of a municipal corporation, or township
constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a member
of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under R.C. §
3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit authority
under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer appointed
under R.C. § 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed under R.C. §
5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. §
4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its
agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute,
a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and
the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory
duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose primary duties are
to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to enforce the laws,
ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions.
      PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Means any security guard, special police officer,
private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person, or search the property of any person.
   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose of a
violation of division (D) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (D) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division (E) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.51)
Cross-reference:
   Personating an officer (fraud offense), see §
131.28
§ 132.13 SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CONCERT. Means a musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. The term
does not include any performance in which music is a part of the presentation
and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion picture, a
demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an instrument,
an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      FACILITY. Means any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that
has walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including but not limited
to a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall,
convention center or music hall.
      LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCE. Means any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. The term
does not include any form of entertainment with respect to which the person
purchasing a ticket routinely participates in amusements as well as views
performers.
      PERSON. Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified in
R.C. § 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      RESTRICTED ENTERTAINMENT AREA. Means any wholly or partially enclosed
area, whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         (a)   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (D) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         (b)   A concert that is not exempted under division (D) of this
section and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section or any concert as described in
division (B)(1)(b) of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only”.
   (C)   Unless exempted by division (D)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (E)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (D)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         (a)   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         (b)   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   (a)   The officer responsible for public safety in the municipality
may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by division (B) of
this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that division if such
officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and
spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the
provisions of that division. In determining whether to grant an exemption, the
officer shall consider the following factors: the size and design of the
facility in which the concert is scheduled; the size, age and anticipated
conduct of the crowd expected to attend the concert; and the ability of the
sponsor to manage and control the expected crowd. If the sponsor of any concert
desires to obtain an exemption under this division, the sponsor shall apply to
the appropriate official on a form prescribed by that official. The official
shall issue an order that grants or denies the exemption within five days after
receipt of the application. The sponsor may appeal any order that denies an
exemption to the Court of Common Pleas of the county in which the facility is
located.
         (b)   If an official grants an exemption under division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by R.C. § 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer appointed
pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(D)(2)(a) of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         (b)   If the officer grants an exemption under division (D)(3)(a) of
this section, designate an on-duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (E)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(D)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (C) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances. The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (E)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall
designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed
in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a restricted
entertainment area located on the campus of an educational institution covered
by R.C. § 3345.04.
   (F)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (H)   This section does not prohibit the Legislative Authority from imposing
additional requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or
holding of live entertainment performances.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (B), (C) or (F) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If any individual suffers physical harm to
the individual’s person as a result of a violation of this section, the
sentencing court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of
imprisonment upon the offender.
(R.C. § 2917.40)
§ 132.14 MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM means a county
transit system operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.01 through 306.13, a
regional transit authority operated in accordance with R.C. §§ 306.30 through
306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in accordance with R.C. §§
306.80 through 306.90.
   (B)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (C)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (D)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (E)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (F)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (G)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system.
      (1)   A violation of division (B), (C), or (F) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense. If a person previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of any division of this section or of a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any division of this section, a
violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (E) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the treasury of the County and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the treasury of the County.
(R.C. § 2917.41)
§ 132.15 IMPEDING PUBLIC PASSAGE OF AN EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly obstruct any
highway, street, sidewalk, or any other public passage in such a manner as to
render the highway, street, sidewalk, or passage impassable without
unreasonable inconvenience or hazard if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The obstruction prevents an emergency vehicle from accessing a
highway or street, prevents an emergency service responder from responding to
an emergency, or prevents an emergency vehicle or an emergency service
responder from having access to an exit from an emergency.
      (2)   Upon receipt of a request or order from an emergency service
responder to remove or cease the obstruction, the person refuses to remove or
cease the obstruction.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code. Any conduct
that is a violation of division (A) of this section and that also is a
violation of R.C. § 2921.31 or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may
be prosecuted under this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawfully impeding public
passage of an emergency service responder, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
(R.C. § 2917.14)
§ 132.16 DOG AT LARGE.
   (A)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by
the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or
harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following:
      (1)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises of
the owner, keeper, or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence, supervision,
or secure enclosure to prevent escape;
      (2)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25 or more
than $100 on a first offense, and on each subsequent offense shall be fined not
less than $75 or more than $250 and may be imprisoned for not more than 30
days.
Statutory reference:
   Confining dogs, see R.C. § 955.22
§ 132.17 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   (A)   No person, who is the owner or keeper of horses, mules, cattle, bison,
sheep, goats, swine, llamas, alpacas, or poultry, shall permit them to run at
large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or upon unenclosed
land, or cause the animals to be herded, kept, or detained for the purpose of
grazing on premises other than those owned or lawfully occupied by the owner or
keeper of the animals.
   (B)   Whoever recklessly violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
Statutory reference:
   Animals at large, see R.C. § 951.02
CHAPTER 133: SEX OFFENSES
Section
   
133.01   Definitions
   
133.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
   
133.03   Sexual imposition
   
133.04   Public indecency
   
133.05   Voyeurism
   
133.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use
   
133.07   Procuring; engagement in sexual activity for hire
   
133.08   Soliciting; loitering to engage in
   
133.09   Prostitution
   
133.10   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.11   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.12   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
   
133.13   Rules of evidence
   
133.14   Declaratory judgment
   
133.15   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
   
133.16   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
   
133.17   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited
   
133.18   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
   
133.19   Unlawful advertising of massage
   
133.20   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images
 
   
133.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration
Statutory reference:
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see R.C. §§ 2907.28 et seq.
   Child victim, disposition of, see R.C. § 2945.481
   Suppression of information at trial, see R.C. § 2907.11
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance describing
or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-masochistic
abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print, picture,
figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser disc,
phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing capable
of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an image or
text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid crystal
display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a computer
hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or similar data
storage device.
   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.51.
   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18.
   NUDITY. The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of
a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   OBSCENE. When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to ordinary
adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially susceptible
group, judged with reference to that group, any material or performance is
“obscene” if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   PERFORMANCE. Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit, dance,
or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   PLACE WHERE A PERSON HAS A REASONABLE EXPECTATION OF PRIVACY. A place where
a reasonable person would believe that the person could fully disrobe in
private.
   PRIVATE AREA. The genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or female breast below the
top of the areola, where nude or covered by an undergarment.
   PROSTITUTE. A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity
for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to
another.
   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another. Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   SEXUAL CONTACT. Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the
person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in a
state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   SPOUSE. A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged offense,
except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of the
following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(R.C. § 2907.01)
§ 133.02 UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (A)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another who is not the spouse of the offender, when the offender
knows the other person is 13 years of age or older but less than 16 years of
age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C. § 2907.12, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with a
minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.04)
§ 133.03 SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of
the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual
contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to have sexual
contact when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the
other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard.
      (2)   The offender knows that the other person’s, or one of the other
person’s ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender’s or
touching person’s conduct is substantially impaired.
      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other
persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.
      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13 years of age
or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the offender knows the
age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years of age and four or
more years older than the other person.
      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or
one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender,
and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to
submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient
that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes.
   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03,
2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2907.02,
2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any combination of those
sections, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree and,
notwithstanding the range of jail terms prescribed in R.C. § 2929.24, the court
may impose on the offender a definite jail term of not more than one year.
(R.C. § 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see R.C. § 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see R.C. §§ 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 133.04 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the persons’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency and
shall be punished as provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3), (C)(4), and (C)(5)
of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), a violation
of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by
the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender’s conduct was a minor, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), a violation
of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(5), a violation
of division (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (B)(4) of this
section:
         (a)   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         (b)   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person
and the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (E)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein the mother
otherwise is permitted.
(R.C. § 3781.55)
Statutory reference:
   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41
§ 133.05 VOYEURISM.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record another person, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation
of privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of that person.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly commit trespass or otherwise secretly or
surreptitiously videotape, film, photograph, broadcast, stream, or otherwise
record a minor, in a place where a person has a reasonable expectation of
privacy, for the purpose of viewing the private areas of the minor.
   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person above, under, or through the
clothing being worn by that other person for the purpose of viewing the body
of, or the undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (4)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.08)
§ 133.06 POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, other public official, defendant,
defendant’s attorney, alleged juvenile offender, or alleged juvenile offender’s
attorney shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit
to a polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation
or prosecution of the alleged sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      ALLEGED JUVENILE OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.
      POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Means any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      PROSECUTION. Means the prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.
      SEX OFFENSE. Means a violation of any provision of §§
133.02 to
133.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(R.C. § 2907.10)
§ 133.07 PROCURING; ENGAGEMENT IN SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE.
   (A)   Procuring.
      (1)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:
         (a)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
         (b)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
      (2)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of procuring. Except as otherwise provided in this division, procuring
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the prostitute who is procured,
patronized, or otherwise involved in a violation of division (A)(1)(b) of this
section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation, regardless of
whether the offender who violates division (A)(1)(b) of this section knows the
prostitute’s age, or if a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in
premises used in violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.23)
   (B)   Engagement in sexual activity for hire.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         PERSON WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2905.32.
         SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. An implicit or explicit agreement to provide
sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person engaging
in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to any
person associated with either such person.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person.
      (3)   No person shall recklessly induce, entice, or procure another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person if the other person is a person with a
developmental disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to
believe that the other person is a person with a developmental disability.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is guilty of
engaging in prostitution, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of engaging in prostitution with a
person with a developmental disability, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In sentencing the offender under this division, the
court shall require the offender to attend an education or treatment program
aimed at preventing persons from inducing, enticing, or procuring another to
engage in sexual activity for hire in exchange for the person giving anything
of value to the other person and, notwithstanding the fine specified in R.C. §
2929.28(A)(2)(a) for a misdemeanor of the first degree, the court may impose
upon the offender a fine of not more than $1,500.
(R.C. § 2907.231)
§ 133.08 SOLICITING; LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly solicit another to engage in sexual activity
for hire in exchange for the person receiving anything of value from the other
person.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (A) of this section.
   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE
means an implicit or explicit agreement to provide sexual activity in exchange
for anything of value paid to the person engaging in such sexual activity, to
any person trafficking that person, or to any person associated with either
such person.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
soliciting. Soliciting is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.24)
   (E)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (F)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in conduct in violation of division (E) of this section.
   (G)   As used in division (E) of this section:
      PUBLIC PLACE. Means any of the following:
         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (a) of this definition.
         (c)   A place not described in division (a) or (b) of this definition
that is open to the public.
      VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
   (H)   (1)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation after a positive HIV test, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.09 PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (B)   No person, with knowledge that the person has tested positive as a
carrier of a virus that causes acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, shall engage
in sexual activity for hire.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
prostitution, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of engaging
in prostitution after a positive HIV test, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see R.C. § 2907.27
§ 133.10 DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license, or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles. If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2907.31)
   (F)   Presumptions, notice and defense.
      (1)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager,
of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged
in selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by this section is presumed to have knowledge
of the character of the material or performance involved if the owner, manager,
or agent or employee of the owner or manager has actual notice of the nature of
such material or performance, whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or
employee of the owner or manager has precise knowledge of its contents.
      (2)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality. Such notice, regardless
of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender, identify the
material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.
      (3)   This §
133.10 does not apply to a motion picture operator or projectionist acting
within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner or manager of the
theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to the general
public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial interest in the
operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than wages.
      (4)   (a)   The provisions of §§
133.10,
133.11 and
133.12(A) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
         (b)   Division (F)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §
133.10,
133.11, or
133.12 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
         (c)   Division (F)(4)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely
transferring information that is engaged in the violation of §
133.10,
133.11, or
133.12 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
      (5)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §
133.10,
133.11, or
133.12 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
         (a)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the
employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
         (b)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
      (6)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §
133.10 or
133.11 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(R.C. § 2907.35)
§ 133.11 DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2907.311)
Cross-reference:
   Presumptions, notice and defense, see §
133.10(F)
§ 133.12 DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree. A juvenile who
violates division (B) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter 2151.
(R.C. § 2907.33)
Cross-reference:
   Presumptions, notice and defense, see §
133.10(F)
Statutory reference:
   Juvenile Court, see R.C. Chapter 2151
§ 133.13 RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation
of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of
whether such place is or is not a brothel.
   (B)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the
question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
   (C)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
133.07 through
133.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (D)   The prohibition contained in R.C. § 2317.02(D) against testimony by a
husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and the
accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of the
following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
133.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
133.08(A) or §
133.09.
(R.C. § 2907.26)
§ 133.14 DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2721, involving the
same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory judgment
action to determine whether particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to R.C. § 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(A) of this section is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (C)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (A) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (D)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (E)   The fact that a violation of R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(R.C. § 2907.36)
§ 133.15 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Where it appears that R.C. § 2907.31 or R.C. § 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation. The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to
trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the
court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (B)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of R.C. § 2907.31 or
R.C. § 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2907.37)
Statutory reference:
   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles, felony, see R.C. § 2907.31
   Pandering obscenity, felony, see R.C. § 2907.32
§ 133.16 UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Means an entity that is open to the public and
to which either of the following applies:
         (a)   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances
depicting sexual conduct.
         (b)   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental, or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES. Means films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video, or other motion pictures.
   (B)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any aperture, hole, or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge,
or other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or
performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 2907.38)
§ 133.17 JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ADULT ARCADE. Means any place to which the public is permitted or invited
in which coin- operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other
image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so displayed
are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE.
         (a)   Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         (b)   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in R.C. §
2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials exhibiting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle
club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages
are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         (b)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. Means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals, or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. Means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not
limited to massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not an
“adult entertainment establishment”.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      ADULT THEATER. Means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON. Means the dominant
or principal character and theme of the object described by this phrase. For
instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so described are
those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO. Means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         (a)   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         (b)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         (c)   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY. Means the showing of the human male or
female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with less
than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with less
than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN. Means a consistent or substantial
course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a
substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the
ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Means a state of dress in which opaque
clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple of the
female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or
devices.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.
         (a)   Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         (b)   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including but not limited to massage
therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is not a “sexual encounter
establishment”.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Means the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male
or female genitals, or the female breast.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         (b)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of
the activities described in division (a) of this definition.
   (B)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including but not
limited to a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on the
premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (C)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (D)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (B) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor made a
bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance
to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification
presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the
identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the
identification had not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (E)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (D) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
deputy registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or deputy
registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(R.C. § 2907.39)
§ 133.18 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. Means a commercial establishment
that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or
inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. Means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality of an
item.
      EMPLOYEE. Means any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      NUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      OPERATOR. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      PATRON. Means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:
         (a)   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         (b)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         (c)   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      PREMISES. Means the real property on which the sexually oriented business
is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but not
limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and
parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      REGULARLY. Means consistently or repeatedly.
      SEMINUDE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      SEXUAL DEVICE. Means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts
or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including but not
limited to dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the
human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. Means a commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. Means a business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. Means an adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or sexual
encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of its
showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.
      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic region, and
buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Means sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
      STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
      STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.
   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4303 may
remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the
performers appear nude.
   (C)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal
sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the offender
touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing
covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender does not touch a
specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the clothing covering a
specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55
§ 133.19 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(R.C. § 2927.17)
§ 133.20 NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      DIRECT-TO-HOME SATELLITE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. §
303, as amended.
      DISSEMINATE. Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer device,
computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      IMAGE. Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or other
depiction or portrayal of a person.
      INTERACTIVE COMPUTER SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      INTERNET PROVIDER. Means a provider of internet service, including all of
the following:
         (a)   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         (b)   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         (c)   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in R.C. §
4927.01.
      MOBILE SERVICE. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended.
      SEXUAL ACT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sexual activity;
         (b)   Masturbation;
         (c)   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         (d)   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIER. Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153,
as amended.
      VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (D)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (E)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(1)(b), (F)(1)
(c), or (F)(1)(d) of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is
a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of
private sexual images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (d)   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         (a)   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         (b)   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (G)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
§ 133.99 SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (A)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in R.C. §
2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s sentence a
statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim offender,
shall comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2950.03, and shall require the
offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant to R.C. §
2901.07.
   (B)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and
2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender,
at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required
under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in
that section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall
perform the duties specified in that division.
(R.C. § 2929.23)
Cross-reference:
   Sentencing generally, see
Chapter 130
CHAPTER 134: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
134.01   Definitions
   
134.02   Prohibitions against gambling; exception
   
134.03   Operating a gambling house
   
134.04   Public gaming
   
134.05   Cheating
   
134.06   Regulations concerning operation of licensed bingo game
   
134.07   Records to be kept
   
134.08   Requirements for bingo game operators
   
134.09   Bingo games for amusement only
   
134.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
   
134.11   Raffle drawings
   
134.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
   
134.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
   
134.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
   
134.15   Electronic instant bingo; prohibited conduct
Statutory reference:
   Conducting an illegal bingo game, felony, see R.C. § 2915.07
   Licensing bingo games by Attorney General, see R.C. § 2915.08
   Licensing distributors of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §
2915.081
   Licensing manufacturers of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C. §
2915.082
§ 134.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   BINGO. Either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in five horizontal and five vertical rows of spaces, with
each space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a
letter and a number and with the central space being designated as a free
space;
         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, and raffles.
   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who performs
work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to collecting
money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or objects to cover
spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle the objects that
contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on bingo cards or
sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers, distributing
prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards, selling or
redeeming electronic instant bingo tickets, credits, or vouchers, accessing an
electronic instant bingo system other than as a participant, supervising the
operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting raffle tickets
from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a raffle, and
preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages. “Bingo game operator” does
not include a person who is installing, maintaining, updating, or repairing an
electronic instant bingo system.
   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo, and electronic instant bingo;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and electronic instant
bingo for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.
   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant bingo
ticket dispensers; electronic instant bingo systems; and devices for selecting
or displaying the combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets.
Items that are “bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise
provided, and used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For
purposes of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment
used to conduct a bingo game.
   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.
   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals, and
businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(6).
   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2) of
the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a charitable
organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08 and the
proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt from
federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and
is a charitable organization as defined in this section. The term does not
include a charitable organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3) and that is created by a
veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting organization in
regards to bingo conducted or assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means either of the following:
         (a)   An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant
bingo or electronic instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or
otherwise transferred to, any of the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC §§ 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2),
or 509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in R.C. § 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships
to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division of the Ohio
Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit
youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that are donated
to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion
of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC § 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.
   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or prepare
for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or a
sweepstakes.
   DEAL. A single game of instant bingo tickets, or a single game of electronic
instant bingo tickets, all with the same serial number.
   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who does
either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.
      (1)   An electronic device used by a participant to monitor bingo cards
or sheets purchased at the time and place of a bingo session and that does all
of the following:
         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant
to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   The term does not include any device into which a coin, currency,
token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO.
      (1)   A form of bingo that consists of an electronic or digital
representation of instant bingo in which a participant wins a prize if the
participant’s electronic instant bingo ticket contains a combination of numbers
or symbols that was designated in advance as a winning combination, and to
which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Each deal has a predetermined, finite number of winning and
losing tickets and a predetermined prize amount and deal structure, provided
that there may be multiple winning combinations in each deal and multiple
winning tickets.
         (b)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal has a unique
serial number that is not regenerated.
         (c)   Each electronic instant bingo ticket within a deal is sold for
the same price.
         (d)   After a participant purchases an electronic instant bingo
ticket, the combination of numbers or symbols on the ticket is revealed to the
participant.
         (e)   The reveal of numbers or symbols on the ticket may incorporate
an entertainment or bonus theme, provided that the reveal does not include
spinning reels that resemble a slot machine.
         (f)   The reveal theme, if any, does not require additional
consideration or award any prize other than any predetermined prize associated
with the electronic instant bingo ticket.
      (2)   The term shall not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any game, entertainment, or bonus theme that replicates or
simulates any of the following:
            1.   The gambling games of keno, blackjack, roulette, poker, craps,
other casino-style table games;
            2.   Horse racing;
            3.   Gambling games offered in this state on slot machines or video
lottery terminals. As used in this division, “video lottery terminal” has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3770.21.
         (b)   Any device operated by dropping one or more coins or tokens into
a slot and pulling a handle or pushing a button or touchpoint on a touchscreen
to activate one to three or more rotating reels marked into horizontal segments
by varying symbols, where the predetermined prize amount depends on how and how
many of the symbols line up when the rotating reels come to a rest;
         (c)   Any device that includes a coin or token slot, tray, or hopper
and the ability to dispense coins, cash, tokens, or anything of value other
than a credit ticket voucher.
   ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO SYSTEM. Means both of the following:
      (1)   A mechanical, electronic, digital, or video device and associated
software to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   It is used by not more than one player at a time to play
electronic instant bingo on a single screen that is physically connected to the
device;
         (b)   It is located on the premises of the principal place of business
of a veteran’s or fraternal organization that holds a type II or type III bingo
license to conduct electronic instant bingo at that location issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08.
      (2)   Any associated equipment or software used to manage, monitor, or
document any aspect of electronic instant bingo.
   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for all of
the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in R.C. § 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including but not limited to a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under R.C. §
2915.08(F)(1).
   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. Chapter 2915;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 or a violation of R.C. § 2915.06
as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   GAME FLARE. The board or placard, or electronic representation of a board or
placard, that accompanies each deal of instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo tickets and that includes the following information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning tickets by
denomination and the respective winning symbol or number combinations for the
winning tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined
largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to produce
income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but does not
include bingo.
   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the conduct of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section
plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described in
division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   GROSS PROFIT. Gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for the
payment of prize awards.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a person
receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid out or
for the expenses of conducting bingo. The term does not include any money
directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   HISTORIC RAILROAD. All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of a
railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets or
paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance as
prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are determined
by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a seal card
or bingo blower. “Instant bingo” also includes a punch board game. In all
“instant bingo” the prize amount and structure shall be predetermined. The term
does not include electronic instant bingo or any device that is activated by
the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and that contains
as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable of displaying
numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.
   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non- winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE (IRC). The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100 Stat.
2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from raw
materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, or bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   NET PROFIT. Gross profit minus expenses.
   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO OR ELECTRONIC
INSTANT BINGO. Gross profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable
expense expended for the purchase of bingo supplies for the purpose of
conducting instant bingo or electronic instant bingo, and, in the case of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conducted by a veteran’s, fraternal,
or sporting organization, minus the payment by that organization of real
property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on which instant bingo or
electronic instant bingo is conducted.
   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm or any
other legal entity, however organized.
   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   PUNCH BOARD. A form of instant bingo that uses a board containing a number
of holes or receptacles of uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and
randomly, serially numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from
the hole or receptacle. A player may punch or draw the numbered slips of paper
from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established for the game if
the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the punch board
includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one or
more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners of the
raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable section from
a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections corresponding to
all tickets sold for the raffle. The term does not include the drawing of a
ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased to attend a
professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other noncash
representation of value.
   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that is
not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership for
regular worship and religious observances.
   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of a
license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SCHEME OF CHANCE.
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of
chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by
participants at any one location;
         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than
20% of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain
any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic
device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors. “Electronic
device” does not include an electronic instant bingo system.
   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or symbols.
   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a Sheriff, deputy
sheriff, Marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer’s training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 through 109.79 and
who is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.
      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time of play.
         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the player’s score;
         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined
by game features not visible or known to the player;
         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         (a)   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”,
GAME and PLAY mean one event from the initial activation of the machine until
the results of play are determined without payment of additional consideration.
An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game, play, contest,
competition, or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise
prizes based on the results of play.
         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play.
         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest,
competition, or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a
defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in competition for
scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest,
competition, or tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin- setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   SLOT MACHINE.
      (1)   Either of the following:
         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   The term does not include a skill-based amusement machine, an
instant bingo ticket dispenser, or an electronic instant bingo system.
   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization, other
than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not organized for
profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting organization,
including but not limited to the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and that has been in
continuous existence in this state for a period of three years.
   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a charitable
gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Chapter
2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770,
and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
134.02:
         ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any prize
offered in a sweepstakes.
         ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward, or
any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this state where
a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant, except
as provided in §
134.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   VETERAN’S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of a
national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of a
national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters, or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national
veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association. As used in this definition,
NATIONAL VETERAN’S ASSOCIATION means any veteran’s association that has been in
continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either is
incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-
paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER’S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.
   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as defined
in R.C. § 4765.01.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for profit,
that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or
to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or younger
by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support
of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         (a)   The playing fields are used for athletic activities by one or
more organizations, not organized for profit, each of which is organized and
operated exclusively to provide financial support to, or to operate, athletic
activities for persons who are 18 years of age or younger by means of
sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the support of an
athletic team, club, league, or association.
         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity
at any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(R.C. § 2915.01)
§ 134.02 PROHIBITIONS AGAINST GAMBLING; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use
in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or
with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         (a)   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         (b)   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
(A)(5), or (A)(6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any
gambling device.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged
in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of division (A)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such
game or scheme.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         (b)   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)
(3).
         (c)   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable organization
shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that
exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may
pay under R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         (d)   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3).
         (e)   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance. No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. § 1531.01, operated
under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under R.C. § 2915.08.
   (E)   Division (D) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (F)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (G)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         (a)   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         (b)   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         (c)   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         (d)   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         (e)   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         (f)   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (F) of this section or the semiannual
report required by division (G) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))
§ 134.03 OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of R.C. §
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a gambling house is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.03)
§ 134.04 PUBLIC GAMING.
   (A)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor misdemeanor. If
the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense, public
gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2915.04)
§ 134.05 CHEATING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating is
$1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01, cheating is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.05)
§ 134.06 REGULATIONS CONCERNING OPERATION OF LICENSED BINGO GAME.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used
in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security
personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for
reimbursement of other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition
for “expenses” in R.C. § 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so
spent is not more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase,
lease, hiring, advertising, or expense. If the building in which bingo is
conducted is owned by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the
bingo conducted includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct
from the total amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to
the lesser of $600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in
that division as consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(1) for a charitable purpose
listed in its license application and described in R.C. § 2915.01(V), or
distribute all of the net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo as stated in its license application and in
accordance with R.C. § 2915.101, as applicable.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size, and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable organization is required to pay
property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not a charitable
organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is
empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per calendar
week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than
nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization. “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo.
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. If
circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct a
bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08(J). A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;
      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may include
a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited by the
Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played during
each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo,
electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session at the site of
instant bingo, electronic instant bingo, or both other than at a bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization, or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D)
of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender previously
has been convicted of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D) of this section, a violation of division
(A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) through (C)(11), or (D) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates division (C)(12)
of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C)(12) of this
section, a violation of division (C)(12) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.09)
§ 134.07 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each electronic instant bingo game by
serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance, and
an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of instant bingo by serial
number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number and each electronic instant bingo game by serial number,
and the name, address, and social security number of all persons who are
winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), R.C. § 2915.02(D), or R.C. § 2915.101,
a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for each
purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C. § 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo or electronic
instant bingo conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and
beverages by the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of
the charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.
   (B)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (A) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (C)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be deposited
into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game.
Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or
game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo
session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn
on the bingo session or game account.
   (D)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (E)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter
119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and reporting to
ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are properly accounted
for.
   (F)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (G)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (H)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer or any officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the
organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the charitable organization,
distributor, or manufacturer or of any officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization, distributor, or manufacturer;
         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games
of chance;
         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted or where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed;
         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 has occurred
and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization, distributor, or manufacturer or an officer,
agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization, distributor, or
manufacturer has violated any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the proper court to enforce
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the law enforcement agency
shall give written notice to the Attorney General when commencing an action as
described in this division.
   (I)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization, distributor, or
manufacturer that have been requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or
interfere with any inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of
chance, of premises where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or of
premises where bingo supplies are manufactured or distributed, or refuse to
comply with any reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with
any other reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law
enforcement agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (A) or (I) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.10)
§ 134.08 REQUIREMENTS FOR BINGO GAME OPERATORS.
   (A)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (B) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2915.11)
§ 134.09 BINGO GAMES FOR AMUSEMENT ONLY.
   (A)   Sections 134.06 through 134.13 and 134.15 do not apply to bingo games
that are conducted for the purpose of amusement only. A bingo game is conducted
for the purpose of amusement only if it complies with all of the requirements
specified in either division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section.
      (1)   (a)   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         (b)   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.
         (c)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (d)   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten
hours of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in R.C. §
2915.01(O)(2).
         (e)   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   (a)   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than $0.25 to purchase
a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo.
         (b)   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.
         (c)   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to
cover spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay
winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         (d)   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.
         (e)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (f)   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.15 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).
         (g)   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         (h)   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (B)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed by
action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law enforcement
agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing the action.
(R.C. § 2915.12)
§ 134.10 PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 2915.09(A)(1), (A)
(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         (a)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in R.C. §
2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08, and is in
compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;
         (b)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), is
described in IRC § 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC § 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under
R.C. § 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to R.C. § 2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C. §
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling,
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   (a)   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo
game operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo
tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are
working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         (b)   Division (A)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as reflected on an
invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information required
by R.C. § 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (B)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (C)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt rules
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of instant bingo by
charitable organizations.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (A) of this section or of such a rule adopted under
division (C) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.091)
§ 134.11 RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a person or entity
may conduct a raffle to raise money for the person or entity and does not need
a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for
profit if the person or entity is any of the following:
         (a)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A school district, community school established under R.C.
Chapter 3314, STEM school established under R.C. Chapter 3326, college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328, or chartered
nonpublic school;
         (c)   Exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c)(4), 501(c)(6), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19).
      (2)   If a person or entity that is described in division (A)(1)(c) of
this section conducts a raffle, the person or entity shall distribute at least
50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state,
or any political subdivision.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (A) of this section, no person shall
conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is not for
profit.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (B) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(R.C. § 2915.092)
§ 134.12 INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services,
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (B)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C.
§ 2915.08, the charitable instant bingo organization shall enter into a written
contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in the conduct of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each location where the instant
bingo other than at a bingo session is being conducted, and identify the owner
or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued under R.C. §
2915.08 is not required to enter into a written contract with the owner or
lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is conducted provided that
the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of the instant bingo other
than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct of the instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at that location is not more than five days per
calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (F) of this section, no charitable
instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at a location where the primary source of retail income from all
commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (B) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items provided for
in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
      (4)   As used in this division, FULL GROSS PROFIT means the amount by
which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal has been
sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all prizes were
redeemed.
   (E)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (B) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (B) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (F)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(R.C. § 2915.093)
   (G)   (1)   Subject to the requirements of R.C. §§ 2915.14 and 2915.15
concerning electronic instant bingo, a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo, electronic instant
bingo, or both other than at a bingo session under a type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08 if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00
a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.
         (b)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.
         (c)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC §
509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC
§ 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written
contract with that organization as required in division (G)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section is raising money for another
organization that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing
in this state, the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is
described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in this
state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a) and
described in IRC § 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order
to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant bingo. That contract shall
include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s,
fraternal, or sporting organization will be distributing to the organization
that is described in IRC § 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §
501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this
state.
      (3)   (a)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo or electronic instant
bingo pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor
permit under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation, or cancellation if the veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915.
         (b)   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (G)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915,
or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo to the organization with which the
veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization has
entered into a written contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, illegal instant bingo or electronic instant bingo conduct is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (G) of this section, illegal instant bingo
or electronic instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.13)
§ 134.13 RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (A)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (B)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (C)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in
violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (D)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C) or
(D) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (C) or (D) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or
lessor’s premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(R.C. § 2915.094)
§ 134.14 SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(1), (2), (3), or (4) of the definition for “merchandise prize” in §
134.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward
for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free or
reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.06)
   (C)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.
(R.C. § 2915.061)
§ 134.15 ELECTRONIC INSTANT BINGO; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No charitable organization shall conduct electronic instant bingo
unless all of the following are true:
      (1)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in R.C. §
2915.01(J), or is a fraternal organization described in R.C. § 2915.01(L), and
the organization qualified as a veteran’s organization or fraternal
organization, as applicable, on or before June 30, 2021.
      (2)   The organization is a veteran’s organization described in IRC § 501
(c)(4) or is, and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the organization
is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a), and is described in
IRC § 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19).
      (3)   The organization has not conducted a raffle in violation of R.C. §
2915.092(B) using an electronic raffle machine, as described in Ohio Veterans
and Fraternal Charitable Coalition v. DeWine, Case No. 13-CV-13610 (C.P.
Franklin Co. February 23, 2018), at any time on or after January 1, 2022.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts electronic instant bingo
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Possess an electronic instant bingo system that was not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915 or with any rule adopted under R.C. Chapter
2915;
      (2)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on any day, at any time, or on any
premises not specified on the organization’s type II or type III license issued
under R.C. § 2915.08;
      (3)   Hold more than one valid license to conduct electronic instant
bingo at any one time;
      (4)   Conduct electronic instant bingo on more than one premises or on
any premises other than the charitable organization’s principal place of
business;
      (5)   Operate more than ten electronic bingo systems at the premises on
which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo under its
license;
      (6)   Fail to display both of the following conspicuously at the premises
on which the charitable organization conducts electronic instant bingo:
         (a)   The charitable organization’s bingo license;
         (b)   The serial number of each deal of electronic instant bingo
tickets being sold.
      (7)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should have
known, to be under 18 years of age to play electronic instant bingo;
      (8)   Sell or provide to any person an electronic instant bingo ticket
for a price different from the price displayed on the game flare for that deal,
except that the charitable organization may give a participant who wins an
electronic instant bingo game an electronic instant bingo ticket as a prize in
place of a cash prize;
      (9)   Fail, once an electronic instant bingo deal is begun, to continue
to sell tickets in that deal until all prizes have been awarded;
      (10)   Permit any person whom the organization knows, or should have
known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction
to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of electronic instant bingo;
      (11)   Permit a bingo game operator to play electronic instant bingo;
      (12)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(12)(b) of this
section, pay compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting electronic
instant bingo.
         (b)   Division (B)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit an
employee of a veteran’s organization or fraternal organization from redeeming
electronic instant bingo tickets or vouchers for the organization’s members or
invited guests, so long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any bingo receipts.
      (13)   Pay consulting fees to any person in relation to electronic
instant bingo.
   (C)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide or offer to
provide an electronic instant bingo system to any person for use in this
municipality unless the electronic instant bingo system has been approved under
R.C. § 2915.15.
   (D)   Whoever knowingly violates division (A), (B), or (C) of this section
or a rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.14(D) is guilty of illegal electronic
instant bingo conduct. Illegal electronic instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or state law, or of a rule adopted
under R.C. § 2915.14(D), illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2915.14)
CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Negligent homicide
   
135.03   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault
   
135.04   Assault; negligent assault
   
135.05   Injury to persons by hunters
   
135.06   Menacing; aggravated menacing; menacing by stalking
   
135.07   Unlawful restraint
   
135.08   Unlawful collection of bodily substances
   
135.09   Coercion
   
135.10   Bigamy
   
135.11   Unlawful abortion; failure to perform viability testing
   
135.12   Abortion trafficking
   
135.13   Nonsupport of dependents
   
135.14   Endangering children
   
135.15   Interference with custody; interference with support orders
   
135.16   Domestic violence
   
135.17   Hazing prohibited
   
135.18   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child
   
135.19   Failure to provide for a person with a functional impairment
   
135.20   Patient abuse or neglect; patient endangerment; exceptions; false
statements; retaliation
   
135.21   Interference with right of person to engage in housing transactions
because of race, religion, or the like
   
135.22   Ethnic intimidation
   
135.23   Violating a protection order, consent agreement, anti-stalking
protection order or order issued by a court of another state
   
135.24   Adulteration of food
   
135.25   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans
   
135.26   Nonsmoking areas in places of public assembly
   
135.27   Spreading contagion
   
135.28   Abuse of a corpse
   
135.29   Disposal of dead bodies
   
135.30   Curfew for persons under the age of 18
Statutory reference:
   Child care, misrepresentations by providers and failure to disclose death or
serious injuries, misdemeanors, see R.C. §§ 2919.223 et seq.
   Extortionate extension of credit, see R.C. §§ 2905.21 through 2905.24
   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
   Rights of victims of crimes, see R.C. Chapter 2930
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of §§
135.01 through
135.06, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ANOTHER’S UNBORN or OTHER PERSON’S UNBORN. A member of the species Homo
sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
      UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF ANOTHER’S PREGNANCY. Causing the death of an
unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of
another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins with
fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms “another’s unborn”, “other person’s unborn” and
“unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy” that are set forth in division
(A) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman. An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate R.C. § 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of such section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         (a)   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         (b)   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
         (c)   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         (d)   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         (e)   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
(R.C. § 2903.09)
§ 135.02 NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041
§ 135.03 VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or aircraft,
shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another’s
pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   (a)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
1547.11(A), or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (c)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of R.C. §
4561.15(A)(3), or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Recklessly;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided that this division
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (D) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Negligently;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division applies only
if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is unlawfully terminated
is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s commission of the
speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in
division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or of a
municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for the
violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of any section
contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal
of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without
examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-
related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section, any
traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, or a traffic-
related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a class four
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (A)(3)(b) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. §
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (A)(1), (A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a), or (A)(4) of this section
in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section:
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.
         RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.20 or a
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a municipal
ordinance pertaining to speed.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Means a
violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D) of that
section applies, a violation of R.C. § 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a violation of
R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to March 23, 2000.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT, OR ATTEMPTED MURDER
OFFENSE. Means a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 in circumstances
in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit the
violation, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which the
deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle, or an
attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of R.C. § 2923.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(R.C. § 2903.06)
   (F)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle or motorcycle, shall cause serious physical harm to another
person or another’s unborn as the proximate result of committing, while
operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in
a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division applies
only if the person to whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose
unborn the serious physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the
time of the offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (F)(4) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (F)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (F)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (F)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (F)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (F)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (F):
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (F), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Court to suspend driver’s license, see R.C. §§ 4510.05 and 4510.07
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 135.04 ASSAULT; NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (A)   Assault.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to another or to another’s unborn.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another
or to another’s unborn.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of assault. Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), assault is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when
it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment, or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
R.C. § 2929.24(F).
      (5)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section does not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of
the Ohio Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of
behavior that can be prosecuted under division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section, the other section of the Ohio Revised Code,
or both sections. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section and also is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.22, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, based on the same conduct involving the same
victim that was the basis of the violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar import under R.C. §
2941.25.
(R.C. § 2903.13)
   (B)   Negligent assault.
      (1)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to another
or to another’s unborn.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
negligent assault, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(R.C. § 2903.14)
Cross-reference:
   Jurisdictional limitation on Mayor regarding violations of division (A) of
this section, see §
33.01(E)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see R.C. §§ 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Felony assault offenses, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
   Strangulation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.18
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
R.C. § 2903.08
§ 135.05 INJURY TO PERSONS BY HUNTERS.
   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing a wild
animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to injure
persons.
(R.C. § 1533.171(A))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(R.C. § 1533.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Violation, license revocation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) through (E)
§ 135.06 MENACING; AGGRAVATED MENACING; MENACING BY STALKING.
   (A)   Menacing.
      (1)   (a)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate
family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the
offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other
organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
         (b)   No person shall knowingly place or attempt to place another in
reasonable fear of physical harm or death by displaying a deadly weapon,
regardless of whether the deadly weapon displayed is operable or inoperable, if
either of the following applies:
            1.   The other person is an emergency service responder, the person
knows or reasonably should know that the other person is an emergency service
responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage in the specified
conduct against an emergency service responder.
            2.   The other person is a family or household member or co-worker
of an emergency service responder, the person knows or reasonably should know
that the other person is a family or household member or co-worker of an
emergency service responder, and it is the person’s specific purpose to engage
in the specified conduct against a family or household member or co-worker of
an emergency service responder.
      (2)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or if the victim of the offense is an
emergency service responder in the performance of the responder’s official
duties, menacing is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency or an emergency service responder, and that prior offense
related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties or to the responder’s performance of the
responder’s official duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this section does
not preclude a prosecution of a violation of any other section of the Ohio
Revised Code. One or more acts, a series of acts, or a course of behavior that
can be prosecuted under division (A) of this section or any other section of
the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under division (A) of this section, the
other section of the Ohio Revised Code, or both sections. However, if an
offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of
this section and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. §
2903.13, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance, based on the same
conduct involving the same victim that was the basis of the violation of
division (A) of this section, the offenses are allied offenses of similar
import under R.C. § 2941.25.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         CO-WORKER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2903.13.
         EMERGENCY SERVICE RESPONDER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
2903.13.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.22)
   (B)   Aggravated menacing.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, such other person’s unborn, or a member of such other person’s
immediate family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief
that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of
the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
aggravated menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(2),
aggravated menacing is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the
offense is an officer or employee of a public children services agency or a
private child placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or
employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities
or duties, aggravated menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties,
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   As used in this division (B), ORGANIZATION includes an entity that
is a governmental employer.
(R.C. § 2903.21)
   (C)   Menacing by stalking.
      (1)   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         (b)   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (C)(1)(a) of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (C)
(1)(a) of this section.
         (c)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (C)
(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. § 2911.211, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (C)
(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an
offense committed under division (C)(1)(b) or (C)(1)(c) of this section, a
third person induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or
premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a) of this
section or a violation of division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct
in violation of division (C)(1)(a) of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control.
Division (C)(2)(b)6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this section or a violation of
division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct in violation of division
(C)(1)(b) of this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213 or R.C. §
2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the
order is the victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (C)(1)(a), (C)(1)(b)
or (C)(1)(c) of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (C)(1)(b) of this section or
an offense committed under division (C)(1)(c) of this section based on a
violation of division (C)(1)(b) of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property, or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with a
violation of this section.
      (4)   As used in division (C) of this section:
         COMPUTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER NETWORK. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER PROGRAM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         COMPUTER SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.
         EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON. Is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.
         FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section is committed is
the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         MENTAL DISTRESS. Means any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Means two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization. Actions
or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public
official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or emergency
facility person of any authorized act within the public official’s,
firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical services person’s, or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information or
data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct”.
         PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived
with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this
section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         POST A MESSAGE. Means transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating
another.
         PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.
         SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.
         TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
         THIRD PERSON. Means, in relation to conduct as described in division
(C)(1)(b) of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the
victim of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (C) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (2) of
the definition for “mental distress” in this section.
      (6)   (a)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a person
solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to
providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely
transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the
content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In
addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control
shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the
receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes
is or will be sent in violation of division (C) of this section.
         (b)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not create an
affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any
information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (C) of
this section except as otherwise provided by law.
         (c)   Division (C)(6)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (C) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(R.C. § 2903.211)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
Statutory reference:
   Authority of corporations to seek protection orders in certain
circumstances, see R.C. § 2903.215
   Conditions of bail for violators, see R.C. § 2903.212
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex parte
orders, see R.C. § 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213
§ 135.07 UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of the other person’s liberty.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2971.01.
(R.C. § 2905.03)
§ 135.08 UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         (b)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b) of this section do
not have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as
described in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set
forth in R.C. § 2901.01.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.15)
§ 135.09 COERCION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom of choice,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage any person’s personal or
business repute, or to impair any person’s credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (A)(5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which the accused is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing a community control sanction on certain conditions,
including without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or
redress to the victim of the offense.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3), (A)
(4), or (A)(5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable
response to the circumstances which occasioned it, and that the actor’s purpose
was limited to any of the following:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the second degree.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
      THREAT includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo.
(R.C. § 2905.12)
§ 135.10 BIGAMY.
   (A)   No married person shall marry another or continue to cohabit with such
other person in this municipality.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor’s spouse was continuously absent for five years immediately preceding the
purported subsequent marriage, and was not known by the actor to be alive
within that time.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of bigamy, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.01)
§ 135.11 UNLAWFUL ABORTION; FAILURE TO PERFORM VIABILITY TESTING.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      ABORTION. Means the purposeful termination of a human pregnancy by any
person, including the pregnant woman herself, with an intention other than to
produce a live birth or to remove a dead fetus or embryo.
(R.C. § 2919.11)
      EMANCIPATED. A minor shall be considered emancipated if the minor has
married, entered the armed services of the United States, become employed and
self-subsisting, or has otherwise become independent from the care and control
of her parent, guardian or custodian.
      UNEMANCIPATED. Means a woman who is unmarried and under 18 years of age
who has not entered the armed services of the United States, has not become
employed and self-subsisting, or has not otherwise become independent from the
care and control of her parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (B)   No person shall perform or induce an abortion without the informed
consent of the pregnant woman.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly perform or induce an abortion upon a
pregnant minor unless one of the following is the case:
      (1)   The attending physician has secured the informed written consent of
the minor and one parent, guardian or custodian;
      (2)   The minor is emancipated and the attending physician has received
her informed written consent;
      (3)   The minor has been authorized to consent to the abortion by a court
order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2919.121(C) and the attending physician has
received her informed written consent; or
      (4)    The court has given its consent in accordance with R.C. § 2919.121
(C) and the minor is having the abortion willingly.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly perform or induce an abortion upon a woman
who is pregnant, unmarried, under 18 years of age, and unemancipated unless at
least one of the circumstances enumerated in R.C. § 2919.12(B) applies.
   (E)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (D) of
this section that the pregnant woman provided the person who performed or
induced the abortion with false, misleading, or incorrect information about her
age, marital status, or emancipation, about the age of the brother or sister to
whom she requested notice to be given as a specified relative instead of one of
her parents, her guardian, or her custodian, or about the last known address of
either of her parents, her guardian, her custodian, or a specified brother,
sister, stepparent, or grandparent to whom she requested notice be given and
the person who performed or induced the abortion did not otherwise have
reasonable cause to believe the pregnant woman was under 18 years of age,
unmarried, or unemancipated, to believe that the age of the brother or sister
to whom she requested notice be given as a specified relative instead of one of
her parents, her guardian, or her custodian was not 21 years of age, or to
believe that the last known address of either of her parents, her guardian, her
custodian, or a specified brother, sister, stepparent, or grandparent to whom
she requested notice be given was incorrect.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
compliance with the requirements of this section was not possible because an
immediate threat of serious risk to the life or physical health of the pregnant
woman or pregnant minor from the continuation of her pregnancy created an
emergency necessitating the immediate performance or inducement of an abortion.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful abortion. A
violation of division (B), (C) or (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree on the first offense and a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (G)   Whoever violates this section is liable to the pregnant woman or
pregnant minor, and her parents, guardian, or custodian for civil, compensatory
and exemplary damages.
(R.C. §§ 2919.12, 2919.121)
   (H)   (1)   Division (C) of this section applies in lieu of division (D) of
this section whenever its operation is not enjoined. If division (C) of this
section is enjoined, division (D) of this section applies.
      (2)   If a person complies with the requirements of division (D) of this
section under the good faith belief that the application or enforcement of
division (C) of this section is subject to a restraining order or injunction,
good faith compliance shall constitute a complete defense to any civil,
criminal or professional disciplinary action brought under division (C) of this
section or R.C. § 2919.121.
      (3)   If a person complies with the requirements of division (C) of this
section under the good faith belief that it is not subject to a restraining
order or injunction, good faith compliance shall constitute a complete defense
to any civil, criminal or professional disciplinary action for failure to
comply with the requirements of division (D) of this section.
(R.C. § 2919.122)
   (I)   Failure to perform viability testing.
      (1)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce
an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth week of
gestation unless, prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion or the
attempt to perform or induce the abortion, the physician determines, in the
physician’s good faith medical judgment, that the unborn child is not viable,
and the physician makes that determination after performing a medical
examination of the pregnant woman and after performing or causing to be
performed those tests for assessing gestational age, weight, lung maturity, or
other tests that the physician, in that physician’s good faith medical
judgment, believes are necessary to determine whether an unborn child is
viable.
      (2)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce
an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth week of
gestation without first entering the determination made in division (I)(1) of
this section and the associated findings of the medical examination and tests
in the medical record of the pregnant woman.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (I) is guilty of failure to perform
viability testing, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (4)   The State Medical Board shall suspend a physician’s license to
practice medicine in this state for a period of not less than six months if the
physician violates this section.
(R.C. § 2919.18)
Statutory reference:
   Judicial bypass, see R.C. § 2151.85
   Judicial consent and the right of a minor to consent, see R.C. § 2919.121(C)
   Notice or consent requirements for unmarried minors, see R.C. § 2919.12(B)
§ 135.12 ABORTION TRAFFICKING.
   (A)   No person shall experiment upon or sell the product of human
conception which is aborted. Experiment does not include autopsies pursuant to
R.C. §§ 313.13 and 2108.50.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abortion trafficking, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2919.14)
§ 135.13 NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   The person’s spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   The person’s child who is under age 18, or the persons’s child with
a mental or physical disability who is under age 21;
      (3)   The person’s aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from
lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for the parent’s own
support.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         (a)   Is legally obligated to support; or
         (b)   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person’s duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (B)(1)(b) of this section shall begin to run on the date the person’s
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (C)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to
a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined
in R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (A) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (B) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or had a mental or
physical disability and was under age 21.
   (F)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the
offender has failed to provide support under division (A)(2) or (B) of this
section for a total accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive
weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of
division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a felony violation of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or
(B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231,
2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31, 3115.401, or
former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other sentence imposed,
shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge against the person and
require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees of any adverse party
other than the state, as determined by the court, that arose in relation to the
charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Each day of a violation of division (C) of this section is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.21)
§ 135.14 ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age, shall
create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a
duty of care, protection, or support. It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (B)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a child with a mental or physical disability under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use, or
allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is nudity-oriented matter;
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that the
act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted of
the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the violation
of this division.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C. § 4511.01,
within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle. Notwithstanding any other provision of law,
a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation of
this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division. For purposes of R.C. §§ 4511.191 through 4511.197
and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.
      (2)   As used in division (C)(1) of this section:
         CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
         VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursuing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (B)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (B)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation, or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   As used in this division and division (B)(5) of this section:
         MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance that shows a
minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         OBSCENE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         PERFORMANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.
         SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER. Means any material or performance that shows
a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation, or
bestiality.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (A) or (B)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(1)(b), (E)(1)(c) or
(E)(1)(d), a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense
under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to
the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided
in division (E)(1)(c) or (E)(1)(d) of this section, endangering children is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation is a violation of division (A) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(5) or
(B)(6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (C) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c), endangering
children in violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
         (b)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
or if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any
offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the delinquency of
or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (E)(3)
(c) of this section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, R.C. § 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. § 2903.07 as it
existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case in which the
offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
divisions (E)(3)(a), (E)(3)(b) or (E)(3)(c) of this section or pursuant to any
other provision of law, and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege under R.C. Chapter 4506, 4509, 4510, or 4511, or any other
provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(7).
         (e)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division
(E)(3)(a), (E)(3)(b), (E)(3)(c) or (E)(3)(d) of this section or pursuant to any
other provision of law for the violation of division (C) of this section, if as
a part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the offender also
shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, for that violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (F)   (1)   If a person violates division (C) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (C) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of division (C) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and
does not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, both the following
apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. § 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the violation of
division (C) of this section shall not constitute a violation of R.C. § 4511.19
(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (F)(2)(a)1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to
the violation of division (C) of this section shall constitute a conviction or
plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (C) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge of the
violation of division (C) of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty
to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute, for the
purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C.
§ 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15
§ 135.15 INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY; INTERFERENCE WITH SUPPORT ORDERS.
   (A)   Interference with custody.
      (1)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a person
identified in division (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section from
the parent, guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division (A)(1)
(a), (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section:
         (a)   A child under the age of 18, or a child with a mental or
physical disability under the age of 21;
         (b)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent,
unruly, neglected, abused, or dependent children;
         (c)   A person committed by law to an institution for persons with
mental illnesses or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
      (2)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department, or institution without legal consent.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking
under division (A)(1)(a) of this section that the actor reasonably believed
that his or her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety.
It is an affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division
(A)(1) of this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law
enforcement or judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or
committed person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
      (4)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with
custody.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the child who
is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1)(a) is removed from the state
or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense under this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a
violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. If the child who is the subject of a violation of
division (A)(1)(a) suffers physical harm as a result of the violation, a
violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
         (b)   A violation of division (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
         (c)   A violation of division (A)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. Each day of a violation of division (A)(2) is a separate
offense.
(R.C. § 2919.23)
   (B)   Interference with support orders.
      (1)   No person, by using physical harassment or threats of violence
against another person, shall interfere with the other person’s initiation or
continuance of, or attempt to prevent the other person from initiating or
continuing, an action to issue or modify a support order under R.C. Chapter
3115, or under R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 2151.36, 2151.361,
2151.49, 3105.18, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3109.19, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.07, or
3113.31.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of interfering with an
action to issue or modify a support order, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this division (B) or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or R.C. § 3111.19, interfering with an action to issue or
modify a support order is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
(R.C. § 2919.231)
§ 135.16 DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to a
family or household member.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family or
household member.
   (C)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (D)(2) to
(D)(5) of this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3), (D)(4) or (D)(5)
of this section, a violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree and a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(4) of this section, if
the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of domestic
violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent
to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. § 2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12,
2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a family or household
member at the time of the violation, a violation of an existing or former
municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that
is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the victim of the
violation was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the offense was a family
or household member at the time of the commission of the offense, a violation
of division (A) or (B) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law, and a violation of division (C) is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more violations or
offenses of the type described in division (D)(3) of this section involving a
person who was a family or household member at the time of the violations or
offenses, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (C) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) or (D)(4) of this
section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was pregnant at
the time of the violation, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of
division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or unit
of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or money in
connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the person
violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to this
section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or a
former spouse of the offender;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived with
the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting
with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender within five
years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question.
(R.C. § 2919.25)
Cross-reference:
   Violation of protection orders, see §
135.23
Statutory reference:
   Temporary protection orders, see R.C. § 2919.26
   Violation of protection order or consent agreement, factors to consider,
bail, see R.C. § 2919.251
§ 135.17 HAZING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      HAZING. Means doing any act or coercing another, including the victim, to
do any act of initiation into any student or other organization or any act to
continue or reinstate membership in or affiliation with any student or other
organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental or
physical harm to any person, including coercing another to consume alcohol or a
drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      ORGANIZATION. Includes a national or international organization with
which a fraternity or sorority is affiliated.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another
when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs of abuse
resulting in serious physical harm to the other person.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other educational institution, public or private,
shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person associated with the
organization when the hazing includes coerced consumption of alcohol or drugs
of abuse resulting in serious physical harm to that person.
   (D)   Whoever violates divisions (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of
hazing. A violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. A violation of division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.31)
   (E)   Reckless failure to immediately report knowledge of hazing.
      (1)   No administrator, employee, faculty member, teacher, consultant,
alumnus, or volunteer of any organization, including any primary, secondary, or
post-secondary school or any other public or private educational institution,
who is acting in an official and professional capacity shall recklessly fail to
immediately report the knowledge of hazing to a law enforcement agency in the
county in which the victim of hazing resides or in which the hazing is
occurring or has occurred.
      (2)   A violation of division (E)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree, except that the violation is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the hazing causes serious physical harm.
(R.C. § 2903.311(B), (C))
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for hazing, see R.C. § 2307.44
§ 135.18 CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (B)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(R.C. § 2919.24)
Statutory reference:
   Failure to send child to school, see R.C. § 3321.38
§ 135.19 FAILURE TO PROVIDE FOR A PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT.
   (A)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in physical harm
or serious physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (B)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a person with a
functional impairment under the caretaker’s care with any treatment, care,
goods, or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of the
person with a functional impairment when this failure results in serious
physical harm to the person with a functional impairment.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a person with a functional impairment, a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the person with a functional impairment
under the offender’s care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the
violation of this section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.16)
   (D)   As used in this section:
      CARETAKER. A person who assumes the duty to provide for the care and
protection of a person with a functional impairment on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The term
does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an
agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in R.C. § 2903.33.
      PERSON WITH A FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENT. Any person who has a physical or
mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for the person’s own
care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from
providing for the person’s own care or protection.
(R.C. § 2903.10)
§ 135.20 PATIENT ABUSE OR NEGLECT; PATIENT ENDANGERMENT; EXCEPTIONS; FALSE
STATEMENTS; RETALIATION.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      ABUSE. Means knowingly causing physical harm or recklessly causing
serious physical harm to a person by physical contact with the person or by the
inappropriate use of a physical or chemical restraint, medication or isolation
on the person.
      CARE FACILITY. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any “home” as defined in R.C. § 3721.10.
         (b)   Any “residential facility” as defined in R.C. § 5119.34 or
5123.19.
         (c)   Any institution or facility operated or provided by the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or by the Department of
Developmental Disabilities pursuant to R.C. §§ 5119.14 and 5123.03.
         (d)   Any unit of any hospital, as defined in R.C. § 3701.01, that
provided the same services as a nursing home, as defined in R.C. § 3721.01.
         (e)   Any institution, residence or facility that provides, for a
period of more than 24 hours, whether for consideration or not, accommodations
to one individual or two unrelated individuals who are dependent upon the
services of others.
      GROSS NEGLECT. Means knowingly failing to provide a person with any
treatment, care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or
safety of the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the
person.
      INAPPROPRIATE USE OF A PHYSICAL OR CHEMICAL RESTRAINT, MEDICATION OR
ISOLATION. Means the use of physical or chemical restraint, medication or
isolation as punishment, for staff convenience, excessively, as a substitute
for treatment, or in quantities that preclude habilitation and treatment.
      NEGLECT. Means recklessly failing to provide a person with any treatment,
care, goods or service that is necessary to maintain the health or safety of
the person when the failure results in serious physical harm to the person.
(R.C. § 2903.33)
   (B)   Patient abuse or neglect; spiritual treatment; defense.
      (1)   No person who owns, operates, or administers, or who is an agent or
employee of a care facility shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Commit abuse against a resident or patient of the facility.
         (b)   Commit gross neglect against a resident or patient of the
facility.
         (c)   Commit neglect against a resident or patient of the facility.
      (2)   (a)   A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through
prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious
denomination, shall not be considered neglectful under division (B)(1)(c) of
this section for that reason alone.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of gross neglect or
neglect under this section that the actor’s conduct was committed in good faith
solely because the actor was ordered to commit the conduct by a person with
supervisory authority over the actor.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) is guilty of patient
abuse, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(b) is guilty of gross patient
neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient
neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(c) is guilty of patient
neglect, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, any violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, gross patient
neglect is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.34)
   (C)   Patient endangerment; spiritual treatment; defense.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES CARETAKER. Means any developmental
disabilities employee or any person who assumes the duty to provide for the
care and protection of a person with a developmental disability on a voluntary
basis, by contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a
result of a family relationship, or by order of a court of competent
jurisdiction. The phrase includes a person who is an employee of a care
facility and a person who is an employee of an entity under contract with a
provider. The phrase does not include a person who owns, operates, or
administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility unless that
person also personally provides care to a person with a developmental
disability.
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5123.50.
         DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5123.01.
      (2)   No developmental disabilities caretaker shall create a substantial
risk to the health or safety of a person with a developmental disability. A
developmental disabilities caretaker does not create a substantial risk to the
health or safety of a person with a developmental disability under this
division when the developmental disabilities caretaker treats a physical or
mental illness or disability of the person with a developmental disability by
spiritual means through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a
recognized religious body.
      (3)   No person who owns, operates, or administers a care facility or who
is an agent of a care facility shall condone, or knowingly permit, any conduct
by a developmental disabilities caretaker who is employed by or under the
control of the owner, operator, administrator, or agent that is in violation of
division (C)(2) of this section and that involves a person with a developmental
disability who is under the care of the owner, operator, administrator, or
agent. A person who relies upon treatment by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious denomination,
shall not be considered endangered under this division for that reason alone.
      (4)   (a)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section that the actor’s conduct was
committed in good faith solely because the actor was ordered to commit the
conduct by a person to whom one of the following applies:
            1.   The person has supervisory authority over the actor.
            2.   The person has authority over the actor’s conduct pursuant to
a contract for the provision of services.
         (b)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(3) of this section that the person who owns, operates, or
administers a care facility or who is an agent of a care facility and who is
charged with the violation is following the individual service plan for the
involved person with a developmental disability or that the admission,
discharge, and transfer rule set forth in the Ohio Administrative Code is being
followed.
         (c)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of
division (C)(3) of this section that the actor did not have readily available a
means to prevent either the harm to the person with a developmental disability
or the death of such a person and the actor took reasonable steps to summon
aid.
      (5)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(5)(b) or (C)(5)(c) of this
section, whoever violates division (C)(2) or (C)(3) of this section is guilty
of patient endangerment, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of, or pleaded
guilty to, a violation of this section, patient endangerment is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the person
with a developmental disability, patient endangerment is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2903.341)
   (D)   False statements.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly
swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, alleging a
violation of division (B) of this section when the statement is made with
purpose to incriminate another.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (D) is guilty of filing a false
patient abuse or neglect complaint, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2903.35)
   (E)   Retaliation against person reporting patient abuse or neglect. No care
facility shall discharge or in any manner discriminate or retaliate against any
person solely because such person, in good faith, filed a complaint, affidavit,
or other document alleging a violation of division (B) of this section or a
violation of R.C. § 2903.34.
(R.C. § 2903.36)
Statutory reference:
   License revocation for felony violations, see R.C. § 2903.37
§ 135.21 INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHT OF PERSON TO ENGAGE IN HOUSING TRANSACTIONS
BECAUSE OF RACE, RELIGION, OR THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section;
         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, national origin,
military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in that
section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or
facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2927.03)
§ 135.22 ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.
   (A)   No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, or 2909.07,
or R.C. § 2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5), by reason of the race, color,
religion, or national origin of another person or group of persons.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic intimidation. Ethnic
intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree than the offense the
commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic intimidation. In the case
of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree, ethnic intimidation is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.12)
§ 135.23 VIOLATING A PROTECTION ORDER, CONSENT AGREEMENT, ANTI- STALKING
PROTECTION ORDER OR ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER STATE.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the following:
      (1)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant to
R.C. § 2919.26 or R.C. § 3113.31;
      (2)   A protection order issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213 or
2903.214;
      (3)   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of violating a
protection order.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) or (B)(4) of this
section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   Violating a protection order is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded
guilty to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a protection order issued or consent agreement
approved pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34, 2903.213, 2903.214, 2919.26, or 3113.31,
or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance;
         (b)   Two or more violations of R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, or
2911.211, or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or
any combination of those offenses, that involved the same person who is the
subject of the protection order or consent agreement;
         (c)   One or more violations of this section, or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance.
      (4)   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to R.C. § 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent, the court shall order that the
offender pay the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device
and the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the protection order issued by a court of another state does not
comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. § 2265(b) for a protection
order that must be accorded full faith and credit by a court of this state or
that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. § 2265(c).
   (D)   In a prosecution for a violation of this section, it is not necessary
for the prosecution to prove that the protection order or consent agreement was
served on the defendant if the prosecution proves that the defendant was shown
the protection order or consent agreement or a copy of either or a judge,
magistrate, or law enforcement officer informed the defendant that a protection
order or consent agreement had been issued, and proves that the defendant
recklessly violated the terms of the order or agreement.
   (E)   As used in this section, PROTECTION ORDER ISSUED BY A COURT OF ANOTHER
STATE means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court of
another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection. The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(R.C. § 2919.27)
§ 135.24 ADULTERATION OF FOOD.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (A)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 3716.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 3716.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Adulteration of food generally, see R.C. § 3715.59
§ 135.25 ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (A)   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         AGE VERIFICATION. A service provided by an independent third party
(other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT.
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         CIGARETTE. Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         DISTRIBUTE. Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Means any device that can be used to
deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately,
and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the
use of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         PROOF OF AGE. Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license,
a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         TOBACCO PRODUCT. Means any product that is made or derived from
tobacco or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component
or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic
smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not
include any product that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those
terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         VAPOR PRODUCT. Means a product, other than a cigarette or other
tobacco product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or
derived from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         VENDING MACHINE. Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to
any person under 21 years of age;
         (b)   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         (c)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         (d)   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six- tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         (e)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         (f)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         (a)   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         (b)   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         (c)   Any other place not identified in division (A)(3)(a) or (A)(3)
(b) of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products.”
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(A)(2)(a) of this section:
         (a)   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         (b)   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (A)(2)(a) of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21 years
of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under 21
years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
         (b)   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
         (c)   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
      (6)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d),
(A)(2)(e), or (A)(2)(f) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of illegal
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal distribution
of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d), (A)(2)(e), or (A)
(2)(f) or (A)(3) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(c) of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (A)(2)(c) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (7)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (B)   Transaction scan.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (C) of this section:
         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent, or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 through 4507.52.
         SELLER. Means a seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (A) of this section.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Means any commercial device or combination of
devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (B)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (B) and division (C) of this section.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (B)(4)(a) of this section, except for
purposes of division (C) of this section.
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (C) of this section
or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (B) or division (C) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(b) or (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(R.C. § 2927.021)
   (C)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (A) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent, or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away, or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (A) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (A) of this
section. For purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (C)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2927.022)
   (D)   Shipment of tobacco products.
      (1)   As used in this division (D):
         AUTHORIZED RECIPIENT OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS means a person who is:
            1.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. § 5743.15;
            2.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
            3.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in Section 5702 of
the Internal Revenue Code;
            4.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
            5.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or of
this state acting in the person’s official capacity;
            6.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
            7.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by the
Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
         MOTOR CARRIER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this division (D) is to prevent the sale of
cigarettes to minors and to ensure compliance with the Master Settlement
Agreement, as defined in R.C. § 1346.01.
      (3)   (a)   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes to any
person in this municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco
products.
         (b)   No motor carrier or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes to any person in this municipality that the carrier or other person
reasonably believes is not an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If
cigarettes are transported to a home or residence, it shall be presumed that
the motor carrier or other person knew that the person to whom the cigarettes
were delivered was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes who ships
or causes to be shipped cigarettes to any person in this municipality in any
container or wrapping other than the original container or wrapping of the
cigarettes shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of the container
or wrapping in which the cigarettes are shipped with the words “cigarettes”.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (D)(3)(a), (D)(3)(b) or (D)(4) of this section.
(R.C. § 2927.023)
   (E)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
§ 135.26 NONSMOKING AREAS IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   As used in this section, PLACE OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in such
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for persons with mental illnesses and persons with
intellectual disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms
within those buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other
persons affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation. That portion of a building
or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state agency, or a
political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food service
establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public. Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias, or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (B)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety. The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (A)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area. In
places included in division (A)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its Legislative
Authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area. In places
included in division (A)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking area.
In places included in division (A)(2) of this section which are also included
in division (A)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to designate
the area in places in division (A)(2) of this section shall designate the no
smoking area. A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly. Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are clearly
visible and that state “no smoking”. No person shall remove signs from areas
designated as no smoking areas.
   (C)    This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in §
94.02 and
94.03.
   (D)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (B) of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 3791.031)
§ 135.27 SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (A)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the
person has a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to take
reasonable measures to prevent exposing self to other persons, except when
seeking medical aid.
   (B)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom the person having
charge or care knows or has reasonable cause to believe has a dangerous,
contagious disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to
protect others from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities
of the existence of the contagion.
   (C)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(R.C. § 3701.81)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second
degree.
(R.C. § 3701.99(C))
Statutory reference:
   Contagion and quarantine, see R.C. §§ 3707.04 et seq.
   Power to prevent contagious diseases, see R.C. § 715.37
§ 135.28 ABUSE OF A CORPSE.
   (A)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that he or she knows would outrage reasonable family sensibilities.
   (B)   No person, except as authorized by law, shall treat a human corpse in
a way that would outrage reasonable community sensibilities.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of abuse of a
corpse, a misdemeanor of the second degree. Whoever violates division (B) of
this section is guilty of gross abuse of a corpse, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2927.01)
§ 135.29 DISPOSAL OF DEAD BODIES.
   (A)   No person(s) shall cause or allow dead bodies to be disposed of within
city limits in any place other than a cemetery which has been properly
registered with the Ohio Division of Real Estate under R.C. § 4767.02.
   (B)   No person(s) shall be allowed to create a private or family cemetery
within the city limits.
(Ord 28(92-93), passed 10-11-1993)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
§ 135.30 CURFEW FOR PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF 18.
   (A)   No person under the age of 18 years shall be on the streets, sidewalks
or other public places in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00
a.m, of the following day, eastern standard time, unless:
      (1)   He or she is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or an adult
person having the legal care, custody and control of his or her person;
      (2)   He or she is accompanied by an adult person having the permission
of one of the persons mentioned in division (A)(1) of this section; or
      (3)   He or she is going directly to or from any lawful activity,
entertainment or employment with the knowledge and consent of the parent,
guardian or adult person having the legal care, custody and control of his or
her person.
   (B)   No parent, guardian or other person having the care, control or
custody of a person under the age of 18 years shall fail to keep such person
off the streets, sidewalks or other public places in the city between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, eastern standard time,
unless:
      (1)   Such person under 18 is accompanied by such parent, guardian or
other adult person having permission from such parent or guardian to accompany
such person under 18; or
      (2)   Such parent or guardian has consented to the person under 18 going
to or coming from any lawful activity, entertainment or employment.
   (C)   No adult person shall be in the company of any person under the age of
18 on the streets or sidewalks or any public place in the city between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. of the following day, eastern standard time,
unless such adult person has the permission from the parent or guardian to be
in the company of the person under 18 during such hours.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be dealt with in
accordance with Juvenile Court law and procedure. Whoever violates divisions
(B) and (C) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for the first
offense and a misdemeanor of the fourth degree for any subsequent offense.
   (E)   It is an exemption to a violation under this section that the person
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
Police Department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 08-O-02, passed 9-3-2008)
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Falsification
   
136.03   Compounding a crime
   
136.04   Failure to report a crime
   
136.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
   
136.06   Obstructing official business
   
136.07   Obstructing justice
   
136.08   Resisting arrest
   
136.09   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
   
136.10   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
   
136.11   Dereliction of duty
   
136.12   Interfering with civil rights
   
136.13   Illegal conveyance of prohibited items onto grounds of a detention
facility or other specified governmental facilities
   
136.14   False report of child abuse or neglect
   
136.15   Assaulting police dog or horse, or assistance dog
   
136.16   Disclosure of confidential peace officer information
   
136.17   Intimidation of crime victim or witness
   
136.18   Using sham legal process
   
136.19   Making false allegation of peace officer misconduct
   
136.20   Misuse of 9-1-1 system
   
136.21   Failure to disclose personal information
Cross-reference:
   Failure to comply with order or signal of a police officer, see §
70.02
Statutory reference:
   Escape from detention, see R.C. § 2921.34
   Harassment by inmates by causing or attempting to cause contact with blood,
semen, urine, feces or other bodily substance; knowledge of AIDS, hepatitis or
tuberculosis infection; felony offenses, see R.C. § 2921.38
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   CONTRIBUTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   DETENTION. Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of R.C. § 2945.37,
2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement in any
vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those natures;
detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this division,
supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures that is
incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in the
facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee of
the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state into this
state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under
R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B). For a person confined in a county jail
who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30,
the term includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to and from the
work site.
   DETENTION FACILITY. Any public or private place used for the confinement of
a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or another state
or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent
child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States.
   LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING. Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.
   PARTY OFFICIAL. Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a
political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he or
she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party affairs
at any level of responsibility.
   POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   POLITICAL PARTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3517.01.
   PROVIDER AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or agent of the
state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or permanent
capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges, and law
enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   PUBLIC SERVANT.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   Any public official.
         (b)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor, or consultant.
         (c)   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general, or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general, or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT. Includes but is not limited to a
contribution. This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution was
not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(R.C. § 2921.01)
§ 136.02 FALSIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including but not limited to an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the furnishing
to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any
other document that contains false information about the purchaser’s identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in connection with
the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery sale.
   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or altered
document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence in
handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)
(5), (A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(10), (A)(11), (A)(13) or (A)(15) of this
section is guilty of falsification. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.13)
   (G)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce any
document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless communications
device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to mislead a
peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of financial
responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 4509.102)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. § 2921.13(G)
§ 136.03 COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of R.C. §
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (B) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.21)
§ 136.04 FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. § 2913.04(B) has been
or is being committed or that the person has received information derived from
such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (E) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (C)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (C) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the following:
         (a)   Second or third degree burns;
         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super-heated air;
         (c)   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death;
         (d)   Any physical harm to persons caused by or as the result of the
use of fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each
is defined by R.C. § 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of a
hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is attended
or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent,
malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately
to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in
which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(E)(2) or (E)(3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal. The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (E) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (E) of this section.
   (F)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (F)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (G)   Division (A) or (D) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to that member of the clergy in that member’s capacity as a
member of the clergy by a person seeking the aid or counsel of that member of
the clergy.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program of treatment or services for persons with drug dependencies or persons
in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a
hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction services provider
whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. §
5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of the actor’s duties in connection with a bona fide
program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are
violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or R.C. § 2907.05 or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12. As used in this
division, “counseling services” include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
those services.
   (H)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of
failure to report a crime. Violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (K)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (E) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (E) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (L)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
(R.C. § 2921.22)
§ 136.05 FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement
officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the
commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the
aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person
giving it.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a law
enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2921.23)
§ 136.06 OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent,
obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act
within the public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers
or impedes a public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful
duties.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing official
business. Except as otherwise provided in this division, obstructing official
business is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If a violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, obstructing official business is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.31)
§ 136.07 OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (A) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed. The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (C) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      ACT OF TERRORISM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.
      ADULT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.
      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
(R.C. § 2921.32)
§ 136.08 RESISTING ARREST.
   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. A
violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2923.11.
(R.C. § 2921.33)
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from a law enforcement officer, felony
offense, see R.C. § 2911.01
§ 136.09 HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any
brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family, or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (D)   Division (A)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public monies if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public employee’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee. Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest in
a public contract in violation of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract. Violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division
(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law director
appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees in accordance
with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.
      PUBLIC CONTRACT. Means any of the following:
         (a)   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         (b)   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair, or
maintenance of any public property.
(R.C. § 2921.42)
Statutory reference:
   Assistants and employees of Prosecutors, Law Directors, and Solicitors, see
R.C. § 2921.421
§ 136.10 SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. § 102.03(G), (H),
(I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (B)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (F)   Divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(R.C. § 2921.43)
§ 136.11 DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (D)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the legislative
authority for the use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution
with which the public official is connected.
   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under R.C. Chapter 3326; or
fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under R.C.
Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of duty is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry of
the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment or
restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (H)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in R.C. § 9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-preparatory
boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.
(R.C. § 2921.44)
§ 136.12 INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (A)   No public servant, under color of the public servant’s office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, or conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.45)
Statutory reference:
   Restraining or confining pregnant children or pregnant women, see R.C. §
2152.75(B) and R.C. § 2901.10
§ 136.13 ILLEGAL CONVEYANCE OF PROHIBITED ITEMS ONTO GROUNDS OF A DETENTION
FACILITY OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building, or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services, or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. §
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in such deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in R.C. § 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in R.C. § 4301.01, except for
small amounts of wine for sacramental purposes when the person engaging in the
specified conduct is a cleric, as defined in R.C. § 2317.02.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building, or other place under the control of the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services, or the Department
of Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place and in accordance with the written rules of the detention facility or the
institution, office building, or other place.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (A).
   (D)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio, or other
electronic communications device.
   (F)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (C) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner, or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
         (a)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building, or other place to deliver the
item to the confined person or the patient.
         (b)   The actor was given written authorization by the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place to deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any item listed in division
(A)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.36)
   (H)   The person in charge of a detention facility shall, on the grounds of
the detention facility, have the same power as a peace officer, as defined in
R.C. § 2935.01, to arrest a person who violates this section.
(R.C. § 2921.37)
Cross-reference:
   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety
zone, see §
137.11
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, see §
137.12
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 136.14 FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under R.C. § 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an act
or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in R.C. §
2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in R.C. § 2151.03.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2921.14)
§ 136.15 ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police
dog or horse;
         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without
the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct, the
police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer’s duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment.
      (2)   The dog, at the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, is
not assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment, but the offender has actual knowledge that
the dog is an assistance dog.
   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a person with a
mobility impairment who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or a
person with a mobility impairment or that the person knows is an assistance
dog.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a police
dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D)
of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the police department regarding a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section or by the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired
or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance
dog regarding a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;
         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog
or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as
a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the person who is blind, deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a
mobility impairment assisted or served by the assistance dog;
         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the assistance dog
that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious physical harm to
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog or horse that was the subject of
the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be replaced on
either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing that dog or
horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or a new
assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the person who is blind,
deaf, or hearing impaired or the person with a mobility impairment assisted or
served by the assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because
of the death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the
subject of the violation.
   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      BLIND. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.
      PERSON WITH A MOBILITY IMPAIRMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
955.011.
      PHYSICAL HARM. Means any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Means a dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(R.C. § 2921.321)
§ 136.16 DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL PEACE OFFICER INFORMATION.
   (A)   No officer or employee of a law enforcement agency or court, or of the
clerk’s office of any court, shall disclose during the pendency of any criminal
case the home address of any peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting
attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth
services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not prohibit a peace officer, parole
officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional
employee, or youth services employee from disclosing the peace officer’s,
parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s,
correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s own home address, and
does not apply to any person who discloses the home address of a peace officer,
parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney,
correctional employee, or youth services employee pursuant to a court-ordered
disclosure under division (C) of this section.
   (C)   The court in which any criminal case is pending may order the
disclosure of the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case, if
the court determines after a written request for the disclosure that good cause
exists for disclosing the home address of the peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or
youth services employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of disclosure
of confidential information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2921.24)
   (E)   No judge of a court of record, or Mayor presiding over a Mayor’s
Court, shall order a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney,
assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth services
employee who is a witness in a criminal case, to disclose the peace officer’s,
parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant prosecuting attorney’s,
correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s home address during the
peace officer’s, parole officer’s, prosecuting attorney’s, assistant
prosecuting attorney’s, correctional employee’s, or youth services employee’s
examination in the case unless the judge or Mayor determines that the defendant
has a right to the disclosure.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
      CORRECTIONAL EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.
      YOUTH SERVICES EMPLOYEE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 149.43.
(R.C. § 2921.25)
§ 136.17 INTIMIDATION OF CRIME VICTIM OR WITNESS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly attempt to intimidate or hinder the victim
of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or prosecution of criminal charges
or a delinquent child action or proceeding, and no person shall knowingly
attempt to intimidate a witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of
the person being a witness to that act.
   (B)   No person, knowingly and by force or by unlawful threat of harm to any
person or property or by unlawful threat to commit any offense or calumny
against any person, shall attempt to influence, intimidate, or hinder any of
the following persons:
      (1)   The victim of a crime or delinquent act in the filing or
prosecution of criminal charges or a delinquent child action or proceeding;
      (2)   A witness to a criminal or delinquent act by reason of the person
being a witness to that act;
      (3)   An attorney by reason of the attorney’s involvement in any criminal
or delinquent child action or proceeding.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who is
attempting to resolve a dispute pertaining to the alleged commission of a
criminal offense, either prior to or subsequent to the filing of a complaint,
indictment, or information by participating in the arbitration, mediation,
compromise, settlement or conciliation of that dispute pursuant to an
authorization for arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement, or
conciliation of a dispute of that nature that is conferred by any of the
following:
      (1)   A section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (2)   The Rules of Criminal Procedure, the Rules of Superintendence for
Municipal Courts and County Courts, the Rules of Superintendence for Courts of
Common Pleas, or another rule adopted by the Ohio Supreme Court in accordance
with Ohio Constitution, Article IV, Section 5.
      (3)   A local rule of court, including but not limited to a local rule of
court that relates to alternative dispute resolution or other case management
programs and that authorizes the referral of disputes pertaining to the alleged
commission of certain types of criminal offenses to appropriate and available
arbitration, mediation, compromise, settlement or other conciliation programs.
      (4)   The order of a judge of a municipal court, county court, or court
of common pleas.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of intimidation of an
attorney, victim or witness in a criminal case. A violation of division (A) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. A violation of division (B)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (E)   As used in this section, WITNESS means any person who has or claims to
have knowledge concerning a fact or facts concerning a criminal or delinquent
act, whether or not criminal or delinquent child charges are actually filed.
(R.C. § 2921.04)
Statutory reference:
   Retaliation, felony offense, see R.C. § 2921.05
§ 136.18 USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      LAWFULLY ISSUED. Means adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance with
the United States Constitution, the Constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state, and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS. Means municipal corporations, townships,
counties, school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that are
organized under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only
in geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      SHAM LEGAL PROCESS. Means an instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         (a)   It is not lawfully issued.
         (b)   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order of a court, a
law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.
         (c)   It is designed to make another person believe that it is
lawfully issued.
      STATE. Means a state of the United States, including without limitation
the state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the state. The term does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (B)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or otherwise use
sham legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1) or (B)
(2) of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful
purpose.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. A
violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. A violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (B)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (B)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2921.52(A) - (D))
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability, see R.C. § 2921.52(E)
§ 136.19 MAKING FALSE ALLEGATION OF PEACE OFFICER MISCONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2935.01.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly file a complaint against a peace officer
that alleges that the peace officer engaged in misconduct in the performance of
the officer’s duties if the person knows that the allegation is false.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of making a
false allegation of peace officer misconduct, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2921.15)
§ 136.20 MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, 9-1-1 SYSTEM means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number 9-1-1.
(R.C. § 128.01(A))
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person knows
that no emergency exists.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C. Chapter 128,
except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of
such information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(R.C. § 128.32(E) - (G))
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))
§ 136.21 FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offenses identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section;
         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this section has been, is being,
or is about to be committed.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (C)   Nothing in division (A) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’s name, address, or date of birth. Nothing in
division (A) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address, or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (D)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(R.C. § 2921.29)
   (E)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (F)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (E) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(R.C. § 2909.31)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS CONTROL
Section
   
137.01   Definitions
   
137.02   Carrying concealed weapons
   
137.03   Using weapons while intoxicated
   
137.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
   
137.05   Possessing criminal tools
   
137.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance
   
137.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons
   
137.08   Underage purchase of firearm or handgun
   
137.09   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
   
137.10   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance
   
137.11   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone
   
137.12   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention
   
137.13   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession
   
137.14   Defaced firearms
Cross-reference:
   Conveyance into certain facilities, see §
136.13
   Injury to persons by hunters, see §
135.05
   Injury to property by hunters, see §
131.24
   Using weapons to endanger or damage aircraft or airport operations, see §
131.05
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 137.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACTIVE DUTY. Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.
   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   BALLISTIC KNIFE. A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a
spring-operated mechanism.
   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. §
2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued
by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the type that is specified
in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to carry a concealed
handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the type that is
specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license issued by
another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a reciprocity
agreement under R.C. § 109.69.
   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife.
         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite,
TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol,
pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic
explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium
nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting
agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power
to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in
mining, quarrying, excavating, or demolitions.
         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         (f)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use
in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The term does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         (b)   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         (d)   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)(c) of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition.
         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot
readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy,
souvenir, curio, or museum piece.
         (f)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that act.
         (g)   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   DEADLY WEAPON. Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting death,
and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed, carried,
or used as a weapon.
   EXPLOSIVE. Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or common
purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes all materials
that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division 1.3, or
division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of Transportation in
its regulations and includes but is not limited to dynamite, black powder,
pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps, electric blasting caps,
safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant fuses, instantaneous
fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not include “fireworks”,
as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or material otherwise meeting
the definition of explosive set forth in this section that is manufactured,
sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in any activity described in R.C.
§ 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted in accordance with all applicable
laws, rules, and regulations, including but not limited to the provisions of
R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. §
3737.82.
   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE. Any device designed or specially adapted to cause physical
harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting of an
explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it. The term includes
without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device, any blasting cap
or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure vessel that has
been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   FIREARM.
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant. The term
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including
but not limited to the representations and actions of the individual exercising
control over the firearm.
   HANDGUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   INCENDIARY DEVICE. Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR. The
phrase does not include any of the following:
      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust violations,
unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar offenses relating
to the regulation of business practices;
      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of imprisonment of two
years or less.
   SAWED-OFF FIREARM. A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a
rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than
26 inches long overall. “Sawed-off firearm” does not include any firearm with
an overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the “Gun
Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found
by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat.
725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to
fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not under
a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a
suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the license
was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. § 2923.128(B)(1), under
R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state other than this
state in which the license was issued.
   ZIP-GUN. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.11)
§ 137.02 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, before or at the time a law enforcement officer
asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose
that the person then is carrying a concealed handgun, provided that it is not a
violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact to an
officer during the stop and the person already has notified another officer of
that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to
and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C.
§ 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (C)(1)(b) does not apply
to the person;
         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for any
lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who
has been issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time of the
alleged carrying or possession of a handgun or who, at the time of the alleged
carrying or possession of a handgun, is an active duty member of the armed
forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless
the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (E)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall
be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the
dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to, or
has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B)(1) of this section as it
existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may file an application under R.C. §
2953.35 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed
weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2), (F)
(6), and (F)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in violation of
division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7) of
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance
or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is
either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the
weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, carrying concealed weapons in violation
of division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7)
of this section, if the offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with
purpose to carry a concealed weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the
weapon involved, carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A person shall not be arrested for a violation of division (A)(2)
of this section solely because the person does not promptly produce a valid
concealed handgun license. If a person is arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section and is convicted of or pleads guilty to the violation,
the offender shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor if both of
the following apply:
            1.   Within ten days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of the arrest to
the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.
            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (b)   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined
$500 if all of the following apply:
            1.   The offender previously had been issued a concealed handgun
license, and that license expired within the two years immediately preceding
the arrest.
            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender presents a
concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that employed the
arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the offender’s right to a
speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is provided in R.C. § 2945.71.
            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
         (c)   If divisions (F)(2)(a) and (F)(2)(b) and (F)(6) of this section
do not apply, the offender shall be punished under division (F)(1) or (F)(7) of
this section.
      (3)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(2) or (B)
(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).
      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(3) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the United States
and is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if at the time of the
violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. 2923.126
(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that division.
If the person is not able to promptly produce a valid military identification
card and documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets
or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if
the person is not in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall
issue a citation and the offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more
than $500. The citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty
shall not be assessed if both of the following apply:
         (a)   Within ten days after the issuance of the citation, the offender
presents a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which were both valid at the time of the
issuance of the citation to the law enforcement agency that employs the citing
officer.
         (b)   At the time of the citation, the offender was not knowingly in a
place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of
this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B)(5) and is
not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand under that division, the penalty shall be as
follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person
produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after the arrest and
has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)
(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division
(A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree;
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the person has
previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is a
dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop. If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (H)   For purposes of this section, “deadly weapon” or “weapon” does not
include any knife, razor, or cutting instrument if the instrument was not used
as a weapon.
(R.C. § 2923.12)
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see R.C. §§
2923.124 et seq.
   Concealed carry by a qualifying adult, see R.C. § 2923.111
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see R.C. §
2923.121
§ 137.03 USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.15)
§ 137.04 IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person at
the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division is
the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (E)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Before or at the time a law enforcement officer asks if the person
is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to disclose that the person
then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle, provided that it
is not a violation of this division if the person fails to disclose that fact
to an officer during the stop and the person already has notified another
officer of that fact during the same stop;
      (2)   Before or at the time an employee of the motor carrier enforcement
unit asks if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to
disclose that the person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the
commercial motor vehicle, provided that it is not a violation of this division
if the person fails to disclose that fact to an employee of the unit during the
stop and the person already has notified another employee of the unit of that
fact during the same stop;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while stopped and before
the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in
accordance with directions given by a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer.
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (F)   (1)   Divisions (A), (B), (C), and (E) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         (b)   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm
is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(2)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         (b)   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(4)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         (d)   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (F)(4)(b) of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (G)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. § 2923.12(D)(1) and
(D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (B) or (C) of this
section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) or (C)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway,
or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (H)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (B), (C),
or (D) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011, and the conduct that was the basis of the
violation no longer would be a violation of division (E) of this section on or
after September 30, 2011, or if a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) or
(E)(2) of this section as it existed prior to June 13, 2022, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011, and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (B) or
(C) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, due to the application of
division (F)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under R.C. § 2953.35 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. A violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (D) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person’s person, it is
also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of
division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (E)(4) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. A violation of division (E)(3) or (E)
(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. In
addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation
of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section, the offender’s concealed handgun
license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of
division (B) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (J)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop. If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.
   (K)   As used in this section:
      AGRICULTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.
      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.25(A).
      HIGHWAY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT. Means the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by R.C. § 5503.34.
      MOTOR VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.
      STREET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.
      UNLOADED.
         (a)   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division (d) of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (a)2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         (c)   For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper- clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         (d)   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (L)   Divisions (a) and (b) of the definition of “unloaded” in division (K)
of this section do not affect the authority of a person who has been issued a
concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question to have one or
more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle,
without being transported as described in those divisions, as long as no
ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as
permitted under any other provision of this chapter. A person who has been
issued a concealed handgun license that is valid at the time in question may
have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a
vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm,
other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any
provision of this chapter.
(R.C. § 2923.16)
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163
§ 137.05 POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (A)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (B)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the circumstances indicate that the
substance, device, instrument, or article involved in the offense was intended
for use in the commission of a felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.24)
§ 137.06 FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.19)
§ 137.07 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or recklessly sell,
lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person prohibited by R.C. §
2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
from acquiring or using any dangerous ordnance;
      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose to dispose
of it in violation of division (A)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a federally licensed firearms
dealer or private seller to transfer a firearm or ammunition to any person in a
manner prohibited by state or federal law;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section, with
an intent to deceive, knowingly provide materially false information to a
federally licensed firearms dealer or private seller;
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
knowingly procure, solicit, persuade, encourage, or entice a person to act in
violation of division (A)(3) or (A)(4) of this section;
      (6)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license, or
permit showing the transferee to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of
the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the sheriff of
the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality where the
transaction takes place;
      (7)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities forthwith
the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the person’s
possession and under his or her control.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(3), (A)(4), and (A)(5) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer who is acting within the scope of the
officer’s duties;
      (2)   A person who is acting in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer described in division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful transactions in
weapons. A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. A violation of division (A)(7) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      AMMUNITION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.401.
      FEDERALLY LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.
      MATERIALLY FALSE INFORMATION. Means information regarding the transfer of
a firearm or ammunition that portrays an illegal transaction as legal or a
legal transaction as illegal.
      PRIVATE SELLER. Means a person who sells, offers for sale, or transfers a
firearm or ammunition and who is not a federally licensed firearms dealer.
(R.C. § 2923.20)
§ 137.08 UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult. Whoever
violates division (B) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
(R.C. § 2923.211)
Statutory reference:
   Improperly furnishing firearms to a minor, felony, see R.C. § 2923.21
§ 137.09 POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (A)   Discharge of firearms on or near prohibited premises. No person shall
do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (B)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (B)   Application of division (A).
      (1)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (C)   Penalty for violation of division (A). Whoever violates division (A)
of this section is guilty of discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited
premises. A violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of division (A)(3) shall be
punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section, a
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
      (2)   If the violation created a substantial risk of physical harm to any
person, caused serious physical harm to property, caused physical harm to any
person, or caused serious physical harm to any person, a violation of division
(A)(3) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2923.162)
   (E)   Unlawful discharge. No person shall discharge any BB gun, air gun, or
firearm, or make use of any sling, bow and arrow, or crossbow, within the
corporate limits of the municipality.
   (F)   Unlawful pointing or aiming. No person shall, intentionally and
without malice, point or aim any BB gun, air gun, or firearm, or any sling, bow
and arrow, or crossbow at or toward another.
   (G)   Penalty for violations of division (E) or (F). Whoever violates
division (E) or (F) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
   (H)   Exceptions. This section shall not prohibit the firing of a military
salute or the firing of weapons by persons of the nation’s armed forces acting
under military authority, and shall not apply to law enforcement officials or
other government officials in the proper enforcement of the law, or to any
person in the proper exercise of the right of self defense, or to any person
otherwise lawfully permitted by proper federal, state or local authorities to
discharge a BB gun, air gun, or firearm, or to use a sling, bow and arrow, or
crossbow in a manner contrary to the provisions of this section. Division (E)
of this section does not extend to cases in which BB guns, air guns, or
firearms, or slings, bows and arrows, or crossbows are used in the confines of
structures or used within the confines of a person’s own property, provided
such use is under adult supervision and is approved by the municipality.
Statutory reference:
   Improperly discharging firearm at or into habitation or school safety zone,
felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.161
§ 137.10 LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   Upon application to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (B) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of such business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (B)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the sheriff of the county or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit. The fees
shall be paid into the General Revenue Fund of the county or municipality. The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address, and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (C)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (D)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage, or
use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (E)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non-consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (F)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.18(F),
the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance anywhere in the state.
The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous ordnance only within
the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (G)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(6) and (A)(7) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(R.C. § 2923.18)
§ 137.11 POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   A law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly
weapons or dangerous ordnance;
         (c)   A security officer employed by a board of education or governing
body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty pursuant
to that contract of employment;
         (d)   1.   Any person not described in divisions (B)(1)(a) to (B)(1)
(c) of this section who has written authorization from the board of education
or governing body of a school to convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
into a school safety zone or to possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance
in a school safety zone and who conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance in accordance with that authorization, provided both of the
following apply:
               a.   Either the person has successfully completed the
curriculum, instruction, and training established under R.C. § 5502.703, or the
person has received a certificate of having satisfactorily completed an
approved basic peace officer training program or is a law enforcement officer;
               b.   The board or governing body has notified the public, by
whatever means the affected school regularly communicates with the public, that
the board or governing body has authorized one or more persons to go armed
within a school operated by the board or governing authority.
            2.   A district board or school governing body that authorizes a
person under division (B)(1)(d) of this section shall require that person to
submit to an annual criminal records check conducted in the same manner as R.C.
§ 3319.39 or R.C. § 3319.391.
         (e)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
division (B)(1)(e) of this section does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         (b)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (c)   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).
         (d)   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) through (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person has been issued a concealed handgun license that is
valid at the time of the conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         (c)   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         (d)   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the
motor vehicle.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the Director of Education and
Workforce prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s probationary
driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary commercial driver’s
license that then is in effect from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4)
and shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that type
during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of this
state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02
(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (D)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (D)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (D)(1) of this section, but the court, in its discretion,
instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of
hours determined by the court.
   (E)   As used in this section, OBJECT THAT IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A
FIREARM means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(R.C. § 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122(A) and (B)
§ 137.12 POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (A)   As used in this section, DETENTION and DETENTION FACILITY have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 2921.01.
   (B)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law.
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see R.C.
§ 2923.131
§ 137.13 CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (A)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))
   (B)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:
      (1)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. § 2923.125
shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has been
issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30 days
after the licensee's license expires during which the licensee's license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the license is valid when the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed
handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the licensee's
residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within 45 days after
that change.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.12(B)
or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license does not
authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the following
places:
         (a)   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         (b)   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;
         (c)   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         (d)   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun
is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;
         (e)   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university, or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in
a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing
the handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         (f)   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         (g)   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (B)(2)(c) of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building;
         (h)   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (B) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         (b)   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises or property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by
the private employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose.
A private employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to
the private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C. Chapter 2744,
for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused
by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or property
owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the political subdivision. As
used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2744.01.
            3.    An institution of higher education shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor vehicles owned by
the institution, unless the institution acted with malicious purpose. An
institution of higher education is immune from liability in a civil action for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by
or related to the institution’s decision to permit a licensee or class of
licensees to bring a handgun onto the premises of the institution.
            4.    A nonprofit corporation shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises of the nonprofit corporation, including any motor vehicle owned by the
nonprofit corporation, or to any event organized by the nonprofit corporation,
unless the nonprofit corporation acted with malicious purpose. A nonprofit
corporation is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death,
or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to the
nonprofit corporation’s decision to permit a licensee to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the nonprofit corporation or to any event organized by the
nonprofit corporation. The immunities described in this division apply to an
entity that leases its property to the nonprofit corporation or permits its
property to be used by the nonprofit corporation for any purpose.
         (c)   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (B)(3)(c)2. of this
section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land or
premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or
onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a
posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was
a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.    If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
care center, type A family child care home, or type B family child care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family child care home
or type B family child care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass
in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (B)(3)(c) of this section:
               LANDLORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
               RENTAL AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
               RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01,
except the term does not include a dwelling unit that is owned or operated by a
college or university.
               TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who has been
issued a license under that section that is valid at the time in question.
      (5)   (a)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (B).
         (c)    A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
         (d)   A fire investigator who is qualified to carry firearms while on
duty under R.C. § 109.774 has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in
this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. §
2923.125.
      (6)   (a)   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (B)(6)(c) of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who has been issued a license issued under that section that is valid at
the time in question. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a
qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer
identification card issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a
valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to division (B)(6)
(c) of this section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)
(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(B)1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (B)(6)(c) of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(B)(6)(b)1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED”.
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section.
         (c)   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)
(b)1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. §
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (B)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)
(6)(b)1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (B)(6)(b) of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)    As used in division (B) of this section:
         FIRE INVESTIGATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 109.71.
         GOVERNING BODY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL SUBDIVISION OF THIS
STATE. Means any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         NONPROFIT CORPORATION. Means any private organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation pursuant to subsection 501(a) and described in
subsection 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. Means a person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (B)
(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an identification
card that is issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section to a person
who is a retired peace officer.
         TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
109.71.
         VALIDATING IDENTIFICATION. Means photographic identification issued by
the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that identifies
the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(R.C. § 2923.126)
   (C)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. § 2923.126(B) as
a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a
concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall post
in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign that
contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”
(R.C. § 2923.1212)
§ 137.14 DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number, or
other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer’s serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(R.C. § 2923.201)
CHAPTER 138: DRUG OFFENSES
Section
   
138.01   Definitions
   
138.02   Trafficking in controlled substances; gift of marihuana
   
138.03   Drug possession offenses
   
138.04   Possessing drug abuse instruments
   
138.05   Permitting drug abuse
   
138.06   Illegal cultivation of marihuana
   
138.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants
   
138.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples
   
138.09   Federal prosecution bar to municipal prosecution
   
138.10   Nitrous oxide: improper dispensing or distribution; possession in a
motor vehicle
   
138.11   Laboratory report required
   
138.12   Counterfeit controlled substances
   
138.13   Use, possession, or sale of drug paraphernalia
   
138.14   Controlled substance or prescription labels
   
138.15   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics
   
138.16   Controlled substance schedules
   
138.17   Unlawful furnishing of prescription to enable persons to be issued
handicapped parking placards or license plates
   
138.18   Sale of pseudoephedrine
   
138.19   Sale of pure caffeine product
   
138.20   Sale of dextromethorphan
Statutory reference:
   Administration of epinephrine, exemption from prosecution, see R.C. §
2925.64
   Controlled substances, regulation of pharmacists and other professionals,
see R.C. Chapters 3719 and 4729
   Conviction of professionally licensed persons to be reported to licensing
board, see R.C. § 2925.38
   Criminal and civil forfeiture of property for felony drug abuse offenses,
see R.C. Chapter 2981
   Destruction of chemicals used to produce methamphetamine; preservation of
samples, see R.C. § 2925.52
   Tampering with drugs, felony offense, see R.C. § 2925.24
§ 138.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   ADMINISTER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   ALCOHOL AND DRUG ADDICTION SERVICES. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5119.01.
   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum
opium;
         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid
amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of
a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of phencyclidine;
         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in
a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal
drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or contains any
amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic
substance;
         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug, and
Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse
control laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of
a Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl- related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized committee of
the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of the
state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V, Section 6 of the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   COCAINE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer
or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative of ecgonine, or a
salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A JUVENILE. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of
a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender
knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the
juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the
boundaries of any school premises.
   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER OR A
RECOVERING ADDICT. An offense is “committed in the vicinity of a substance
addiction services provider or a recovering addict” if either of the following
apply:
      (1)   The offender commits the offense on the premises of a substance
addiction services provider’s facility, including a facility licensed prior to
June 29, 2019, under R.C. § 5119.391 to provide methadone treatment or an
opioid treatment program licensed on or after that date under R.C. § 5119.37,
or within 500 feet of the premises of a substance addiction services provider’s
facility and the offender knows or should know that the offense is being
committed within the vicinity of the substance addiction services provider’s
facility.
      (2)   The offender sells, offers to sell, delivers, or distributes the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog to a person who is
receiving treatment at the time of the commission of the offense, or received
treatment within 30 days prior to the commission of the offense, from a
substance addiction services provider and the offender knows that the person is
receiving or received that treatment.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed by a
person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution, or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DECEPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of
Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   DISPENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DISTRIBUTE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to
any section listed in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a municipality, state
or any other state, or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating,
harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping,
transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing,
dispensing, selling, inducing another to use, administering to another, using,
or otherwise dealing with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3)
of this definition.
   DRUG OF ABUSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States.
   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3-methyl-4- piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-– phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N-phenylaceta- mide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         (a)   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         (b)   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         (c)   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         (d)   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but means
any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the gas, fumes, or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline, or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         (b)   Any aerosol propellant.
         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   HASHISH.
      (1)   A resin or a preparation of a resin to which both of the following
apply:
         (a)   It is contained in or derived from any part of the plant of the
genus cannabis, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form.
         (b)   It has a delta-9 tetrahydrocannabinol concentration of more than
0.3%.
      (2)   The term does not include a hemp byproduct in the possession of a
licensed hemp processor under R.C. Chapter 928, provided that the hemp
byproduct is being produced, stored, and disposed of in accordance with rules
adopted under R.C. § 928.03.
   HYPODERMIC. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.
   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities incident to
production.
   MANUFACTURER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   MARIHUANA. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it does
not include hashish.
   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing
methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PERSON WITH A DRUG DEPENDENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   PHARMACIST. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   PHARMACY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may not
be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through ownership
or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is found.
   PREMISES OF A SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER'S FACILITY. Means the
parcel of real property on which any substance addiction service provider’s
facility is situated.
   PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL BE
IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term is
a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)
(1) through (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed
person.
   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a certificate of registration as a
registered barber under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced cosmetologist’s license, advanced hair designer’s
license, advanced manicurist’s license, advanced esthetician’s license,
advanced natural hair stylist’s license, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair
design instructor’s license, manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics
instructor’s license, natural hair style instructor’s license, independent
contractor’s license, or tanning facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license, or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist, independent school
psychologist, or school psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered environmental health
specialist under R.C. Chapter 4736;
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or class C
license or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard
employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other
place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.
   SALE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous to
health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at
one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
   SCHEDULE I, SCHEDULE II, SCHEDULE III, SCHEDULE IV or SCHEDULE V . Have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the
State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal offense is
committed.
   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any
instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is
being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense
is committed.
   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   SUBSTANCE ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Means an agency, association,
corporation or other legal entity, individual, or program that provides one or
more of the following at a facility:
      (1)   Either alcohol addiction services, or drug addiction services, or
both such services that are certified by the Ohio Director of Mental Health and
Addiction Services under R.C. § 5119.36;
      (2)   Recovery supports that are related to either alcohol addiction
services, or drug addiction services, or both such services and paid for with
federal, state, or local funds administered by the Ohio Department of Mental
Health and Addiction Services or a board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental
health services.
   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C.§ 2925.01)
§ 138.02 TRAFFICKING IN CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES; GIFT OF MARIHUANA.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Sell or offer to sell a controlled substance or a controlled
substance analog;
      (2)   Prepare for shipment, ship, transport, deliver, prepare for
distribution, or distribute a controlled substance or a controlled substance
analog, when the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
controlled substance or a controlled substance analog is intended for sale or
resale by the offender or another person.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
and 4741.
      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the “Federal Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act” (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended), and is sold, offered
for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose in accordance
with that Act.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this
section, trafficking in controlled substances is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the offense
involves a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana, trafficking in marihuana is a
minor misdemeanor upon a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree
upon a subsequent offense. If the offense involves a gift of 20 grams or less
of marihuana and if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, trafficking in marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of trafficking in marihuana and shall be
punished under division (C)(2) of this section. The offender is not guilty of
trafficking in a fentanyl-related compound and shall not be charged with,
convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.03(C)(9) for trafficking in a
fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of trafficking in a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.03(C)(9).
   (D)   As used in this section, “drug” includes any substance that is
represented to be a drug.
(R.C. § 2925.03(A) - (C), (I))
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see R.C. § 2925.03(C)
§ 138.03 DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
and 4741.
         (b)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         (c)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug,
and Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         (d)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (B)(1)(d), “deception” and “theft offense”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   (a)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section:
            COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5119.01.
            COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. §
2929.01
            DRUG TREATMENT PROGRAM. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.
            HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2919.16.
            MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. A violation of this section or R.C.
§ 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.
            POST-RELEASE CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2967.28.
            PUBLIC AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2930.01.
            QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. A person who is acting in good faith who
seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a
drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.
            SEEK OR OBTAIN MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. Includes, but is not limited to
making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an on-duty peace
officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care facility.
         (b)   Subject to division (B)(2)(e) of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense or a violation of
R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog, drug abuse instruments, or
drug paraphernalia that would be the basis of the offense was obtained as a
result of the qualified individual seeking the medical assistance or
experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (B)(2)(b)2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         (c)   If a person who is serving a community control sanction or is
under a sanction on post- release control acts pursuant to division (B)(2)(b)
of this section, then R.C. § 2929.141(B), R.C. § 2929.15(B)(2), R.C. § 2929.25
(D)(3), or R.C. § 2967.28(F)(3) applies to the person with respect to any
violation of the sanction or post-release control sanction based on a minor
drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, or a violation of R.C. §
2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141.
         (d)   Nothing in division (B)(2)(b) of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (B)(2)(b) of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense or a violation
of R.C. § 2925.12, R.C. § 2925.14(C)(1), or R.C. § 2925.141 committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of this
section;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         (e)   Division (B)(2)(b) of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b) of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b)
of this section more than two times.
         (f)   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996”, 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4)(b) or (C)(4)(c)
of this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams
of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a
liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of
hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (C)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall
not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(6)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (C)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (C)(6)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
   (E)   (1)   In addition to any prison term or jail term authorized or
required by division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22,
2929.24, and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
in addition to any other sanction that is imposed for the offense under this
section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court that sentences
an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A)
of this section may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit for not more than five years. However, if the offender
pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the
United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation,
the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit for not more than five years.
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
   (F)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (F) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.11)
Statutory reference:
Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)
§ 138.04 POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for
the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
      (2)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this section when a person seeks or obtains medical assistance for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person experiences a drug
overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.12)
§ 138.05 PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (A) or (B) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (D)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (B) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.
(R.C. § 2925.13(A) - (C), (F))
§ 138.06 ILLEGAL CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person listed in R.C. § 2925.03(B)
(1), (B)(2) or (B)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to
the extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (C)   Whoever commits a violation of division (A) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in the following divisions, illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor or, if the offense was
committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 100 grams but
is less than 200 grams, illegal cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree or, if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school
or in the vicinity of a juvenile, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (3)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(R.C. § 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Illegal manufacturing of controlled substances, felony, see R.C. § 2925.04
   Sale or use of drugs not approved by Food and Drug Administration, felony,
see R.C. § 2925.09
§ 138.07 ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (C)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.31)
§ 138.08 ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be
determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following division, illegal
dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (b)   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (C))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 138.09 FEDERAL PROSECUTION BAR TO MUNICIPAL PROSECUTION.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(R.C. §§ 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 138.10 NITROUS OXIDE: IMPROPER DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTION; POSSESSION IN A
MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   Improper dispensing or distribution.
      (1)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
         (a)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (A)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (A)(4) of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section is
guilty of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
      (3)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes
nitrous oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or
distribution of the nitrous oxide on a separate card. The person shall require
the purchaser to sign the card and provide a complete residence address. The
person dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the
card. The person shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year
from the date of the transaction. The person shall maintain the cards at the
person’s business address and make them available during normal business hours
for inspection and copying by officers or employees of the State Board of
Pharmacy or of other law enforcement agencies that are authorized to
investigate violations of this code, R.C. Chapters 2925, 3719, or 4729, or
federal drug abuse control laws. The cards used to record each transaction
shall inform the purchaser of the following:
         (a)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes
of preparing food;
         (b)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health
effects; and
         (c)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
      (4)   (a)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in
this municipality shall bear the following printed warning: “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food. Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. Do not inhale contents.
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
         (b)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more
cartridges of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the
cartridges with a label or other device that identifies the person who
dispensed or distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
   (B)   Possession in a motor vehicle.
      (1)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the
same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.
      (2)   Unless authorized by this code or by state law, no person shall
possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on
a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
         (b)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of possessing nitrous
oxide in a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (4)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(R.C. § 2925.33)
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, see R.C. § 2925.32
§ 138.11 LABORATORY REPORT REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another law
enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority of an
institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state and that
is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North Central
Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the purpose of
providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed by the
person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the basis of
the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as
to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and that it contains any
amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of unit
dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight or the
existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or a violation of this chapter,
R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the possession of
chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, a laboratory report from the Bureau
or from any laboratory that is operated or established as described in this
division that is signed by the person performing the analysis, stating that the
substances that are the basis of the alleged offense have been weighed and
analyzed and stating the findings as to the content, weight, and identity of
each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and
weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training, and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section. The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (B)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (C)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the
person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney,
within seven days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the
report. The time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (D)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (E)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court. Such portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances. The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial. If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused’s attorney. In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (F)   In addition to the rights provided under division (E) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapters 2925
or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any multiple
thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor violation, that
involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice, or, if the
accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the court,
present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis of the
alleged violation. Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further written
request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the
measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at
conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number of
unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(R.C. § 2925.51)
   (G)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled
the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was the
basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(R.C. § 2925.511)
§ 138.12 COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking and other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 138.13 USE, POSSESSION, OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any equipment,
product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter. The term
includes but is not limited to any of the following equipment, products, or
materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender for use, or
designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance, except for those exempted
in division (D)(4) of this section;
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or
carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe;
carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or
chiller.
   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product, or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product, or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product, or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925. A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product,
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment, product, or
material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product, or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product, or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product, or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product, or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product, or
material.
   (C)   (1)   Subject to divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), and (D)(4) of this section,
no person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug
paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product, or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741. This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
      (3)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of division (C)(1) of this section when a person seeks or obtains
medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a
person experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that
overdose, or a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose.
      (4)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug testing strips to determine the
presence of fentanyl or a fentanyl-related compound.
   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was
used, possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall be
seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon
forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. § 2981.12(B).
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(3) of this section, whoever
violates division (C)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section by selling drug
paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug paraphernalia to
juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (C)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (G)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with R.C. §
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the United States
that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation for which the
offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section shall not file
such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (G)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.14)
   (H)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the same
meaning as in division (A) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (B) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (H) does not apply to any person identified in
division (D)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the
possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
      (5)   (a)   Division (E) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of division (H) of this
section.
         (b)   Division (B)(2) of R.C. § 2925.11 applies with respect to a
violation of this division (H) when a person seeks or obtains medical
assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose, a person
experiences a drug overdose and seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or
a person is the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for that overdose.
      (6)   (a)   Whoever violates division (H)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   Arrest or conviction for a violation of division (H)(3) of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s
criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person’s appearance as a witness.
      (7)   (a)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender
for a violation of division (H) of this section, the court shall do the
following, if applicable:
            1.   If the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or
the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five years.
            2.   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.
         (b)   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (H)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016, may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (H) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (H)(7)(b) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(R.C. § 2925.141)
§ 138.14 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (A)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, “repackager” and “outsourcing
facility” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (B)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
R.C. § 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(R.C. § 3719.08(A), (E))
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or R.C. § 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I or II
controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if the offender, as
a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then R.C. § 3719.99(D)
applies.
(R.C. § 3719.99(C))
§ 138.15 POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (A)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (B)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale. No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division (A)
of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to
prevent any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by
any unauthorized person.
(R.C. § 3719.172(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (B) of this section, R.C. § 3719.05, 3719.06,
3719.13, 3719.172(B), or 3719.31, or a drug abuse offense, a violation of
division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(R.C. § 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 3719.172(C) and (D)
§ 138.16 CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in R.C.
§ 3719.41 and amended by R.C. §§ 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted by
reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
§ 138.17 UNLAWFUL FURNISHING OF PRESCRIPTION TO ENABLE PERSONS TO BE ISSUED
HANDICAPPED PARKING PLACARDS OR LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   No physician or chiropractor shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Furnish a person with a prescription in order to enable the person
to be issued a removable windshield placard, temporary removable windshield
placard, or license plates under R.C. § 4503.44, knowing that the person does
not meet any of the criteria contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   Furnish a person with a prescription described in division (A)(1)
of this section and knowingly misstate on the prescription the length of time
the physician or chiropractor expects the person to have the disability that
limits or impairs the person’s ability to walk in order to enable the person to
retain a placard issued under R.C. § 4503.44 for a period of time longer than
that which would be estimated by a similar practitioner under the same or
similar circumstances.
(R.C. §§ 4731.481, 4734.161)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(R.C. §§ 4731.99(F), 4734.99(B))
Cross-reference:
   Parking privileges for persons with disabilities, see §
76.05
§ 138.18 SALE OF PSEUDOEPHEDRINE.
   (A)   Unlawful purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this section:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   (a)   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)
(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (B)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. of
this section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   (a)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
         (b)   Division (A)(3)(a) of this section does not apply to an
individual under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2925.55)
   (B)   Unlawful retail sales.
      (1)   (a)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(1)(b) of this
section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee
of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell,
offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual
an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1.a. and
(B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   1.   Division (B)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a) of this section
for a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either
to provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         (b)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per
violation.
(R.C. § 2925.56)
   (C)   Transaction scans.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (D) of this section:
         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent, or employee.
         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
         SELLER. Means a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (C)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (C)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under R.C. §
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (C) and division (D) of this section.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) of this section except for
purposes of division (D) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (D) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (C) or division (D) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away, or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(R.C. § 2925.57)
   (D)   Affirmative defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (B) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a
pseudoephedrine product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away, or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (B) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (B) of this
section. For purposes of division (D)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (D)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(R.C. § 2925.58)
   (E)   Retailer’s duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (E) and (F) of this section:
         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or used by humans
and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only pursuant to a
prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS. Has the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic system for
tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on a national
basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug Diversion
Investigators or a successor organization.
         PHARMACIST. A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage in the
practice of pharmacy.
         PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license, a
military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or
salts of optical isomers.
         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national precursor log
exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs indicating
that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or federal law.
         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
         WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         (a)   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         (b)   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i.
and (E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         (d)   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for inspection by the
State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter
4731.
(R.C. § 3715.05)
   (F)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers,
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         (a)   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         (b)   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. § 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(R.C. § 3715.06)
§ 138.19 SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT means:
      (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         (a)   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         (b)   Any energy product.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (C) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         (a)   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         (b)   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         (c)   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         (d)   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         (e)   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (D)(2)(a) to (D)(2)(d) of
this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34)
§ 138.20 SALE OF DEXTROMETHORPHAN.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DEXTROMETHORPHAN. Means the dextrorotatory isomer of 3-methoxy-N-
methylmorphinan, including its salts, but not including its racemic or
levorotatory forms.
      EVIDENCE OF MAJORITY AND IDENTITY. Means a document issued by the federal
government or a state, county, or municipal government, or a subdivision or
agency of any of the foregoing, including a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, an identification card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52, a
military identification card, or any other form of identification that bears
the name, date of birth, description, and picture of the person identified.
      RETAILER. Means a place of business that offers consumer products for
sale to the general public, including a terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 and operated as a pharmacy.
   (B)   No retailer or employee of a retailer shall knowingly supply, deliver,
give, or otherwise provide a drug, material, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing any quantity of dextromethorphan through the sale of any
product to a person under 18 years of age, unless the person has been issued a
prescription for the product being purchased.
   (C)   For purposes of division (B) of this section, the person making the
sale of a product containing dextromethorphan shall require and obtain evidence
of majority and identity from the purchaser, unless from the purchaser’s
outward appearance the person making the sale would reasonably presume the
purchaser to be 25 years of age or older. Proof that the person making the sale
demanded, was shown, and acted in reasonable reliance on the purchaser’s
evidence of majority and identity is a defense to any charge of a violation of
division (B) of this section.
   (D)   A retailer or employee of a retailer is not liable for damages in a
civil action for injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly
arises from an act or omission associated with a failure to prevent the sale of
a product containing dextromethorphan to a person under 18 years of age, unless
the act or omission constitutes willful or wanton misconduct.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
selling dextromethorphan, a minor misdemeanor.
(R.C. § 2925.62)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
151.   SMALL CELL FACILITIES AND WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES
      
152.   INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN STANDARDS AND DETAILS
      
153.   RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGULATIONS
      
154.   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
      
155.   CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
156.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
150.01   Engineering and zoning plan reviews
   
150.02   Facilitating the effective reutilization of nonproductive land
§ 150.01 ENGINEERING AND ZONING PLAN REVIEWS.
   (A)   The city is hereby authorized to invoice the appropriate developer of
a building allotment for all engineering plan review fees and all zoning plan
review fees associated with inspections for the allotment. The cost for the
various services are set forth in below.
   (B)   The city is hereby authorized to include a $25 processing fee with
each invoice.
Zoning Department Municipal Engineering Fee Schedule
Zoning Department Municipal Engineering Fee Schedule
Engineering Plan Review Fees
Lot split - lot consolidation     $200
Minor subdivision                 $600
Single family site plan           $200
Multi-family site plan            $300
Commercial - industrial site plan $800
Major subdivision                 $40 per lot for preliminary plan
                                 $100 per lot for final plan review
                                 $25 per lot for each subsequent submittal
Zoning Plan Review Fees
Lot split - lot consolidation     $20
Minor subdivision                 $35
Single family site plan           $50
Multi-family site plan            $50
Commercial - industrial site plan $100
Major subdivision                 $200
NOTE: Any additional labor, materials or service costs incurred by city
besides these set engineering and zoning fees shall be billed to the
applicant. Additional fees can include professional services ouch as surveying
costs, environmental evaluations and/or consulting fees.
 
(Ord. 05-99, passed 12-7-2005)
§ 150.02 FACILITATING THE EFFECTIVE REUTILIZATION OF NONPRODUCTIVE LAND.
   The city hereby adopts and implements the procedures set forth in R.C. §§
5722.02 through 5722.15 to facilitate the effective reutilization of
nonproductive land in the city.
(Ord. 12-O-03, passed 7-18-2012)
CHAPTER 151: SMALL CELL FACILITIES AND WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURES
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Definitions
   
151.03   Applicability
Procedures
   
151.15   Permit required
   
151.16   Application requirements
   
151.17   Application type
   
151.18   Decisions
   
151.19   Amendments
   
151.20   Issuance of permit and certificates
   
151.21   Scope of approval
   
151.22   Duration of approval
   
151.23   Revocation
   
151.24   Appeals
Standards
   
151.35   General
   
151.36   Design and siting requirements
   
151.37   Reservation of right-of-way
   
151.38   Nonconformity
   
151.39   Conflict with other provisions
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish general procedures and
standards for the siting, construction, placement, collocation, modification,
operation and removal of small cell facilities and/or wireless support
structures within the city.
   (B)   The goals of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Provide standards for the siting, construction, placement,
collocation, modification, operation, and removal of small cell facilities and
wireless support structures within the city;
      (2)   Establish criteria for making application and to promote fair and
efficient processing of applications;
      (3)   Ensure small cell facilities and wireless support structures
conform to all applicable health and safety regulations;
      (4)   Preserve the character of the city’s neighborhoods and/or historic
districts by limiting the overall number of facilities within the city’s right-
of-way;
      (5)   Reduce visual clutter and preserve and enhance the aesthetic
environment of the city;
      (6)   Users of the city’s rights-of-way by limiting the placement and
overall number of facilities within close proximity to roadways, sidewalks or
other such ways of travel; and
      (7)   Establish a fair and reasonable method to recover costs incurred in
administering this chapter.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED. Any small cell facilities or wireless support structures that are
unused for a period of 365 days without the operator otherwise notifying the
city and receiving the city’s approval.
   AGENT. A person that provides to the city, written authorization to work on
behalf of a public utility.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives radio frequency
signals in the provision of wireless service.
   APPLICANT. Any person that submits an application to the city to site,
construct, place, collocate, modify, operate and/or remove a small cell
facility or wireless support structure in the City of New Franklin.
   CABLE OPERATOR, CABLE SERVICE, FRANCHISE. These words have the same meanings
as in the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 522.
   COLLOCATION, COLLOCATE. To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on a wireless support structure or utility pole.
   DECORATIVE POLE. A pole, arch, or structure other than a street light pole
placed in the right-of- way specifically designed and placed for aesthetic
purposes and on which no appurtenances or attachments have been placed except
for any of the following:
      (1)   Electric lighting;
      (2)   Specially designed informational or directional signage; and
      (3)   Temporary holiday or special event attachments.
   ENCLOSURE. A cabinet for equipment intended to conceal its contents, prevent
electrical shock to users, and protect the contents from the environment.
   EQUIPMENT. Electrical and/or mechanical devices or components.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A building, property or site, or group of buildings,
properties, or sites that are either of the following:
      (1)   Listed in the national register of historic places or formally
determined eligible for listing by the keeper of the national register, the
individual who has been delegated the authority by the federal agency to list
properties and determine their eligibility for the national register, in
accordance with Section VI.D.1.a.i-v of the nationwide programmatic agreement
codified at 47 C.F.R. part 1, Appendix C; and
      (2)   A registered historic district as defined in R.C. § 149.311.
   MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY. The same meaning as in R.C. § 4928.01.
   OCCUPY, USE. With respect to a right-of-way, to place a tangible thing in a
right-of-way for any purpose, including, but not limited to, constructing,
repairing, positioning, maintaining or operating lines, poles, pipes, conduits,
ducts, equipment, or other structures, appurtenances, or facilities necessary
for the delivery of public utility services or any services provided by a cable
operator.
   OHIO MANUAL OF UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, OMUTCD. The uniform system
of traffic control devices promulgated by the Department of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09.
   PERMIT, WORK PERMIT. A permit issued by the city that must be obtained in
order to perform any work in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through
any part of the right-of-way, including, but not limited to, the act or process
of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing or
installing, as well as the act of opening and cutting into the surface of any
paved or improved surface that is part of the right-of-way. Also, a permit
issued by the city that must be obtained in order to occupy the city’s right-
of-way.
   PERMITTEE. A person issued a permit.
   PERSON. Any natural person, corporation or partnership and also includes any
governmental entity.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. A wireless service provider as defined in R.C. § 4927.01(A)
(20) or any company described in R.C. § 4905.03 except in divisions (B) and (I)
of that section, which company also is a PUBLIC UTILITY as defined in R.C. §
4905.02; and includes any electric supplier as defined in R.C. § 4933.81.
   PUBLIC WAY FEE. A fee levied to recover the costs incurred by the city and
associated with the occupancy or use of a right-of-way.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC WAY. The surface of, and the space within, through, on,
across, above or below, any public street, public road, public highway, public
freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public court, public sidewalk,
public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public easement, and any other
land dedicated or otherwise designated for a compatible public use, which, on
or after July 2, 2002, is owned or controlled by a municipal corporation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY excludes a private easement.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY. A wireless facility in which:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of
not more than six cubic feet in volume; and
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The calculation of
equipment volume shall not include electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer
switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power
and other services.
   SMALL CELL FACILITY OPERATOR, OPERATOR. A wireless service provider, or its
designated agent, or cable operator, or its designated agent, that operates a
small cell facility and provides wireless service as defined in R.C. § 4939.01
(T). For the purpose of this chapter, OPERATOR includes a wireless service
provider or cable operator that provides information services as defined in the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 110 Stat. 59, 47 U.S.C. §153(20), and services
that are fixed in nature or use unlicensed spectrum.
   SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE. The same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. § 1.300002,
as may be amended, and as applicable to facilities in the public right-of-way,
which defines that term as a collocation or modification that:
      (1)   Increases the overall height more than 10% or ten feet (whichever
is greater);
      (2)   Increases the width more than six feet from the edge of the
wireless support structure;
      (3)   Involves the placement of any new enclosures on the ground when
there are no existing ground-mounted enclosures;
      (4)   Involves the placement of any new ground-mounted enclosures that
are 10% larger in height or volume than any existing ground-mounted enclosures;
      (5)   Involves excavation or deployment of equipment outside the area in
proximity to the installation and other wireless communications equipment
already deployed on the ground;
      (6)   Would defeat the existing concealment elements of the wireless
support structure as determined by the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer;
or
      (7)   Violates a prior condition of approval, provided however that the
collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval related to
height, width, enclosures or excavation that is inconsistent with the
thresholds for a substantial change.
   SYSTEMATIC REPLACEMENT. As used in §
151.35(B)(24), this term means the replacement of a series of utility poles or
above ground utility equipment which spans a distance of one city block or
greater.
   UTILITY EASEMENT. An easement dedicated for the use of a Public Utilities
Commission of Ohio regulated utility.
   UTILITY POLE. A structure that is designed for, or used for the purpose of,
carrying lines, cables or wires for electric distribution or telecommunications
service. The term excludes street signs and decorative poles.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and a communications network, including all of the
following:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications;
         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiberoptic cable,
regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration; and
         (c)   The term includes small cell facilities.
      (2)   As defined in division (1) of this definition, the term does not
include any of the following: structure or improvements on, under or within
which the equipment is collocated; coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is between
wireless support structures or utility poles or that is otherwise not
immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna;
   WIRELESS SERVICE. Any services using licensed or unlicensed wireless
spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using
wireless facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER. A person who provides wireless service as defined
in R.C. § 4927.01(A)(20).
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A pole, such as a monopole, either guyed or
self-supporting, street light pole, traffic signal pole, a 15-foot or taller
sign pole, or utility pole capable of supporting wireless small cell
facilities. As used in R.C. § 4939.031 and this chapter, WIRELESS SUPPORT
STRUCTURE excludes all of the following:
      (1)   A utility pole or other facility owned or operated by a municipal
electric utility; and
      (2)   A utility pole or other facility used to supply traction power to
public transit systems, including railways, trams, streetcars and trolley
buses.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.03 APPLICABILITY.
   No small cell facility operator may collocate or remove a small cell
facility or construct, maintain, modify, operate, replace or remove wireless
support structures in, along, across, upon, and/or under the right-of-way
except in conformance with all provisions of this chapter and any other
applicable requirements of the city.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
PROCEDURES
§ 151.15 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Unless otherwise exempted, it shall be unlawful for any person to collocate
or remove a small cell facility or construct, maintain, modify, operate,
replace, or remove wireless support structures in, along, across, upon, and/or
under the right-of-way unless a permit has been approved by the City Engineer
and Zoning Administrator and issued by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.16 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   This section specifies the necessary requirements for a complete permit
application. A complete application shall consist of the following.
   (A)   Application fee.
      (1)   The applicant shall pay a permit fee in the amount of $250 per
small cell facility site requested.
      (2)   An applicant seeking to construct, modify, collocate or replace
more than one small cell facility or one wireless support structure may file a
consolidated application for consent to occupy or use the right-of-way for up
to 30 small cell facilities in a single application or up to 30 wireless
support structure requests in a single application. Said single application may
only address multiple small cell facilities or multiple wireless support
structures if they each involve substantially the same type of small cell
facilities or substantially the same type of wireless support structures. The
city may separately address small cell facilities or wireless support
structures for which incomplete information has been received or which are
denied. In the case of a single application, each small cell facility or
wireless support structure proposed to be constructed, modified or collocated
on, or replaced shall constitute a separate request for consent to occupy or
use the right-of-way for purposes of tolling the response deadline set forth in
this chapter.
   (B)   Required disclosures. Required disclosures above must be included for
all transmitters on the support structure, which includes without limitation
existing collocated antennas and antennas used for wireless backhaul (such as
microwave dish antenna or U/E relay).
   (C)   Regulatory authorization. To the extent that the applicant claims any
regulatory authorization or other right to use the public right-of-way, the
applicant must provide a true and correct copy of the certificate, license,
notice to proceed or other regulatory authorization that supports the
applicant’s claim.
   (D)   Owner’s authorization. Applicants must submit evidence sufficient to
show that either:
      (1)   The applicant owns the proposed support structure; or
      (2)   The applicant has obtained the owner’s authorization to file the
application.
   (E)   Site plans and structural calculations.
      (1)   The applicant must submit fully dimensioned site plans, elevation
drawings and structural calculations prepared, sealed, stamped and signed by a
professional engineer licensed and registered by the state.
      (2)   Drawings must depict any existing wireless facilities with all
existing wireless communications equipment and other improvements, the proposed
facility with all proposed wireless communications equipment and other
improvements and the legal boundaries of the leased or owned area surrounding
the proposed facility and any associated access or utility easements.
   (F)   Equipment and enclosure specifications. The applicant shall provide
dimensioned elevations, cut sheets, material samples or other construction
documents necessary to evaluate for compliance with this chapter.
   (G)   Statement of intent. The applicant shall provide a statement of a
wireless support structure’s intended purpose.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.17 APPLICATION TYPE.
   (A)   Types of applications. Each application to collocate or remove a small
cell facility or construct, maintain, modify, operate, replace, or remove
wireless support structures in, along, across, upon, and/or under the right-of-
way shall be classified as one of three types. The three types of applications
are:
      (1)   Small cell minor.
         (a)   An application which involves removal or replacement of small
cell facilities and any associated equipment on an existing wireless support
structure; and such removal or replacement does not constitute a substantial
change; or
         (b)   An application which involves the routine maintenance of a small
cell facility.
      (2)   Small cell substantial. An application that:
         (a)   Involves the installation of a new small cell facility on a
wireless support structure; or
         (b)   Involves the removal or replacement of a small cell facility on
an existing wireless support structure and such removal or replacement
constitutes a substantial change.
      (3)   Wireless support structure. An application for a proposal to
construct, modify or replace a wireless support structure in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Applications seeking to collocate. Applications seeking to collocate a
small cell facility to a wireless support structure or municipal pole owned by
the city and located within the city right-of-way shall also be required to
obtain an attachment certificate and shall pay an attachment fee in the amount
of $250 per small cell facility site. Thereafter, the applicant shall pay an
annual fee of $200 for continued placement of the facility on the municipal
structure.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.18 DECISIONS.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator and City Engineer shall review the
application for conformance with the standards of this chapter and shall
either:
      (1)   Approve, approve with conditions;
      (2)   Deny a small cell minor application; or
      (3)   Grant or deny consent for small cell substantial and wireless
structure applications.
   (B)   If a request is denied, the reasons for denial shall be provided in
writing to the applicant.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to deny an application if any one of the
following conditions exist:
      (1)   The application does not comply with a provision herein or a
provision of the city’s codified ordinances;
      (2)   The applicant is not authorized to conduct business in the state;
      (3)   The applicant is not current in its obligation to pay to the city
fees or taxes;
      (4)   The design or location is deemed unsafe or noncompliant in regards
to transportation and engineering standards for construction within the right-
of-way;
      (5)   The design is counter to the health, safety and welfare of the
city;
      (6)   The design or location is in conflict with current or proposed
accessibility standards;
      (7)   The design does not meet standards related to electrical,
structural, safety or construction best practices; and
      (8)   The proposed design is in conflict with existing infrastructure,
facilities and/or utilities.
   (D)   Except as allowed in division (E) of this section, applications shall
be reviewed and a decision rendered, within the following time periods.
      (1)   Small cell minor. Small cell minor applications shall be rendered
within 60 days of the date of filing.
      (2)   Small cell substantial. Small cell substantial applications shall
be rendered within 90 days of the date of filing.
      (3)   Wireless support structure. Wireless support structure applications
shall be rendered within 120 days of the date of filing.
   (E)   The time period required in division (D) of this section may be tolled
only:
      (1)   By mutual agreement between the applicant and the city;
      (2)   If the application is determined to be incomplete;
      (3)   If the number of requests for consent for small cell facilities or
wireless support structures received is likely to result in difficulty
processing applications within the time limits set forth herein due to a lack
of resources of the city, then the city may toll the time limits as follows:
         (a)   The time period may initially be tolled for up to 21 days when
the number of applications received within any consecutive 30 day period
exceeds 15 applications; and
         (b)   For every additional 15 applications that the city receives
above the 15 applications stated in division (D)(3)(a) of this section, the
time period may be tolled an additional 15 days.
      (4)   In no instance shall the time tolled exceed 90 consecutive days.
   (F)   To toll the time period for incompleteness, the city shall provide the
applicant notice within 30 days of the date of filing. Such notice shall
include a listing of the missing documents and/or information. The time period
resumes once the applicant submits a response. If an application is still
incomplete, the city shall notify the applicant within ten days of the
response.
   (G)   If multiple applications are received by the city to install two or
more wireless support structures that would violate the spacing requirements of
§
151.36 of this chapter, or to collocate two or more small cell facilities on
the same wireless support structure, the city shall process and render a
decision in the order they are received.
   (H)   In the event that an application is received by the city to install a
wireless support structure or small cell facility in a location in common with
another application for a facility in the right-of-way, preference shall be
granted in the following order of service provided:
      (1)   Municipal infrastructure;
      (2)   Water;
      (3)   Electricity;
      (4)   Gas;
      (5)   Landline telephone; and
      (6)   Wireless service.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.19 AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to an application in process which are not part of a response to
a notice of incompleteness or a correction notice shall be treated as a new
application.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.20 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT AND CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   When an application is approved or granted consent, a permit shall be
issued to the applicant authorizing the following:
      (1)   Small cell work permit. A permit to perform the approved action,
removal, replacement or maintenance work, subject to any conditions;
      (2)   Small cell collocation consent. Consent to perform the approved
removal, replacement or installation, and grant occupancy within the city
right-of-way, subject to any permits or conditions; and
      (3)   Wireless support structure. Consent to construct, modify or replace
a wireless support structure in the right-of-way, subject to any permits or
conditions.
   (B)   An applicant seeking collocation of a small cell facility to a
wireless support structure owned by the city and located within the city right-
of-way shall be issued an attachment certificate authorizing such attachment,
subject to any conditions.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.21 SCOPE OF APPROVAL.
   No permit or certificate authorized by this chapter shall be transferrable.
No permit or certificate issued hereunder shall convey title, equitable or
legal, in the right-of-way.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.22 DURATION OF APPROVAL.
   (A)   Standard conditions of approval.
      (1)   Permission to install small cell facilities and wireless support
structures in the right-of-way shall be conditioned on compliance with the
standard conditions provided in §§
151.35 through
151.39.
      (2)   The city may add or modify conditions of approval as necessary or
appropriate to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
   (B)   Small cell facility permit duration.
      (1)   The city’s approval term of an attachment to a wireless support
structure shall be for a period of not less than ten years, with renewal for
successive five-year terms, subject to terms providing for early termination or
nonrenewal for cause or by mutual agreement.
      (2)   An operator may remove its small cell facilities at any time
subject to applicable permit requirements.
   (C)   Compliance with all applicable laws. The permittee shall at all times
maintain compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws,
regulations, ordinances or other rules.
   (D)   Invalidation. In the event that any court of competent jurisdiction
invalidates any portion of state or federal law which mandates approval of any
permit, such permit shall automatically expire 60 days from the date of the
judicial order.
   (E)   Start of work. The work authorized by a permit must be started within
90 days from the date of issuance, unless otherwise agreed upon as part of the
approval.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.23 REVOCATION.
   The following are grounds for revocation or denial of approval:
   (A)   The intentional provision of materially misleading information by the
applicant (the provision of information is considered “intentional” where the
applicant was aware of the inaccuracies or could have discovered the
inaccuracies with reasonable diligence);
   (B)   The failure to comply with any condition of approval, order, or other
applicable law, rule or regulation;
   (C)   The site, structure or operation is otherwise not in compliance with
any other provision(s) of applicable law; and
   (D)   The subject site or use is otherwise not in compliance due to
incomplete work or projects, or is not in compliance due to unperformed or slow
to perform work as part of an open permit.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.24 APPEALS.
   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hear and decide upon appeals where
it is alleged there is an error in any written decision made by the Zoning
Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   A complete written appeal shall be filed by the appellant within ten
days of the written decision of the Zoning Administrator or the appeal shall
become void. The appeal shall be filed with the Clerk of Council. The written
appeal shall:
      (1)   Cite specific provisions of this chapter that are alleged to have
been interpreted in error or the specific action being appealed and the grounds
on which the appeal is being made;
      (2)   Include any required application fee in an amount set by the city’s
fee schedule;
      (3)   Include such other information as may be required to render a
reasonable decision;
      (4)   A statement as to why the appellant has standing as an aggrieved
party to pursue the appeal;
      (5)   An aggrieved party may appeal the Zoning Administrator’s decision
in accordance with the city’s zoning regulations, §
156.023 of this code of ordinances. Such appeal shall follow the procedures of
§
156.023;
      (6)   A decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals may be appealed in
accordance with the City of the city’s zoning regulations, §
156.024 of this code of ordinances; and
      (7)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall not be required to hear any case
that has been the subject of an appeal during the previous 12 months, unless
substantial new evidence, critical to the case, becomes available.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
STANDARDS
§ 151.35 GENERAL.
   (A)   The city desires to promote orderly small cell facility and wireless
support structure installations using the smallest and least intrusive means
available to provide services to the community. All such installations in the
public right-of-way shall comply with all applicable provisions in this
section.
   (B)   All applications shall be subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   Compliance with all applicable laws. The permittee shall at all
times maintain compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws,
regulations, ordinances or other rules.
      (2)   Right to inspect.
         (a)   The city or its designee may inspect a small cell facility or
wireless support structure within the right-of-way upon reasonable notice to
the permittee.
         (b)   The permittee shall cooperate with all inspections.
         (c)   The city reserves the right to support, repair, disable or
remove any elements of the small cell facility or wireless support structure in
emergencies or when the small cell facility or wireless support structure
threatens imminent harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Contact information.
         (a)   The permittee shall at all times maintain accurate contact
information for all parties responsible for the small cell facility or wireless
support structure, which shall include a phone number, street mailing address
and email address for at least one natural person.
         (b)   All such contact information for responsible parties shall be
provided to the Public Service Department.
      (4)   Indemnification.
         (a)   The permittee and, if applicable, the nongovernment owner of a
small cell facility or wireless support structure shall defend, indemnify and
hold harmless the city and its agents, officers, officials and employees from:
            1.   Any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and
expenses arising out of any claims, demands, lawsuits, writs of mandamus or
other actions or proceedings brought against the city to challenge, attack,
seek to modify, set aside, void or annul the city’s approval of the applicable
permit or certificate; and
            2.   Any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs and
expenses and any claims, demands, lawsuits, or other actions or proceedings of
any kind, whether for personal injury, death, or property damage, arising out
of or in connection with the activities or performance of the permittee or its
agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors or independent
contractors.
         (b)   In the event the city becomes aware of any such actions or
claims, the city shall:
            1.   Promptly notify the permittee and shall reasonably cooperate
in the defense;
            2.   It is expressly agreed that the city shall have the right to
approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel
providing the city’s defense; and
            3.   The permittee (as applicable) shall reimburse city for any
costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the city in the course
of the defense.
      (5)   Interference with city communication services.
         (a)   In the event that the city has reason to believe that
permittee’s operations are causing interference with the city’s radio
communications operations, then the permittee shall, at its cost, immediately
cooperate with the city to either rule out permittee as the interference source
or eliminate the interference.
         (b)   Cooperation with the city may include, but shall not be limited
to, temporarily switching the equipment on and off for testing.
      (6)   Adverse impact. The permittee shall undertake all reasonable
efforts to avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that
may arise from the construction, operation, maintenance, modification, or
removal of the small cell facility or wireless support structure.
      (7)   Maintenance. The site and the small cell facility or wireless
support structure, including, but not limited to, all landscaping, fencing and
related equipment, must be maintained in a neat and clean manner and in
accordance with all approved plans and conditions of approval.
      (8)   Good condition. Small cell facilities and wireless support
structures shall at all times employ best practices and maintain in use only
the best available technology and methods for preventing failures and accidents
so that the same shall not menace or endanger the life or property of any
person.
      (9)   Graffiti abatement. The permittee shall remove any graffiti on the
small cell facility at the permittee’s sole expense.
      (10)   Exposure to RF radiation. All small cell facilities must comply
with all standards and regulations of the FCC and any other state or federal
government agency with the authority to regulate RF exposure standards.
      (11)   Utility lines. Service lines must be undergrounded whenever
feasible to avoid additional overhead lines.
      (12)   Relocation for public improvements. The permittee shall remove and
relocate the permitted small cell facility and/or wireless support structure at
the permittee’s sole expense to accommodate construction of a public
improvement project by the city.
      (13)   Removal if discontinued.
         (a)   In the event that the use of a small cell facility is
discontinued, the owner shall provide written notice to the city of its intent
to discontinue use and the date when the use shall be discontinued.
         (b)   If a small cell facility is not removed within 90 days of
discontinued use, the city may remove it at the owner’s expense irrespective of
the notice requirement under this section.
      (14)   Abandoned. In the event that the use of a small cell facility is
abandoned, the city may remove it at the owner’s expense.
      (15)   Site restoration.
         (a)   Upon completion of the new work, the contractor shall restore
the street and/or alley pavement as required;
         (b)   Upon completion of the new work, the contractor shall restore
all concrete walks, driveway aprons and other concrete as required; and
         (c)   Upon completion of the new work, the contractor shall restore
all tree lawns and/or sod strips with topsoil and sod.
      (16)   General construction. All work and designs shall comply with the
following general standards for construction in the city’s right-of-way:
         (a)   The city’s codified ordinances;
         (b)   The city’s Standard Construction Drawings;
         (c)   The city’s Construction and Material Specifications;
         (d)   Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT) Location and Design
Manual;
         (e)   ODOT Standard Drawings;
         (f)   ODOT Construction and Material Specifications;
         (g)   Ohio Manual of Traffic Control Devices;
         (h)   American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials
(AASHTO) A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets;
         (i)   AASHTO Roadside Design Guide;
         (j)   AASHTO Guide for the Planning, Design, and Operation of
Pedestrian Facilities;
         (k)   AASHTO Guide for Development of Bicycle Facilities;
         (l)   United States Access Board (USAB) Proposed Guidelines for
Pedestrians in the Public Right-of-Way;
         (m)   USAB American with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines;
         (n)   National Fire Protection Association 70 National Electric Code;
and
         (o)   All other applicable local, state and federal codes and
regulations.
      (17)   Taxes and assessments. To the extent taxes or other assessments
are imposed by taxing authorities on the use of city property as a result of an
applicant’s use or occupation of the right-of-way, the applicant shall be
responsible for payment of such taxes, payable annually unless otherwise
required by the taxing authority.
      (18)   Interference. Small cell wireless and wireless support structures
shall be constructed and maintained in such a manner that will not interfere
with the use of other property.
      (19)   Financial condition. 
         (a)   All owners must procure and provide to the city a bond, or must
provide proof of an equivalent financial mechanism, to ensure compliance with
all provisions hereunder.
         (b)   Such bond or financial mechanism must specifically cover the
cost of removal of the item placed in the right-of-way.
      (20)   Setbacks for visibility and access. Any new small cell facility or
wireless support structure and other improvements associated with a new small
cell facility or wireless support structure or an existing small cell facility
or wireless support structure must be setback from intersections, alleys and
driveways and placed in locations where it will not obstruct motorists’
sightlines or pedestrian access.
      (21)   Obstructions. Any new small cell facility or wireless support
structure and other improvements associated with a new small cell facility or
wireless support structure or an existing small cell facility or wireless
support structure shall not obstruct any:
         (a)   Worker access to any above-ground or underground infrastructure
for traffic control, streetlight or public transportation, including without
limitation any curb control sign, parking meter, vehicular traffic sign or
signal, pedestrian traffic sign or signal, barricade reflectors;
         (b)   Access to any public transportation vehicles, shelters, street
furniture or other improvements at any public transportation stop (including,
without limitation, bus stops, streetcar stops and bike share stations);
         (c)   Worker access to above ground or underground infrastructure
owned or operated by any public or private utility agency;
         (d)   Fire hydrant access;
         (e)   Access to any doors, gates, sidewalk doors, passage doors,
stoops or other ingress and egress points to any building appurtenant to the
right-of-way; or
         (f)   Access to any fire escape.
      (22)   Historic or architecturally significant structures. Any new
utility installation and other improvements associated with a new utility
installation or an existing utility installation may not be placed directly in
front of any historic or architecturally significant structures, in a prominent
or highly visible location.
      (23)   Tree trimming. No placement of any small cell facility or wireless
support structure shall necessitate tree trimming, cause removal of, or
otherwise damage any tree located within the city’s right- of-way or a
designated utility easement. Such small cell facility or wireless support
structure shall not be located within the eventual mature dripline or tree
crown of any existing tree located within the city’s right-of-way or a
designated utility easement.
      (24)   Public utilities to be placed underground.
         (a)   New construction, extension of existing public utilities and
systematic replacement of public utilities within the right-of-way shall be
installed underground if one or more of the following conditions as determined
by the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer exist:
            1.   When any public utility within the right-of-way is currently
located in the same vicinity underground;
            2.   The extension of the public utility is required for new
development; or
            3.   As stipulated in the city’s land use plan.
         (b)   Except if the applicant produces clear and convincing evidence
the public utility cannot feasibly be installed underground, the City Engineer
concurs with that assessment, and the extension of the public utility is
necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the community, then the
requirement to place underground may be waived by the Zoning Administrator and
City Engineer, but cost alone shall not be the determining factor. In all cases
where the placement of the public utility underground is waived, additional
screening or camouflaging elements may be required and must be approved by the
Zoning Administrator and City Engineer prior to final approval.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.36 DESIGN AND SITING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General requirements.
      (1)   Wireless support structures shall align with other poles to achieve
a uniform inline appearance.
      (2)   Wireless support structures shall be setback from the edge of
pavement according to applicable safety and construction standards as set forth
in §
151.35 of this chapter.
      (3)   All small cell facilities and wireless support structures and any
related items shall be installed and maintained plumb and level and shall
maintain an orderly and neat appearance.
      (4)   All equipment and enclosures shall be attached, anchored and/or
strapped tightly to poles using corrosion resistant steel hardware.
      (5)   Wireless support structures shall support no more than two small
cell facilities.
      (6)   Ambient noise suppression measures or placement of the equipment in
locations less likely to impact adjacent properties shall be required to ensure
compliance with all applicable noise regulations.
      (7)   Unless otherwise required for compliance with FAA or FCC
regulations, the small cell facility or wireless support structure shall not
include any permanently installed lights. Any lights associated with the
equipment shall be appropriately shielded from public view. This shall not be
interpreted to prohibit streetlights or the placement of luminaires by the
city.
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   In accordance with R.C. § 4939.0314(D), Authority of a Municipal
Corporation, the city shall reserve the right to propose an alternate location
to the proposed location of a new wireless support structure, provided the
alternate location is within 100 feet or a distance equal to the width of the
right-of-way in or on which the new wireless support structure is proposed,
whichever is greater.
      (2)   The city also finds that certain locations and collocation
configurations are preferred. A preferred location and collocation
configuration should be utilized whenever possible and should only be surpassed
if, in the determination of the Zoning Administrator, clear and convincing
evidence supports such a decision. Cost alone should not be grounds for such a
determination. The order of preference is as follows:
         (a)   First, small cell facilities should be collocated on an existing
pole or wireless support structure within a utility easement. If no such pole
or wireless support structure is available then proceed to the next preference;
         (b)   Second, small cell facilities should be collocated on an
existing pole or wireless support structure within an alley. If no such pole or
wireless support structure is available then proceed to the next preference;
         (c)   Third, small cell facilities should be collocated on a new
wireless support structure within a utility easement. If no such location is
available then proceed to the next preference;
         (d)   Fourth, small cell facilities should be collocated on a new
wireless support structure within an alley. If no such location is available
then proceed to the next preference;
         (e)   Fifth, small cell facilities should be collocated on a wireless
support structure currently supporting a small cell facility located within the
city right-of-way. If no such wireless support structure is available then
proceed to the next preference;
         (f)   Sixth, small cell facilities should be collocated on an existing
pole located within the city right-of-way. If no such existing pole is
available then proceed to the next preference; and
         (g)   Seventh, small cell facilities should be collocated on a new
wireless support structure located within the city right-of-way.
      (3)   Any new wireless support structure shall be located at least 1,230
feet from any existing small cell facility.
   (C)   Wireless facilities design.
      (1)   Wireless support structures shall be subject to the following
design standards.
         (a)   Maximum permitted height.
            1.   For a new wireless support structure, the overall height of
the wireless support structure and any collocated antennas shall not be more
than 40 feet in height above established grade measured at the base of the
wireless support structure.
            2.   The city shall limit the maximum permissible height of
wireless support structures to not more than 35 feet in height above
established grade measured at the base of the wireless support structure in
areas that meet this criteria:
               a.   The area is within 300 feet of the proposed site for a new
wireless support structure in the same right-of-way or a connecting right-of-
way, and where there are no wireless support structures or utility poles taller
than 30 feet in height above ground level; and
               b.   The maximum allowable height for building construction in
the underlying or adjacent zoning district is 35 feet in height above ground
level or less.
         (b)   Wireless support structures shall be capable of supporting at
least two small cell facility operators.
         (c)   New wireless support structures shall have the following design
elements:
            1.   Material: aluminum poles;
            2.   Color: black anodized;
            3.   Diameter: 12 inches;
            4.   Style: smooth round tapered profile; and
            5.   Base: trapezoidal pedestal base on a reinforced concrete
footing/foundation pier.
         (d)   Division (C)(1)(c) of this section shall apply except when:
            1.   The aesthetics and character of the immediate area would be
better matched by a pole of a different material, color, style, or base as
determined by the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer, then such design
elements may be substituted with an alternate design element.
            2.   Such determination shall be based on the following factors:
               a.   The design features of nearby poles serving in a similar
capacity;
               b.   The design features of the existing or proposed
streetscape, district or site;
               c.   The historical context of a district or specific site; and
               d.   A desire to camouflage or conceal the pole from view.
      (2)   Small cell facilities shall be subject to the following design
standards.
         (a)   The city reserves the right to require that the antenna and all
associated equipment shall be concealed to the extent deemed necessary by the
Zoning Administrator and City Engineer, in response to the aesthetic context of
the small cell facility.
         (b)   Each antenna and all associated equipment shall not exceed six
cubic feet in volume.
         (c)   All portions of a small cell facility other than an antenna as
identified by R.C. § 4939.01(P)(2), shall not exceed 28 cubic feet in volume
per facility.
         (d)   Small cell facilities mounted to a wireless support structure
shall be completely concealed within a common enclosure capable of containing
at least two small cell facilities. Such common enclosures shall:
            1.   Not exceed 21 cubic feet in volume;
            2.   Not exceed 90 inches in height, 20 inches in width, or 20
inches in depth;
            3.   Not extend more than 24 inches away from the pole on which it
is mounted;
            4.   Shall be centered on the vertical axis of the pole to which it
is mounted;
            5.   Be mounted at a distance of at least ten feet measured from
grade to the bottom of the enclosure; and
            6.   Be mounted on the side of the pole facing away from nearest
traffic lane’s direction of travel.
         (e)   Such common enclosures shall have the following design elements.
            1.   Material: the enclosure material shall be metal, a composite,
or an equivalent material as determined by the Zoning Administrator and City
Engineer.
            2.   Color: the enclosure shall match the color of the pole on
which it is mounted.
            3.   Style: the enclosure shall match the style of the pole on
which it is mounted.
            4.   Coordinated design elements: common enclosures shall match the
material, color and style of nearby existing common enclosures when:
               a.   Such enclosures are located within 5,000 feet of an
existing common enclosure; and
               b.   Such enclosures are mounted on wireless support structures
of a similar or matching design.
            5.   The above criteria shall apply except when:
               a.   The aesthetics and character of the immediate area would be
better matched by a pole of a different material, color, style, or base as
determined by the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer, then such design
elements may be substituted with an alternate design element; and
               b.   Such determination shall be based on the following factors:
                  i.   The design features of nearby poles serving in a similar
capacity;
                  ii.   The design features of the existing or proposed
streetscape, district or site;
                  iii.   The historical context of a district or specific site;
and
                  iv.   A desire to camouflage or conceal the pole from view.
         (f)   All ground mounted equipment shall be placed in an underground
vault. No above grade ground mounted equipment in service of a small cell
facility is permitted unless the following conditions can be satisfied as
determined by the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer:
            1.   The applicant has submitted clear and convincing evidence that
the equipment cannot feasibly be pole-mounted, placed in an underground vault,
or hidden within or integrated into an existing streetscape element (i.e., bus
stop shelter). Increased costs alone shall not be a consideration; and
            2.   If a ground mounted enclosure is approved, the Zoning
Administrator and City Engineer shall reserve the right to require any of the
following conditions:
               a.   Concealed enclosure. All equipment shall be completely
concealed within a metal, composite or equivalent material enclosure as
determined by the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer;
               b.   Smallest size. The enclosure shall be no larger than
necessary based on the smallest available size of the proposed equipment as
determined by the Zoning Administrator and City Engineer;
               c.   Camouflage. Camouflaging elements may be required. Such
elements may include, but shall not be limited to, public art displayed on the
enclosure, strategic placement in less visible or obtrusive locations,
placement within an existing streetscape element, landscape screening, and
strategic painting or coating to camouflage such enclosure or equipment; or
               d.   Maximum height. The maximum height of any such enclosure
shall be 30 inches.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.37 RESERVATION OF RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   The city reserves the right to reserve space for future public safety or
transportation uses in the right-of-way or on a wireless support structure or
pole owned or operated by the city in a documented and approved plan in place
at the time an application is filed. A reservation of space shall not preclude
placement of a pole or collocation of a small cell facility. If replacement of
the city’s pole or wireless support structure is necessary to accommodate the
collocation of the small cell facility and the future use, the small cell
facility operator shall pay for the replacement of the pole or wireless support
structure, and the replaced pole or wireless support structure must accommodate
the future use.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.38 NONCONFORMITY.
   A nonconforming small cell facility and/or wireless support structure shall
immediately lose its nonconforming designation and must be brought into
compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter, and all other applicable
city laws and ordinances or be removed if any of the following conditions are
present:
   (A)   The nonconforming small cell facility and/or wireless support
structure or a part of the nonconforming small cell facility and/or wireless
support structure is altered, modified, relocated, replaced or changed in any
manner whatsoever;
   (B)   The nonconforming small cell facility and/or wireless support
structure is damaged or deteriorated and requires any process of
reconstruction, repair, maintenance, or restoration, and the cost of said
reconstruction, repair, maintenance, or restoration exceeds 50% of the small
cell facility and/or wireless support structure’s replacement cost; or
   (C)   The nonconforming small cell facility and/or wireless support
structure is abandoned.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.39 CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   In the event that any other applicable law or code requires any more
restrictive requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall control.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person in violation of any of the terms hereunder, or who, being
the owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, shall
suffer or permit another to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair,
convert, attach or maintain any such facility in violation of any of the terms
hereunder, shall be deemed to have violated the provisions hereof and commits a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be fined not more than $500 or
imprisoned not more than 60 days or both for each day during the period such
violation continues.
   (B)   If any utility installation is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, attached or maintained in violation of this
chapter or of any regulations made pursuant hereto, the proper officer of the
city, in addition to other remedies, may institute in the name of the city any
appropriate action or proceeding, whether by legal process or otherwise, to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance, attachment or use, to restrain, correct or
abate such violation, to prevent the use of such utility installation, and/or
to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such utility
installation.
   (C)   The city’s Service Department is authorized to make requests and to
issue orders regarding utility installations in the right-of-way for the
purpose of public safety and compliance with the provisions hereunder. The
city’s Service Department is also authorized to conduct visual and external
inspections of utility installations in the right-of-way at any time and shall
make efforts to coordinate with the provider responsible for a utility
installation for any internal inspection of the relevant equipment.
   (D)   This chapter shall be effective as an exception to any ordinance,
resolution or other legislation of the city, inconsistent with this chapter or
which imposes additional requirements for effectiveness or validity.
(Ord. 18-O-02, passed 6-20-2018)
CHAPTER 152: INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN STANDARDS AND DETAILS
Section
   
152.01   Roadway requirements
   
152.02   Drainage requirements
   
152.03   Construction details
§ 152.01 ROADWAY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Roadway plans shall be designed based upon the latest edition of the
Ohio Department of Transportation Location and Design Manual Volume I and III,
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials A Policy on
Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, the Ohio Department of Transportation
Standard Construction Drawings, the Ohio Department of Transportation
Construction and Material Specifications, the Ohio Manual of Traffic Control
Devices, the city’s Zoning Code and the city’s standards as noted in the
following details.
   (B)   Horizontal and vertical design, geometric design of intersections,
barrier design, pavement design for new and reconstructed roads shall follow
the ODOT Location and Design Manual Volume I and AASHTO A Policy of Geometric
Design of Highways and Streets, or as required by the city.
   (C)   For additional information, see details in §
152.03 of this chapter.
(Ord. 18-O-03, passed 7-18-2018)
§ 152.02 DRAINAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The construction and design of storm collection facilities shall
comply with the Ohio Department of Transportation, Location and Design Manual,
Volume II, the Ohio Department of Transportation Standard Construction
Drawings, Ohio Department of Transportation Construction and Materials
Specifications, Summit County Engineer Stormwater Drainage Manual, and the
city’s Zoning Code.
   (B)   Drainage structures shall be per the most recent Ohio Department of
Transportation Standard Construction Drawings. The following drainage
structures are acceptable:
 
Manhole                           MH-1.2
Curbed roadway catch basin        CB-2.2 or CB-2.3 (if in driveway)
Curbed roadway catch basin (sump) CB-2.1 or multiple CB-2.3 (if in driveway)
Ditch catch basin                 CB-l.l
 
(Ord. 18-O-03, passed 7-18-2018)
§ 152.03 CONSTRUCTION DETAILS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1614.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1616.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1618.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1620.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1622.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1624.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1626.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1628.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1630.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1632.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1634.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1636.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1638.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1640.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1642.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1644.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1646.png]
 
(Ord. 18-O-03, passed 7-18-2018)
CHAPTER 153: RIGHTS-OF-WAY REGULATIONS
Section
   
153.01   Purpose
   
153.02   Definitions
   
153.03   Types of permits or franchises; grant of authority
   
153.04   Procedures for permits; terms
   
153.05   Criteria for granting permits or franchises
   
153.06   Obligation of permittees and franchisees; conditions of permits and
franchises
   
153.07   Fees
   
153.08   Notice of right-of-way work; joint planning
   
153.09   Use of permittee facilities
   
153.10   Indemnification
   
153.11   Removal of facilities
   
153.12   Remedies and revocation
   
153.13   Reservation of rights
   
153.14   Street vacation
   
153.15   Temporary movement of facilities
   
153.16   Foreclosure and leadership
   
153.17   Nonenforcement and waivers by city
   
153.18   Controlling law
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide requirements for the use or
occupation of any and all rights-of-way and public property in the city, the
issuance of permits to persons for such use or occupancy and to set forth the
policies of the city related thereto.
   (B)   This chapter does not take the place of any franchise, license or
permit which may be additionally required by law. Each permittee shall obtain
any and all such additional franchises, licenses or permits necessary to the
operations and conduct of its business.
   (C)   No person shall use, occupy, own or operate facilities in, under or
over any rights-of-way within the city unless such person first obtains a
franchise and/or permit conforming to the requirements set forth by law and in
this chapter.
   (D)   The policy of the city with regard to rights-of-way is hereby declared
to be:
      (1)   To promote public safety and protect public property;
      (2)   To promote the efficient utilization of rights-of-way for the
public health, safety and welfare;
      (3)   To assure that rights-of-way are environmentally and aesthetically
protected;
      (4)   To promote economic development in the city;
      (5)   To promote the availability of a wide range of utility,
communication and other services, including the rapid deployment of new
technologies and innovative services, to the city’s citizens and taxpayers at
reasonable rates;
      (6)   To promote cooperation among the city and franchisees and
permittees in the occupation of rights-of-way, and work therein, in order to
minimize public inconvenience during work in the rights- of-way and to avoid
uneconomic, unneeded and unsightly duplication of facilities;
      (7)   To ensure adequate public compensation for the administration of
the regulation of the private use of the rights-of-way; and
      (8)   To promote and require reasonable accommodation of all uses of
rights-of-way and to establish the following priority of use of rights-of-way,
when all requested usage of rights-of-way by permittees cannot be accommodated:
         (a)   The city;
         (b)   Another governmental entity with city’s concurrence of other
uses required by law;
         (c)   Utility companies;
         (d)   Telecommunications, general permittees and franchisees;
         (e)   Special permitees; and
         (f)   Residential permittees; provided, however that the Service
Director may reasonably require rights-of-way permittees and franchisees to
cooperate to accommodate use by other permittees and franchisees and provided
further that the Service Director may alter this priority when the Service
Director reasonably determines a deviation to be in the public interest.
   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to apply the provisions of
this chapter to facilities owned or operated by the city of any of its
operations.
   (F)   Unless otherwise specifically stated in a permit, all permits of
franchises granted hereunder shall be nonexclusive.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The words “shall” and “will”
are mandatory and “may” is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person applying for a permit hereunder.
   APPROVED. Approval by the city pursuant to this chapter or any regulations
adopted hereunder.
   BEST EFFORTS. The best reasonable efforts under the circumstances, taking
into consideration, among other appropriate matters, safety, expedition,
available technology and human resources and cost.
   CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in § 2 of the Cable Communication
Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. § 522, as amended.
   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE. Any transmission of video or other programming
service to subscribers and any subscriber interaction required for the
selection of that video or other programming service.
   CHAPTER or THIS CHAPTER. This chapter, as amended from time to time and any
regulations adopted hereunder.
   CITY. The City of New Franklin, Ohio, or as appropriate in the case of
specific provisions of the chapter, any board, bureau, authority, agency,
commission, department of, or any other entity of or acting on behalf of, the
City of New Franklin, or any officer, official, employee, representative or
agent thereof, the designee of any of the foregoing, or any successor thereto.
   CONTRACTOR. Any individual or company performing or subcontracting to
perform the construction or installation of the facilities needed for the
rendering of the services being provided by the permittee or franchisee.
   COUNCIL. The Council of the City of New Franklin, Ohio.
   DIRECTOR. The Service Director of the City of New Franklin, Ohio.
   EMERGENCY. Any situation, occurrence or happenstance that requires and
demands immediate attention for the correction, maintenance or reinstallation
of the service provided by the permittee or franchisee to correct or prevent
any imminent danger to the safety, health and welfare to the public.
   FORCE MAJEURE. A strike, acts of God, acts of public enemies, orders of any
kind of government of the United States of America or of the State of Ohio or
any of their departments, agencies or political subdivisions, riots, epidemics,
landslides, lightening, earthquakes, fires, tornadoes, storms, floods, civil
disturbances, explosions, partial or entire failure of utilities or any other
cause or event not reasonably within the control of the disabled party, but
only to the extent the disabled party notifies the other party as soon as
practicable regarding such FORCE MAJEURE and then for so long as and to the
extent that, the FORCE MAJEURE prevents compliance or causes noncompliance with
the provisions hereof.
   FRANCHISE. The nonexclusive right pursuant to the Constitution and laws of
Ohio and/or the United States, granted by the city to operate or provide cable
television or services to consumers within the city.
   PERMIT. The nonexclusive grant of authority to use or occupy all or a
portion of city’s rights-of- way granted pursuant to this chapter.
   PERMITTEE. Any person issued a permit pursuant to this chapter to use or
occupy all or a portion of the rights-of-way in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter and said permit.
   PERSON. Any natural person or any association, firm, partnership, joint
venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for-profit or
not-for-profit.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any real property, other than rights-of-way, owned by the
city.
   PUBLIC WAY. Any public street, road, highway, public easement or public
waterway, and includes the entire width of any rights-of-way associated with
any public way.
   REGULATION. Any rule adopted by and pursuant to the authority of this
chapter.
   RESIDENTIAL RELATED PURPOSES. Residential use of rights-of-way for
mailboxes, decorative purposes, curb cuts, driveways, irrigation systems and
other uses permitted in the rights-of-way by ordinance.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surface of and the space above and below any public
street, public road, public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path,
public way, public alley, public court, public sidewalk, public boulevard,
public parkway, public drive or any public easement or rights-of-way now or
hereafter held by the city which shall, within its proper use, entitle a
permittee or franchisee, in accordance with the terms hereof and of any permit,
to the use thereof for the purpose of installing or operating any poles, wires,
cables, transformers, conductors, ducts, lines, mains, conduits, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments or other property or facilities
as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to the provision of utility, cable
television, communications or other services as set forth in any franchise or
any permit. Rights-of-way shall also include public property, but only to the
extent the use or occupation thereof is specifically granted in a permit or by
regulation.
   TELECOMMUNICATION. The transmission, between or among points specified by
the user, of information of the user’s choosing, without change in the form or
content of the information as sent and received.
   TELECOMMUNICATION SERVICE. The offering of telecommunications for a fee
directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used.
   UTILITY. Water, electric, storm sewer, sanitary sewer services and the
companies or agencies providing said service.
   UTILITY SERVICE PROVIDER. A natural gas company, local exchange telephone
company, interexchange telecommunications company, electric company or any
other person that occupies a public way to deliver natural gas, electric or
telecommunications services.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.03 TYPES OF PERMITS OR FRANCHISES; GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The following type of permits and franchises are available:
      (1)   Cable television franchise: granted to providers of cable
television service;
      (2)   Telecommunication and utility permit: permit granted to persons who
desire and are granted authority to utilize rights-of-way to provide a public
utility and/or telecommunications service, other than cable television service;
      (3)   Special permit: permit granted to persons for a specific, limited
use of the rights-of-way or a specific portion thereof; and
      (4)   Residential permit: permit granted to an adjacent or proximate
residential landowner to occupy or use a portion of the rights-of-way for
residential related purposes.
   (B)   All permits shall specify the use or uses for which such permits or
franchises are granted and contain such other nondiscriminatory terms and
conditions as are appropriate and as are set forth in this chapter or
conditions negotiated and agreed to by the city and the permittee to provide
for the public safety or welfare.
   (C)   Permits and the rights of permittees thereunder are not transferable
without the express written approval of the city.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.04 PROCEDURES FOR PERMITS; TERMS.
   (A)   Applicants for cable television franchises shall be granted a cable
television franchise pursuant to applicable federal, state and local laws and
regulations; provided, however, that a cable franchise shall only entitle the
franchisee to utilize the rights-of-way for purposes directly related to the
provision of the cable television service. Any other rights-of-way use by such
franchisee shall require a separate permit.
   (B)   Applicants for telecommunication and utility permits, or renewals
thereof, shall file an application therefor, in such form as the Director may
require, along with an application fee. The Director shall determine if the
application is in order in accordance with the criteria set forth in §
153.05 and shall make a final determination within 60 days after the date the
permit is applied for as to whether or not such permit should be granted and,
if so, upon what terms and conditions.
   (C)   Applicants for special permits, or renewals thereof, shall file an
application therefor, in such form as the Director requires along with an
application fee. The Director shall determine if the application is in order
and if so, and if the Director also finds, in accordance with the criteria set
forth in §
153.05 that the application should be granted, the Director shall grant or
renew such a permit within 60 days after the date the permit is applied for.
The terms of such permits shall be determined by the Director but shall in no
event exceed ten years.
   (D)   Applicants for residential permits shall file an application
therefore, in such form as the regulations require, along with an application
fee. The Director, or the Director’s designate, shall determine if the
application is in order and, if so, shall grant the application within 60 days
after the date the permit is applied for, so long as the Director also finds,
in accordance with the criteria set forth in §
153.05(C), that the application should be granted. Residential permits shall be
valid until canceled by the Director upon 60 days written notice to the
permittee; provided, however, that upon a finding by the Director that an
emergency exists the Director may cancel any such permit upon such lesser
notice as is necessary under the circumstances.
   (E)   Any applicant may appeal the failure of the Director to grant a permit
or to recommend it to be granted upon terms and conditions acceptable to the
applicant. In order to perfect such an appeal, the applicant shall file, within
ten days of the Director’s determination or recommendation or 90 days of the
filing of the application if the Director has taken no action, an appeal to
Council. Council shall then review the matter and render a final determination
after affording the applicant an opportunity to be heard either in person or
writing. Except to the extent otherwise appealable by law, City Council’s
decision shall be final.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.05 CRITERIA FOR GRANTING PERMITS OR FRANCHISES.
   (A)   Cable television’s franchises shall be granted pursuant to applicable
federal, state and local laws and regulations.
   (B)   Telecommunications and utility and special permits shall be granted to
persons based upon a determination that the following criteria are met:
      (1)   The granting of the permit will contribute to the public health,
safety or welfare of the city;
      (2)   The granting of the permit will be consistent with the policy of
the city as set forth in this chapter;
      (3)   The permittee has and will continue to have liability insurance,
which names the city as an additional insured, in effect in such amounts and
for such liability as the city may require or be self-insured pursuant to the
terms of this chapter; and
      (4)   The applicant is a proper person to hold a permit and will fulfill
all its obligations hereunder.
   (C)   Residential permits shall be granted if not inconsistent with the
public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.06 OBLIGATION OF PERMITTEES AND FRANCHISEES; CONDITIONS OF PERMITS AND
FRANCHISES.
   (A)   Obligations. In addition to the other requirements set forth herein,
each telecommunication and utility and special permittee shall:
      (1)   Use its best efforts to cooperate with other franchisees and
permittees and the city for the best, most efficient, most aesthetic and least
obtrusive use of rights-of-way, consistent with safety, and to minimize traffic
and other disruptions including street cuts;
      (2)   Participate in joint planning and advance notification of right-of-
way work, excepting such work performed in emergencies of other exigent
circumstances;
      (3)   Cooperate with other nonresidential permittees and franchisees in
utilization of, construction in and occupancy of private rights-of-way, but
only to the extent the same is not inconsistent with the grant thereof or state
or federal law;
      (4)   Upon written notice of, and at the direction of the Director and at
the permittees’ sole cost, promptly remove or rearrange facilities as
necessary, e.g., during any construction, repair or modification of any street,
sidewalk, city utility or other governmental uses, or if additional or
subsequent city or other public uses of rights-of-way are inconsistent with
then current uses of franchisees and permittees or for any other reasonable
cause as determined by the Director;
      (5)   All persons granted a permit on or after the effective date of this
chapter shall provide maps or other information in such form and at such times
as the city may reasonably require. Said maps and information shall locate,
describe and identify all structures and facilities of such permittee, of and
in the rights-of-way;
      (6)   Perform all work, construction, maintenance or removal of
structures and facilities within the rights-of-way in accordance with good
engineering and construction practice, including any appropriate safety codes
and in accordance with the best efforts to repair and replace any street, curb
or other portion of the rights-of-way, or facilities or structure located
therein, to a condition materially equivalent to the condition prior to such
work, and to do so in a manner which minimizes inconvenience to the public, the
city and other franchisee and permittees, all in accordance with all applicable
regulations;
      (7)   Register with all appropriate underground reporting services; and
      (8)   Unless otherwise set forth in a permit, not enter into leases or
other agreements for physical space in or on permittee’s facilities located
within the rights-of-way without prior notification and approval of the city.
Such notice to include a general description of the uses to be made of the
facilities, which said user may require a separate permit.
   (B)   Construction and technical standard.
      (1)   Upon grant of the permit and in order to construct, operate and
maintain a telecommunication system or utility in the city, the permittee may
enter into contracts with any public utility companies or any other owner or
lessee of any poles or underground areas located within or without the city;
obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate city, state, county and federal
officials necessary to cross or otherwise use highways or roads under their
respective jurisdiction; obtain permission from the Federal Aviation
Administration to erect and maintain antennas; and obtain whatever other
permits a city, county, state or federal agency may require.
      (2)   In those areas of the city where telephone and electric services
are provided by underground facilities, all new facilities shall be placed
underground. In all other areas, the permittee, upon request of the city, shall
use its best efforts to place facilities underground. However, the term
facilities as used in the preceding sentence shall not include equipment which
is customarily placed on or above the ground in conjunction with underground
transmission facilities (e.g., splice and terminal pedestals, equipment
cabinets and transformers). Where not otherwise required to be placed
underground by this chapter, the permittee’s system shall be located
underground at the request of the adjacent property owner, provided the
placement of such system shall be consistent with the permittee’s construction
and operating standards and provided that the excess cost over the aerial
location shall be borne by the property owner making the request. All cable to
be installed under the roadway shall be installed in conduit which shall be
approved by the city. In no circumstance shall new poles be located in any area
of the city where it is not replacing an existing pole without written approval
of the Director, which shall not be unreasonably withheld.
      (3)   The permittee shall construct, install, operate, and maintain its
system in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances, construction,
standards, governmental requirements, FCC technical standards and those
standards are incorporated by reference herein. The system shall be designed,
constructed, operated and maintained 24 hours a day in continuous operation.
      (4)   The permittee shall comply with the city’s normal permitting
process prior to commencing any work in the rights-of-way except for
emergencies and otherwise as provided in this chapter. No work in the rights-
of-way shall be commenced until such time as any and all required permits have
been issued by the city. The city shall not unreasonably withhold the granting
of any permit.
      (5)   Any contractor proposed for work of construction, installation,
operation, maintenance and repair of system equipment must be properly licensed
under all applicable governmental laws. The contractor’s or permittee’s system
and associated equipment erected by the contractor or permittee within the city
shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with proper use of
streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum
interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who
adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places. No pole
or other fixtures placed in any public ways by the permittee shall be placed in
such a manner as to interfere with normal travel on such public way.
      (6)   The city does not guarantee the accuracy of any maps showing the
horizontal or vertical location of existing substructures. In public rights-of-
way, where necessary, the location shall be verified by excavation.
      (7)   Construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the
utility or telecommunications system shall be performed in an orderly and
workmanlike manner, in accordance with the contractor’s or permittee’s then
current corporate construction and maintenance practices. When consistent with
the safety codes and standards set forth in division (B)(8) of this section,
cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with electric and
telephone lines. Multiple configurations shall be arranged in parallel and
bundled with due respect for engineering considerations.
      (8)   The contractor and permittee shall at all times comply with
applicable National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards);
applicable National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); and
applicable FCC or other federal, state and local regulations; and standards set
forth in the permit.
      (9)   In any event, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property in the permit area or other areas where the
contractor or permittee may have equipment located.
      (10)   All worker facilities, conditions and procedures that are used
during construction, installation, operation and maintenance of the utility or
telecommunications system shall comply with the applicable standards of the
Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
      (11)   The franchisee or permittee shall provide either a performance
bond (or self bonding by permittee having capitalization in excess of
$50,000,000, as determined by the Director), an irrevocable letter of credit
acceptable to the city or a certified check in an amount determined by the
Director to pay the cost of restoration of the rights-of-way should the
permittee fail to perform restoration required by this chapter or the permit or
to pay for the cost of removal or relocation of the system required by this
chapter should the franchisee or permittee fail to perform said removal or
relocation.
   (C)   Rights-of-way work permit required. All permittees shall obtain a
rights-of-way work permit from the Director prior to beginning the erection,
installation or maintenance including tree trimming, of any lines or equipment.
Prior city approval shall not be required for emergency repairs; operations
requiring work outside the public rights-of-way; and operations not blocking
any street or alley or materially disrupting any landscaping, structures and/or
irrigation system. The permittee, and/or its subcontractors, shall leave the
streets, alleys and other public places where such work is done in as good
condition or repair as they were before such work was commenced and to the
reasonable satisfaction of the city. Such rights-of-way work permit shall be
issued in writing and is subject to conditions that may be attached by the
Director including, but not limited to, requirements concerning traffic
control, safety, scheduling of work and restoration, notification of adjoining
property owners, and restoration time and type of seed, sod or specific plant
materials as directed by the city. The permittee, and/or its subcontractors,
shall complete final restoration and/or repairs to the rights-of-way in a
timely manner. All workmanship and materials used by the permittee, and/or its
subcontractors, to repair the streets and roadways shall be subject to the
inspection and approval of the Director or his or her authorized agent and
shall be warranted for a period of one year from the date of completion for
failure due to workmanship or quality of materials.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.07 FEES.
   The following fees are hereby established.
   (A)   Application fee. The purpose of the application fee is limited to the
recovery of the direct increment or cost incurred by the city in inspecting or
reviewing any plans and specifications and in granting the associated permit.
      (1)   Telecommunication and utility permittees shall pay an application
fee determined by the following:
         (a)   A permittee proposing to utilize equal to or greater than 20
miles of right-of-way shall pay an application fee of $400; and
         (b)   A permittee proposing to utilize less than 20 miles of right-of-
way shall pay an application fee of $200.
      (2)   Special permittees proposing to use the right-of-way shall pay an
application fee equal to $0.10 per lineal feet used or occupied.
      (3)   Residential permittees shall pay no application fee but shall be
required to make application for and receive approval of the use of the right-
of-way.
   (B)   Rights-of-way excavation work permit fee,
      (1)   Permittees shall make application for an excavation work permit for
each street opening, cut or bore and shall post a performance bond in the
amount determined by the Director unless said fee and/or bond is waived by the
Director. The fee for an excavation work permit shall be $50.
      (2)   Said fees are payable at the time the notice set forth in §
153.08 is filed. Fees for work done without a prior notice as set forth in §
153.08 shall be made within seven business days of the initiation of any such
work.
      (3)   Said permit shall serve as permittee’s rights-of-way work permit.
   (C)   Rights-of-way work permit fee. There shall be no fee for a rights-of-
way work permit when the work being performed involves no excavation, cutting,
or boring of the rights-of-way but does involve activities listed in §
153.06(C).
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.08 NOTICE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY WORK; JOINT PLANNING.
   (A)   All applicants for right-of-way work permits under §
153.06 of this chapter shall file a written notice with the Director at least
seven days before working in or on the rights-of-way, unless waived by the
Director, except in the case of emergency as determined by the Director. In
addition to such other information this chapter shall require, this notice
shall contain or indicate, to the extent applicable:
      (1)   The rights-of-way affected:
      (2)   A description of any facilities to be installed, constructed or
maintained;
      (3)   Whether or not any street will be opened or otherwise need to be
restricted, blocked or closed;
      (4)   An estimate of the amount of time needed to complete such work;
      (5)   A description and timetable of any remedial measures planned to
close any street opening or repair any damage done to facilitate such work;
      (6)   A statement verifying that other affected or potentially affected
permittees and franchisees have been notified; and
      (7)   A statement that any consumers of any utility, cable television,
communications or other service which will be adversely affected by such work
have been or will be notified in conformance with applicable rules and
regulations of the Public Utilities Commission of Ohio.
   (B)   All applicants for rights-of-way permits under §
153.06 shall submit a bond guaranteeing completion of all restoration work as
required by the Director unless said bond requirement is waived by the
Director.
   (C)   Permittees may, under emergency or other exigent circumstances, work
in the rights-of-way so long as the permittees use best efforts to provide the
city the notice required by this section at the earliest possible time.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.09 USE OF PERMITTEE FACILITIES.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to install and maintain, free of charge,
upon any poles and within any underground pipes and conduits or like facilities
of any telecommunication and utility or special permittee, communications
facilities (“city facilities”) solely for governmental use desired by the city
unless:
      (1)   Such installation and maintenance unreasonably and materially
interferes with existing and future operations of the permittee; or
      (2)   That such installation and maintenance would be unduly burdensome
to such permittee.
   (B)   Each permittee and franchisee shall cooperate with the city in the
planning and design of its facilities so as to accommodate the city’s
reasonably disclosed governmental requirements. Neither the city facilities nor
the capacity of bandwidth thereon shall be leased, licensed or otherwise made
available to third parties. The city’s right to use and/or occupy a permittee’s
conduit shall be limited to the right to occupy a single innerduct in any given
conduit and a single attachment to any given pole. The city’s right to use and
occupy a permittee’s poles or conduit shall be subject to any and all
reasonable terms and conditions the permittee requires of other third party
users of its poles and conduit. The city shall pay the permittee the reasonable
cost to make the poles or conduit ready for the city’s use and occupancy.
Nothing herein shall be construed to require a permittee to construct poles or
conduits where none exist or to rearrange, modify or alter its facilities on a
pole of conduit in order to provide space for city facilities where space is
not otherwise available.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.10 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   To the fullest extent permitted by law, all telecommunication and
utility permittees shall, at their sole cost and expense, fully indemnify,
defend and hold harmless the city, its officers, public officials, boards and
commissions, agents, and employees from and against any all lawsuits, claims
(including without limitation worker’s compensation claims against the city or
others), causes of actions, actions, liability, and judgements for injury or
damages (including but not limited to expenses for reasonable legal fees and
disbursements assumed by the city in connection therewith):
      (1)   To persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the
acts or omissions of permittee, its subcontractors, agents or employees
attributable to the occupation by the permittee of the rights-of-way, to which
permittee’s negligence shall in any way contribute, and regardless of whether
the city’s negligence or the negligence of any other party shall have
contributed to such claim, cause of action, judgment, injury or damage; or
      (2)   Arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy, for
defamation of any person, firm or corporation, or the violation or infringement
of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent or any other
right of any person, firm and corporation by the permittee, but excluding
claims arising out of or related to city programming; and
      (3)   Arising out of permittee’s failure to comply with the provisions of
any federal, state or local statutes, ordinances or regulations applicable to
permittee in its business hereunder.
   (B)   The foregoing indemnification is conditioned upon the city:
      (1)   Giving permittee prompt notice of any claim or the commencement of
any action, suit or proceeding for which indemnification is sought;
      (2)   Affording the permittee the opportunity to participate in and fully
control any compromise, settlement or other resolution or disposition of any
claim or proceeding subject to indemnification; and
      (3)   Fully cooperating in the defense of such claim and making available
to the permittee all pertinent information under the city’s control.
   (C)   The city shall have the right to employ separate counsel in any such
action or proceeding and to participate in the investigation and defense
thereof, and the permittee shall pay the reasonable fees and expense of such
separate counsel if employed with the approval and consent of the permittee or
if representation of both permittee and the city by the same attorney would be
inconsistent with accepted canons of professional ethics.
   (D)   Each permittee shall maintain insurance coverages (or self-insurance
coverage by permittees having capitalization in excess of $50,000,000, as
determined by the Director) in accordance with the following.
      (1)   General liability insurance.
         (a)   The permittee shall maintain, and by its acceptance of any
franchise granted hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain
throughout the terms of the permit, general liability insurance insuring the
franchisee in the minimum of:
            1.   One million dollars per occurrence;
            2.   Two million dollars annual aggregate; and
            3.   One million dollars excess general liability per occurrence
and annual aggregate.
         (b)   Such general liability insurance must be written on a
comprehensive coverage form, including the following: premises/operations;
explosion and collapse hazard; underground hazard; products/completed
operations hazard; contractual insurance; broad form property damage; and
personal injury.
      (2)   Automobile liability insurance. The permittee shall maintain, and
by its acceptance of any permit granted hereunder specifically agrees that it
will maintain throughout the term of the permit, automobile liability insurance
for owned, non-owned or rented vehicles in the minimum amount of:
         (a)   One million dollars per occurrence; and
         (b)   One million dollars excess automobile liability per occurrence,
      (3)   Worker’s compensation and employer’s liability insurance. The
franchisee shall maintain and by its acceptance of any franchise granted
hereunder specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the term of the
franchise, worker’s compensation and employer’s liability, valid in the state,
in the minimum amount of:
         (a)   Statutory limit for worker’s compensation;
         (b)   One million dollars for employer’s liability per occurrence; and
         (c)   One million dollars excess employer liability.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.11 REMOVAL OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   In the event any nonresidential permittee intends to remove, excluding
normal repairs and maintenance, or abandon any facilities within the rights-of-
way, such permittee shall submit a notice to the Director describing the
portion of the facilities to be removed or abandoned and the date of removal or
abandonment, which date shall not be less than 30 days from the date such
notice is submitted to the Director. The permittee may not remove, destroy or
permanently disable any such facilities after such notice without the written
approval of the Director. The permittee shall remove and secure such facilities
as set forth in the notice unless directed by the Director to abandon such
facilities in place.
   (B)   Upon such abandonment the city may elect to accept title to the
abandoned facility. Such acceptance shall be in writing and upon such
acceptance, full title and ownership of such abandoned facilities shall pass to
the city without the need to pay compensation to the permittee or franchisee.
The permittee shall, however, continue to be responsible for all taxes on such
facilities or other liability associated therewith, until the date the same was
accepted by the city.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.12 REMEDIES AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   In case of any failure of permittee’s physical plant, whether due to
damage, age, lack of maintenance or any other cause, the city shall notify
permittee or franchisee who shall, within reasonable time stipulated by the
city, respond and repair such failed plant. Should the permittee fail to act as
required, or in cases where protection of public safety requires an immediate
response, the city may take any required, corrective action and recover the
costs of same from the permittee.
   (B)   The Director shall give the permittee 60 days’ prior written notice of
city’s intent to revoke the permit under the provisions of this chapter stating
the reasons for such action. If the permittee cures the stated reason within
the 60-day notice period, or if the permittee initiates efforts satisfactory to
the city to remedy the stated violation, the city shall not revoke the permit.
If the permittee does not cure the stated violation or undertake efforts
satisfactory to the city to remedy the stated violation then, after granting
the permittee an opportunity to be heard in person or in writing, the Council
may revoke the permit.
   (C)   In the event the permit is revoked, all facilities located in the
rights-of-way or located upon public property pursuant to this permit shall be
removed from the streets and public places of the city at the sole expense of
the permittee.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.13 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from
constructing, maintaining, repairing or relocating any city utility,
communications or like facilities; grading, paving, maintaining, repairing,
relocating or altering any street or rights-of-way; or constructing,
maintaining, relocating or repairing any sidewalk or other public work or
improvement.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter should be construed so as to grant any right
of interest in any rights-of- way or public property other than that explicitly
set forth herein or in a permit.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.14 STREET VACATION.
   Unless preempted by state or federal law, in the event any street or rights-
of-way used by a permittee or franchisee shall be vacated by the city during
the term of any permit granted pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall,
at the permittee’s expense forthwith remove its facilities therefrom unless
specifically permitted by the city to continue the same or such continuance of
use is permitted by state law, and upon the removal thereof, restore, repair or
reconstruct the area where such removal has occurred to a condition materially
equivalent to that existing before such removal took place. In the event of
failure, neglect or refusal of the permittee after 30 days’ written notice by
the city to remove the facilities or to repair, restore, reconstruct, improve
or maintain such vacated areas, the city may, if in accordance with applicable
law, do such work or cause it to be done, and the cost thereof as found and
declared by the city shall be paid by the permittee as directed by the city and
collection may be made by any available remedy.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.15 TEMPORARY MOVEMENT OF FACILITIES.
   In the event it is necessary temporarily to move or remove any of the
permittee’s wires, cable poles or other facilities placed pursuant to this
chapter, in order to lawfully move a large object, vehicle, building or other
structure over the streets of the city, upon two weeks’ written notice by the
city to the permittee, the permittee shall, at the expense of the person
requesting the temporary removal of such facilities, comply with city’s
request.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.16 FORECLOSURE AND LEADERSHIP.
   (A)   Foreclosure. Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of the
permittee’s facilities located within the rights-of-way, the permittee shall
notify the city of such fact and its permit shall be deemed void and of no
further force and effect.
   (B)   Receivership. The city shall have the right to cancel any permit
granted pursuant to this chapter subject to any applicable provisions of law,
including the Bankruptcy Code, being 11 U.S.C., 120 days after the appointment
of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the permittee
whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or
proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated
prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
      (1)   Within 120 days after his or her election or appointment, such
receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of this
chapter and the relevant permit and remedied all defects thereunder; and
      (2)   Such receiver or trustee, within said 120 days, shall have executed
an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises
whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and
every provision of this chapter and the relevant permit.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.17 NONENFORCEMENT AND WAIVERS BY CITY.
   The permittee and franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligation to
comply with any of the provisions of this chapters by reason of any failure of
the city to enforce prompt compliance. However, the Director may in individual
instances and upon a request in writing establishing hardship and for good
cause shown waive, in writing, any requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.18 CONTROLLING LAW.
   This chapter shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the
Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   In addition to any other penalties set forth in this chapter, and the
remedy of specific performance, the following penalty shall apply: for failure
to comply with any provision of this chapter, the penalty shall be a civil
forfeiture, payable to the city, in the amount of up to $100 per day for each
day of violation.
   (B)   Any permittee may be excused for violations of the chapter and its
permit for reasons of force majeure.
(Ord. 07-O-05, passed 7-18-2007)
CHAPTER 154: FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.001   Statutory authority
   
154.002   Findings of fact
   
154.003   Statement of purpose
   
154.004   Methods of reducing flood loss
   
154.005   Lands to which these regulations apply
   
154.006   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
154.007   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
154.008   Interpretation
   
154.009   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
154.010   Severability
Definitions
   
154.025   Definitions
Administration
   
154.040   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
154.041   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
154.042   Floodplain development permits
   
154.043   Application required
   
154.044   Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application
   
154.045   Inspections
   
154.046   Post-construction certifications required
   
154.047   Revoking a floodplain development permit
   
154.048   Exemption from filing a development permit
   
154.049   Map maintenance activities
   
154.050   Data use and flood map interpretation
   
154.051   Substantial damage determinations
Use and Development Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
154.065   Generally
   
154.066   Use regulations
   
154.067   Water and wastewater systems
   
154.068   Subdivisions and large developments
   
154.069   Residential structures
   
154.070   Nonresidential structures
   
154.071   Accessory structures
   
154.072   Recreational vehicles
   
154.073   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks
   
154.074   Assurance of flood carrying capacity
Appeals and Variances
   
154.085   Appeals Board established
   
154.086   Powers and duties
   
154.087   Appeals
   
154.088   Variances
   
154.089   Procedure at hearings
   
154.090   Appeal to the Court
Enforcement
   
154.105   Compliance required
   
154.106   Notice of violation
 
   
154.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted pursuant to Article XVIII, § 3, of the Ohio
Constitution which grants municipalities the legal authority to adopt land use
and control measures for promoting the health, safety and general welfare of
its citizens.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.002 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The city has special flood hazard areas that are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.003 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare, and to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
   (G)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (H)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood prone areas;
   (I)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (J)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (K)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (L)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.004 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSS.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters;
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other
areas.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.005 LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.
   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the city as identified in §
154.006, including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the
city.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.006 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   (A)   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or
maps are adopted:
      (1)   (a)   Flood insurance study, Summit County, Ohio, incorporated
areas, effective July 20, 2009; and
         (b)   Flood insurance rate map, Summit County, Ohio, incorporated
areas, effective July 20, 2009.
      (2)   Other studies and/or maps which may be relied upon for
establishment of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year
floodplain, floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard
include: any updated surveys and maps prepared and adopted by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency, Federal Insurance Administration affecting Summit
County, Ohio or the city; and
      (3)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered professional engineer in the State of Ohio which has been approved
by the city as required by §
154.068 of this chapter.
   (B)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps
and/or studies are on file at the City of New Franklin, 5611 Manchester Road,
New Franklin, Summit County, Ohio.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008; Ord. 09-O-02, passed 4-15-2009)
§ 154.007 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
(resolutions) including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In
the event of a conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance
(resolution), the more restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall
not impair any deed restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to
such interests shall also be governed by the regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.008 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
shall be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.009 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. These regulations do
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that
results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.010 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
DEFINITIONS
§ 154.025 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   APPEAL. A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year. The BASE FLOOD may also be referred to as the 1% CHANCE ANNUAL
FLOOD or 100-YEAR FLOOD.
   BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). The water surface elevation of the
base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the BASE
FLOOD ELEVATION is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from one
to three feet).
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR.
   EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT). Issued by President Carter in
1977 and being codified as 3 C.F.R., 1977 Comp., p. 117, this order requires
that no federally assisted activities be conducted in or have the potential to
affect identified special flood hazard areas, unless there is no practicable
alternative.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FILL. A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). Usually the initial map, produced by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard areas.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES. Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMS that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions.
      (1)   ZONE A. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year flood;
base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   ZONES A1-30 AND ZONE AE. Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   ZONE AO. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   ZONE AH. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood
elevations are determined.
      (5)   ZONE A99. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   ZONE B AND ZONE X (SHADED). Areas of 500-year flood; areas subject
to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   ZONE C AND ZONE X (UNSHADED) Areas determined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on flood boundary and floodway maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The base flood elevation plus zero feet of
freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative
source, the FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION can be historical flood elevations, or
base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the Floodplain
Administrator.
   FLOODWAY.
      (1)   The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood discharge. A
FLOODWAY is typically determined through a hydraulic and hydrologic engineering
analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water surface elevation of
the base flood discharge is no more than a designated height. In no case shall
the designated height be more than one foot at any point within the community.
      (2)   The FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually
characterized by any of the following: moderate to high velocity flood waters;
high potential for debris and projectile impacts; and moderate to high erosion
forces.
   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level
for the purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to compensate for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice jams, and the
hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio’s inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office; and/or
      (4)   Individually listed on the inventory of historic places maintained
by the city whose historic preservation program has been certified by the Ohio
Historic Preservation Office.
   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS. An analysis performed by a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with
standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood
elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official FEMA determination, by letter, to
amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs are broken down into the
following categories.
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on technical data
showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special flood
hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map and
establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood hazard
area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones, flood
elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric features. One
common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning whether a
structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood elevation
and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A CLOMR does
not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an “enclosure below the
lowest floor” which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the LOWEST FLOOR.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a “recreational vehicle”. For the purposes
of these regulations, a MANUFACTURED HOME includes manufactured homes and
mobile homes as defined in R.C. Chapter 3733.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As specified in the O.A.C. § 4781-12-01(K), any
tract of land upon which three or more manufactured homes, used for habitation
are parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
roadway, building, structure, vehicle or enclosure used or intended for use as
part of the facilities of the park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the
individual lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the
purpose of installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is not a
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK, even though three or more manufactured homes are parked
thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the local government authority.
   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). A federal program enabling property
owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection against
losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an insurance
alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of repairing
damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods. Participation in the
NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities and the federal
government that states if a community will adopt and enforce floodplain
management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all development in
special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make flood insurance
available within the community as a financial protection against flood loss.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the “start of construction” commenced
on or after the initial effective date of the Summit County, Ohio
unincorporated, flood insurance rate map, July 20, 2009 and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   PERSON. Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An AGENCY is further defined in R.C. § 111.15 as any
governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any
board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution,
state college or university, community college district, technical college
district or state community college. AGENCY does not include the general
assembly, the controlling board, the Adjutant General’s department, or any
court.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT. A person registered to engage in the
practice of architecture under the provisions of R.C. §§ 4703.01 to 4703.19.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person registered as a professional
engineer under R.C. Chapter 4733.
   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. A person registered as a professional
surveyor under R.C. Chapter 4733.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA. Also known as AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD, it
is the land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood insurance
studies, flood boundary and floodway maps and flood hazard boundary maps as
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS may also refer
to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal state or local
sources of data including, but not limited to, historical flood information
reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone
soils associated with a watercourse.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. The date the building permit was issued, provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition,
placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
ACTUAL START means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure which is considered new
construction;
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations
consistent with the variance conditions herein.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008; Ord. 09-O-02, passed 4-15-2009)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 154.040 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The city’s Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and
implement these regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain
Administrator.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.041 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to:
   (A)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas;
   (B)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information;
   (C)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance;
   (D)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed;
   (E)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary
for the administration of these regulations including flood insurance rate
maps, letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and denial of
permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of
issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances and
records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations;
   (F)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations;
   (G)   Provide information, testimony or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings;
   (H)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA followup; and
   (I)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.042 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity including, but not limited to, filling; grading;
construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or alteration
of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any
identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
154.006, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.
   (B)   Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
   (C)   No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until
the requirements of these regulations have been met.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.043 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all
development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in contact
with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be made by
the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein referred to as
the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form
furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is
in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an
application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development’s
location. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and
topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of
the foregoing;
   (B)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed;
   (C)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures;
   (D)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations;
   (E)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the state and submitted with an application for a floodplain
development permit when applicable:
      (1)   Floodproofing certification for non-residential floodproofed
structure as required in §
154.070;
      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a
structure not meeting the design requirements of §
154.069(E) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces;
      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
154.074(C);
      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
154.074(B);
      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
154.074(A); and
      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large
scale developments as required by §
154.068.
   (F)   Any person seeking a floodplain review from the Floodplain
Administrator shall pay a fee of $250 to the city. This fee shall be in
addition to any other fee required by the city, the state or any other
political subdivision of the state, for the activity that is the subject of the
floodplain review. The person requesting the review shall also be required to
reimburse the city for any costs, including, but not limited to, engineering
fees, floodplain consulting fees and other governmental agency fees, incurred
by the city in the processing of the floodplain review request and the
monitoring of any permits issued. At his or her discretion, the Floodplain
Administrator may require the person requesting the review to deposit funds
with the city to guarantee payment of additional costs.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.044 REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Review.
      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in §
154.043 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under § 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1 et
seq., and § 404 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1344, and the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency under § 401 of the Clean Water Act, being 33
U.S.C. § 1343.
   (B)   Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application,
the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the
application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit
shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain development site is in a
special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an
application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development’s
location. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities and the location of
the foregoing;
      (2)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed;
      (3)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures;
      (4)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations; and
      (5)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the state and submitted with an application for a floodplain
development permit when applicable:
         (a)   Floodproofing certification for nonresidential floodproofed
structure as required in §
154.070;
         (b)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
of a structure not meeting the design requirements of §
154.069(E) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces;
         (c)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
154.074(C);
         (d)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
154.074(B);
         (e)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact
of any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
154.074(A); and
         (f)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large
scale developments as required by §
154.068.
§ 154.045 INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate
times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with
permit conditions.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.046 POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:
   (A)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency elevation certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner’s representative;
and
   (B)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
154.049(A), a letter of map revision.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.047 REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things,
the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals in
accordance with §§
154.085 through
154.090 of these regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.048 EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting and basement sealing, or
for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and grading)
valued at less than $5,000;
      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the state’s Department of Health and
subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the O.A.C. § 4781-12-07;
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the state’s Power Siting
Board under R.C. Chapter 4906;
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under R.C. Chapter 3734; and
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management, being 3
C.F.R., 1977 Comp., p. 117.
   (B)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development
permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.049 MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood
data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the city’s flood maps,
studies and other data identified in §
154.006 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified.
   (A)   Requirement to submit new technical data.
      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         (a)   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         (b)   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
         (d)   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
154.068.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with this division (A), prepared in a format required
for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision, and
submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a conditional letter of
map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         (a)   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
         (b)   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but
no floodway.
      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map
revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (A)(1) of
this section.
   (B)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain Administrator may
request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does
not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such
as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate
supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor of the city, and may be
submitted at any time.
   (C)   Annexation/detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator
shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the city have been
modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an area, or
no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations
for a particular area. In order that the city’s flood insurance rate map
accurately represent the City of New Franklin boundaries, include within such
notification a copy of a map of the city suitable for reproduction, clearly
showing the new corporate limits or the new area for which the city has assumed
or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.050 DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.
   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps
and other data showing areas of special flood hazard.
   (A)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or
in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state or other source.
   (B)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or
lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps
and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   When preliminary flood insurance rate maps and/or flood insurance
study have been provided by FEMA:
      (1)   Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these regulations; and
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood
hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in §§
154.085 through
154.090 of this chapter.
   (E)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field
elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations
(as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water
marks and the like) shall prevail.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.051 SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire and the like.
   (B)   After such a damage event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.
   (C)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 154.065 GENERALLY.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §§
154.006 or
154.050(A):
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.066 USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or
any other applicable land use regulation adopted by the city are allowed
provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
   (B)   Prohibited uses.
      (1)   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3701; and
      (2)   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under R.C. Chapter 3734.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.067 WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.
   The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and
waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
   (A)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;
   (B)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (C)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.068 SUBDIVISIONS AND LARGE DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
   (D)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
   (E)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to
FEMA in §
154.049(A)(1)(d) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by division (D) of this section.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.069 RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. Where a
structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or above
the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring (this division (A))
and construction materials resistant to flood damage (division (B) of this
section) are satisfied.
   (B)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. In Zone AO areas
with no elevations specified, the structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent
natural grade.
   (E)   New construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured
homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the flood protection
elevation using pilings, columns, posts or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood waters may have
an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure meets the following
standards:
      (1)   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access or
storage; and
      (2)   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
      (3)   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
   (F)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
   (G)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt
from the development standards of this section.
   (H)   In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall have
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around
and away from the structure.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.070 NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of §
154.069(A) through (C) and (E) through (G).
   (B)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
      (1)   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is water-tight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood
protection elevation;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management floodproofing certificate,
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with divisions
(B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section.
   (C)   In Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent natural grade.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.071 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for
accessory structures containing no more than 600 square feet. Such structures
must meet the following standards:
   (A) They shall not be used for human habitation;
   (B)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
   (C)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of flood waters;
   (D)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
   (E)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
   (F)   They shall meet the opening requirements of §
154.069(E)(3) ;
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.072 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards:
   (A)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for
more than 180 days;
   (B)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (C)   They must meet all standards of §
154.069.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.073 ABOVE GROUND GAS OR LIQUID STORAGE TANKS.
   All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent
flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.074 ASSURANCE OF FLOOD CARRYING CAPACITY.
   Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in these
regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that the
reduction of the flood carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized.
   (A)   Development in floodways.
      (1)   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any increase in
the base flood elevation; or
      (2)   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
         (a)   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
154.049(A);
         (b)   An evaluation of alternatives which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
         (c)   Certification that no structures are located in areas which
would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
         (d)   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
         (e)   Concurrence of the Mayor of the city and the Chief Executive
Officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
   (B)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but no
floodways.
      (1)   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
      (2)   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
         (a)   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an increase
of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why these
alternatives are not feasible; and
         (b)   Divisions (A)(2)(a) and (A)(2)(c) through (A)(2)(e) of this
section.
   (C)   Alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of these regulations, a
watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the “bankfull
stage”. The field determination of BANKFULL STAGE shall be based on methods
presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or
other applicable publication available from a federal, state or other
authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse,
the following standards apply.
      (1)   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
      (2)   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
state’s Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified
prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such
notification must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
city specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required,
it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in §
154.049(A)(1)(c) when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
APPEALS AND VARIANCES
§ 154.085 APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   City Council hereby appoints the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals as the
Appeals Board to hear appeals filed pursuant to the regulations of this
chapter. The Appeals Board members shall serve terms in accordance with the
city’s Charter, ordinances and resolutions as they pertain to the city’s Board
of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   Meetings of the Appeals Board shall be held as needed and shall be
held at the call of the Floodplain Administrator. All meetings of the Appeals
Board shall be open to the public except that the Board may deliberate in
executive sessions as part of quasi-judicial hearings in accordance with law.
The Appeals Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon each question and shall keep records of all official actions.
Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed in the city’s Zoning
Department.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.086 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by
the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.
   (B)   Authorize variances in accordance with §
154.089 of these regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.087 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action
of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person shall file,
within 30 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action,
a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any
item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator’s decision. Such
appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the
Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain
Administrator shall transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which
the Floodplain Administrator’s decision was made to the Appeals Board.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.088 VARIANCES.
   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a
variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not inconsistent
with federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.
   (A)   Application for a variance.
      (1)   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
      (2)   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: name, address and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
      (3)   All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by a variance
application fee set in the schedule of fees adopted by the city for appeals to
the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   Notice for public hearing. The Appeals Board shall schedule and hold a
public hearing within 30 days after the receipt of an application for a
variance from the Floodplain Administrator. Prior to the hearing, a notice of
such hearing shall be given in one or more newspapers of general circulation in
the community at least ten days before the date of the hearing.
   (C)   Public hearing.
      (1)   At such hearing the applicant shall present such statements and
evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such variance
applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of fact on all
evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of
these regulations and the following factors:
         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility
to the community;
         (e)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
         (f)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan
and floodplain management program for that area;
         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws;
         (d)   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages; and
         (e)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (3)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
   (D)   Other conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing divisions (C)(1)(a) to (C)(1)(k) of this
section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.089 PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS.
   (A)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
   (B)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
   (C)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony in
support of the appeal or variance.
   (D)   The Administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition to
the appeal or variance.
   (E)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
   (F)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become part
of the record for appeal.
   (G)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
   (H)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its decision.
The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and thereafter
issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable
time after the hearing.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.090 APPEAL TO THE COURT.
   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the Summit County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in R.C.
Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.105 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations,
unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in
§
154.048.
   (B)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with §
154.999.
   (C)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with §
154.999.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008) Penalty, see §
154.999
§ 154.106 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of these regulations, he or she shall give notice of
such violation to the person responsible therefore and order compliance with
these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:
   (A)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (B)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of
these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
   (C)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (D)   Advise the owner, operator or occupant of the right to appeal; and
   (E)   Be served on the owner, occupant or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner, occupant
or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to the
person’s last known mailing address, residence or place of business, and/or a
copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
§ 154.999 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, and
shall constitute a fourth degree misdemeanor. Any person who violates these
regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon
conviction thereof be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the city.
Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. The city shall
prosecute any violation of these regulations in accordance with the penalties
stated herein.
(Ord. 08-O-04, passed 9-17-2008)
CHAPTER 155: CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
155.01   Purpose
   
155.02   Standards
   
155.03   Private streets
   
155.04   Sidewalks/walkways and pedestrian access
   
155.05   Staging of conservation subdivisions
   
155.06   Open space and recreation facilities
   
155.07   Easements
   
155.08   Land uses
   
155.09   Minimum project area
   
155.10   Permitted density; residential
   
155.11   Restricted open space
   
155.12   Regulations for restricted open space
   
155.13   Development and site planning standards
   
155.14   Development design criteria
   
155.15   Project review procedures
   
155.16   Final development plan
   
155.17   Fees
§ 155.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of a conservation subdivision is to promote the public
health, safety, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general public
welfare, through the application of flexible subdivision development techniques
in the arrangement and construction of dwelling units and roads. Such
flexibility is intended to maximize the conservation of open space while
accepting development and retaining for the property owner the development
rights (the number of residential dwelling units) that are permitted under the
existing conventional zoning for the property.
   (B)   These regulations are intended to achieve the following goals:
      (1)   To maximize protection of the city’s natural resources by:
         (a)   Minimizing development on and destruction of sensitive natural
resource areas;
         (b)   Reducing the quantity and improving the quality of storm water
runoff from expected development;
         (c)   Maintaining natural characteristics (such as woods, hedgerows,
natural vegetation, wetlands, meadows, slopes and streams); and
         (d)   Reducing the amount of disturbed land, the conversion of natural
areas to landscaped areas for lawns and the use of intrusive vegetation.
      (2)   To conserve the quality of ruralness in those city areas
characterized by:
         (a)   Large, aggregated, undeveloped land areas;
         (b)   Natural features such as woodlands, steep slope, floodplains,
wetlands, stream and river corridors, hedgerows and rock outcroppings;
         (c)   Scenic vistas and rural views;
         (d)   Significant historic features such as old barns, heritage trees
and the like;
         (e)   Maintaining a traditional rural settlement pattern characterized
by compact groups of development in otherwise wide-open spaces; and/or
         (f)   Appropriate topographic or vegetative screening.
      (3)   To encourage more efficient use of land and public services through
unified development;
      (4)   To establish development review criteria which promote creative
design solutions in a manner which best conserves the area’s resources; and
      (5)   To ensure that the proposed conservation development complies with
the objectives of the city as expressed in the comprehensive plan.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.02 STANDARDS.
   A major element of the conservation subdivision is privately owned or
publicly owned common areas and open space in the development. Homeowners need
to have adequate access to the common open space being preserved. These
developments usually contain such features as an internal park network abutting
home sites, recreation facilities, and preservation of natural amenities.
Conservation subdivisions may be exempted from the conventional development
standards of the existing regulations only upon proper justification and
approval as set forth herein. The regulations in this chapter are a replacement
of prior § 1104.03 (Preliminary Plan). The design of internal circulation
systems shall be sensitive to such points as safety, convenience, access to
dwelling units and nonresidential facilities, separation of vehicular and
pedestrian-bicycle traffic, and general attractiveness. Internal streets shall
be adequate to carry anticipated traffic and yet provide convenient and safe
access in accordance with the standards set forth herein.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.03 PRIVATE STREETS.
   Private local streets may be allowed in conservation subdivisions after
review and approval by both the City Engineer and Planning Commission. These
private streets must meet the county approved construction and inspection
standards per division (A) of this section. Collector streets in conservation
subdivisions shall be publicly dedicated streets and conform to the appropriate
design standards. The Planning Commission may also require certain streets
within conservation subdivisions to be publicly dedicated if the Planning
Commission determines that the project density necessitates the use of public
streets and that traffic connections are required to adjacent plats or
developments for adequate traffic circulation.
   (A)   Private and public street standards. Private streets may be permitted
in conservation subdivisions provided they meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Loop or cul-de-sac streets that are less than 250 feet in length
and have ten or fewer dwelling units occupying the street may be permitted to
be private. The design of these streets shall provide for emergency vehicle
access and shall follow the pavement composition standards of the County
Engineer.
      (2)   Access roads such as loop streets or cul-de-sacs that are low
volume traffic streets (average daily traffic (ADT) of 200 vehicles or less)
may be permitted to be private in accordance with these regulations. The
following standards also apply to public streets.
         (a)   These streets will be required to meet a 25 mph design speed,
minimum of 175 foot centerline radius and standards of the County Engineer.
         (b)   Centerline radii less than 175 feet may be approved for low
volume loop type streets or cul-de-sacs upon review and written approval by the
City Engineer.
         (c)   A 50-foot dedicated easement shall be granted to the owners
association. If a public street, there must be 50 feet of dedicated right-of-
way.
         (d)   Landscaping may be permitted to encroach five feet on each side
of the street within the easement once a landscaping plan has been reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer and Planning Commission, for safety purposes.
         (e)   The construction of these streets will require inspection and
performance and maintenance bonding.
      (3)   Any street within a conservation subdivision that has an ADT
exceeding 200 vehicles and is a light-medium traffic local road as classified
in the County Engineer’s rules and regulations may be permitted to be private
in accordance with these regulations. The area of the project devoted to
streets and related pavement should be the minimum necessary to provide
adequate and safe movement through the development. The following standards
also apply to public streets.
         (a)   These roads will be required to meet a 30 mph design speed, 250-
foot centerline radius and Standards of the County Engineer.
         (b)   A 50-foot dedicated easement shall be granted to the owners
association. If a public street, there must be 50 feet of dedicated right-of-
way.
         (c)   Landscaping may be permitted to encroach five feet on each side
of the street within the easement once a landscaping plan has been reviewed and
approved by the City Engineer and Planning Commission, for safety purposes.
         (d)   The construction of these streets will require inspection and
performance and maintenance bonding.
   (B)   Private street requirements. In all cases where private streets are
permitted per these regulations, an owner’s association shall be formed to
control and maintain the streets. Such association document is required to have
the approval of the city legal counsel and shall be recorded with the
subdivision plat. The approval of a private street does not provide for or
imply responsibility for construction, repair, replacement, maintenance,
including, but not limited to: snow or ice removal, dust control, drainage,
mowing, tree trimming and the like of any private street by any government
body. All responsibility and liability remains with the owners association and
owners of the lots served by the private street. Deed restrictions for private
streets are required to include the following language:
The undersigned grantee(s) hereby acknowledge(s) that (he, she, they)
understand that the premises described herein is located upon a non-dedicated
right-of-way. And further, the grantee(s) understand that no government body is
responsible or liable for care and maintenance of said right- of-way and the
grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless all governmental bodies for
any and all claims of any kind or nature that may arise or be related to such
right-of-way.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.04 SIDEWALKS/WALKWAYS AND PEDESTRIAN ACCESS.
   A pedestrian circulation system should be designed to assure that
pedestrians can walk safely and easily on a site, between properties and
activities or special features within the neighborhood open space system.
Sidewalks/walkways should connect with off road trails, which in turn should
link with potential open space on adjoining undeveloped parcels (or with
existing open space on adjoining developed parcels, where applicable). The
sidewalks/walkways shall be maintained by the Owners association, or other
maintenance arrangement approved by the city’s Planning Commission. Deed
restrictions for sidewalks/walkways are required to include the following
language:
No governmental body is responsible or liable for the care, repair, replacement
or maintenance of said sidewalks/walkways and the owners association for such
development shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless all governmental bodies
for any and all such claims of any kind or nature that may arise or be related
to the sidewalks/walkways.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.05 STAGING OF CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS.
   Each stage of a conservation subdivision must be so designed to stand
independently of future related stages in the event future stages are not
constructed. The construction and provision of all of the common open spaces
and public and recreational facilities shown on the final plat must proceed at
the same rate as the construction of dwelling units.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.06 OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION FACILITIES.
   For requirements regarding open space and recreation facilities refer to
public facilities, open space and recreation.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.07 EASEMENTS.
   For requirements regarding utility and drainage easements, see subdivision
regulations.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.08 LAND USES.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in a
conservation subdivision only if encouraged in the city land use plan for the
site:
      (1)   Agricultural uses with the exception of animal or poultry
husbandry;
      (2)   Residential development, including:
         (a)   Single-family dwellings in:
            1.   Detached buildings; and
            2.   Attached buildings.
         (b)   Two-family dwellings appropriately grouped together;
         (c)   Recreational facilities intended for use by residents of the
development; and
         (d)   Restricted open space as required in §
155.11 (Restricted Open Space).
      (3)   Where permitted incompatible land uses are proposed for a
conservation subdivision development, the BZA shall require buffering through
graduated land use intensity or use of landscaping, mounding, walls, solid
fencing, and other buffering techniques within and adjacent to the development.
   (B)   Permitted accessory uses.
      (1)   Accessory uses customarily incidental to the principal permitted
use;
      (2)   Buildings incidental to recreational uses; and
      (3)   Group homes permitted by right, including;
         (a)   Child day care home, Type B; and
         (b)   Foster home for one to five unrelated children, pursuant to R.C.
§ 5103.03.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.09 MINIMUM PROJECT AREA.
   (A)   The gross area of a tract of land proposed for a conservation
subdivision shall be a minimum of 25 acres to provide the potential for larger
contiguous areas of open space and to ensure that the homeowners association is
large enough to sustain itself and fulfill its open space management and
maintenance responsibilities. The Planning Commission may reduce this
requirement upon a finding that a proposed smaller project area meets these
objectives. A smaller project area may be found to be appropriate based upon
the patterns of existing lot ownership, the extent of existing development, or
when a smaller project size is a targeted component of the city’s overall open
space plan for the subject parcel or area of the city.
   (B)   The area proposed shall be in one ownership or, if in multiple
ownership, the application shall be filed jointed by all the owners of the
properties included in the conservation subdivision.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.10 PERMITTED DENSITY; RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   The maximum number of dwelling units permitted in a conservation
subdivision shall not exceed the number of units permitted by the formula:
(TSA/MLA) X 80%, or other applicable regulations, such as the state’s EPA, or a
minimum lot size imposed by the local general health district for area, length
and width of on-site septic systems and minimum spacing of such systems from
site elements as well as from other systems. The most restrictive regulation
shall control.
      (1)   TSA = the Total Site Area. TSA is determined by deducting the
following from the total project area:
         (a)   Any area devoted to nonresidential purposes;
         (b)   Any public right-of-way within the project boundary existing at
the time the development plan is submitted; and
         (c)   The area of land which may not be developed because it is within
a floodway, Category 3 wetland, existing water body, or land subject to an
existing conservation easement, but only the amount of land that exceeds the
minimum acreage required for restricted open space as set forth in §
155.11 (Restricted Open Space). Where floodways, wetlands, water bodies or land
subject to an existing conservation easement overlap, they shall be counted
only once. The Planning Commission may reduce the total for the amount of land
which may not be developed by up to one-third upon a finding the developer will
incorporate and provide an adequate mechanism for the preservation of
equivalent area of these features in required yard setbacks.
      (2)   MLA = Minimum Lot Area (in acres). The minimum overall lot area of
a conservation subdivision shall be determined by one of the standards shown
below which results in the highest density of the parcel:
         (a)   The density recommendation provided for the proposed site area
in the land use plan based on the prevailing demographic trends and desired
characteristics for the city; or
         (b)   The stated density for a single-family dwelling in the zoning
district which would be replaced by the conservation subdivision.
      (3)   Eighty percent: a factor to account for losses in land area due to
proposed roads and the fact that some of the lots in a development will be
larger than the minimum required.
   (B)   When the above formula produces a fractional value for the total
number of units for the total project area, this final number shall be rounded
to the nearest whole number.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.11 RESTRICTED OPEN SPACE.
   The minimum restricted open space shall be 40% of the total project area.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.12 REGULATIONS FOR RESTRICTED OPEN SPACE.
   The restricted open space shall comply with the following.
   (A)   Restricted open space shall be designed and located to conserve,
maintain and incorporate significant wildlife habitats in existing wooded
areas, meadows, and hedgerows and treelines between fields, as well as
significant natural features and historical and cultural elements located on
the site.
   (B)   Areas designated for restricted open space purposes may be:
      (1)   Preserved in its natural state;
      (2)   Designed and intended for the used and/or enjoyment of residents of
the proposed development or the general public; and
      (3)   Utilized for farming when authorized in a conservation easement or
in the association’s covenants and restrictions.
   (C)   Restricted open space shall be interconnected with open space areas on
abutting parcels.
   (D)   Sewage service, stormwater management and/or water supply facilities
may be approved for location partially or entirely within restricted open space
areas to provide additional flexibility in the arrangement of units and to
overcome hardships in meeting the minimum specified area for the conservation
of open space. Where such facilities are so located, septic easements or
conservation easements, as applicable, shall be established naming the city a
co-beneficiary to require and enable maintenance of such facilities by the
appropriate parties. Such easements shall require approval from the County
General Health District, City Engineer and city legal counsel. The Planning
Commission may reduce the front building setback to increase required rear yard
areas for conservation easements.
   (E)   In order to encourage the creation of large areas of contiguous open
space, areas that shall not be counted toward the requirement of restricted
open space include:
      (1)   Private roads and public road rights-of-way;
      (2)   Parking areas, accessways and driveways;
      (3)   Required setbacks between buildings, parking areas and project
boundaries;
      (4)   Required setbacks between buildings and streets;
      (5)   Minimum spacing between buildings, and between buildings and
parking areas;
      (6)   Private yards;
      (7)   A minimum of ten feet between buildings and restricted open space;
and
      (8)   Other small fragmented or isolated open space areas that have a
dimension less than 50 feet in any direction. The Planning Commission may allow
a fragmented or isolated open space area upon a finding the fragmented area is
demonstrated to be purpose fill and contextual to the development and not
simply an isolated, leftover area with little or no contribution in terms of
landscaped amenities, buffering or recreational space.
   (F)   Any restricted open space intended to be devoted to recreational
activities shall be of a usable size and shape for the intended purposes. The
maximum percentage of restricted open space that may be developed for active
recreation areas, including a community center, shall be 5% of the total
project area.
   (G)   Any area within the restricted open space that is disturbed during
construction or otherwise not preserved in its natural state, other common
areas such as required setback areas, and both sides of new streets shall be
landscaped with vegetation that is compatible with the natural characteristics
of the site.
   (H)   The restricted open space, including any recreational facilities
proposed to be constructed in such space, shall be clearly shown on the general
development plan.
   (I)   Prohibition of further subdivision of restricted open space:
restricted open space in a conservation development shall be prohibited from
further subdivision or development by deed restriction, conservation easement
or other agreement in a form acceptable to the city’s legal advisor and duly
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of the county.
   (J)   Ownership of restricted open space: subject to such permanent
restriction as set forth above restricted open space in a conservation
development may be owned by an association, the city, a land trust or other
conservation organization recognized by the city, or by a similar entity, may
remain in private ownership.
   (K)   Offer of dedication: the city may, but shall not be required to,
accept dedication in the form of fee simple ownership of the restricted open
space.
   (L)   Associations: restricted open space may be held by the individual
members of a condominium association as tenants-in-common or may be held in
common ownership by a homeowners’ association, community association, or other
similar legal entity. The city’s legal advisor shall determine that, based on
documents submitted with the development plan, the association’s bylaws or code
of regulations specify the following requirements.
      (1)   Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all purchasers
of lots in the development or units in the condominium.
      (2)   The association shall be responsible for maintenance, control and
insurance of common areas, including the required open space.
   (M)   Transfer of conservation easements. With the permission of the city,
the owner(s) of the restricted open space may, in accordance with the
provisions of R.C. §§ 5301.67 through 5301.70, grant conservation easement to
any of the entities listed in R.C. § 5301.68, provided that:
      (1)   The entity is acceptable to the city;
      (2)   The provisions of the conservation easement are acceptable to the
city; and
      (3)   The conveyance contains appropriate provision for assignment of the
conservation easement to another entity authorized to hold conservation
easements under R.C. § 5301.68 in the event that the original grantee becomes
unwilling or unable to ensure compliance with the provisions of the
conservation easement.
   (N)   Private ownership of restricted open space: restricted open space may
be retained in ownership by the applicant or may be transferred to other
private parties subject to compliance with all standards and criteria for
restricted open space herein.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.13 DEVELOPMENT AND SITE PLANNING STANDARDS.
   Buildings, structures, pavement and streets shall be located in compliance
with the following development and site planning standards.
   (A)   Ownership. Any ownership arrangement, including, but not limited to,
fee simple lots and condominiums, is permitted in a conservation development.
Regardless of the ownership of the land, the arrangement of the dwelling units
shall comply with the spacing requirements of this section.
   (B)   Lot requirements.
      (1)   Principal buildings in a conservation subdivision are not required
to be on separate lots.
      (2)   When lots are included as part of a conservation subdivision they
shall be of sufficient size and shape to accommodate dwelling units in
compliance with the spacing requirements of this section.
      (3)   The applicant shall depict on the development plan the maximum
parameters, or building envelopes, to indicate where buildings shall be
located, and shall demonstrate that such building locations will be in
compliance with the spacing requirements of the section.
   (C)   Setbacks; perimeter building regulations.
      (1)   The following perimeter building setbacks shall apply to a
conservation subdivision.
      (2)   At the sole discretion of the Planning Commission, the minimum
setback requirement may be reduced to allow more flexibility to conserve open
space when:
         (a)   Natural features along the existing perimeter public street are
substantial enough to provide adequate buffering between the units in the
development and the road; or
         (b)   When there are significant natural features located on the
interior of the site and the city’s priorities dictate that it is more
important to conserve those natural features than to maintain large building
setbacks along the existing perimeter public road.
            1.   The minimum perimeter building setback from an existing public
street shall be:
               a.   Seventy feet; or
               b.   Where a conservation subdivision is adjacent to other
existing housing development, the setback shall be equivalent to the front
setback requirement for those adjacent lots outside the conservation
subdivision on the same side of the street. At the sole discretion of the
Planning Commission, the minimum setback requirement may mirror the setback for
those adjacent lots directly across the street from the conservation
subdivision.
            2.   The minimum perimeter rear or side yard building setback for
interior lots abutting the project boundary where there is no existing or
proposed road shall be 50 feet.
            3.   Interior building setback/spacing regulations: the buildable
area for structures and streets on the interior of a conservation subdivision
shall be in compliance with the following development site planning standards:
               a.   Interior streets. Interior streets which parallel a
perimeter boundary shall be set back a minimum of 70 feet from the boundary
unless the Planning Commission provides a modification pursuant to division (F)
(Modification of Requirements) of this section.
               b.   Front yard setback.
                  i.   The minimum setback from a proposed local public right-
of-way: 50 feet;
                  ii.   The minimum setback from the edge of the pavement of a
private street: 40 feet;
                  iii.   Cul-de-sac exception: In a cul-de-sac which is not
greater than 200 feet with no more than six dwellings, the minimum building
setback is 30 feet.
                  iv.   In order to maximize rear yard areas when used for
conservation easements, the Planning Commission may reduce a front yard
setback.
               c.   Rear yard setback. The minimum rear yard setback is 40
feet.
   (D)   Height. The maximum building height shall be 35 feet.
   (E)   Minimum separation between dwellings. The minimum separation between
dwellings shall be 20 feet.
   (F)   Modification of requirements. The Planning Commission may modify these
standards based on sound planning and design principles, taking into account
the degree of compatibility between adjoining uses, sensitivity to the
characteristics for the site, the need for free access for emergency vehicles,
the need for adequate amounts of light and air between buildings, and the need
for proper amounts for open space.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.14 DEVELOPMENT DESIGN CRITERIA.
   In addition to the development and site planning standards set forth in §
155.13 all elements of a conservation development, particularly the restricted
open space areas, shall be designed in accordance with the following criteria
to ensure that the project is appropriate for the site’s natural, historic and
cultural features and meet the objectives of the comprehensive plan and this
UDO.
   (A)   Priority of open space conservation. The city’s open space
conservation priorities are listed in order as follows from most important to
least important.
      (1)   Conservation of wildlife habitats. Wildlife habitat areas of
species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency and/or by the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources should be protected.
      (2)   Conservation of woodlands, vegetation and other natural areas. The
design and layout of the development should conserve, maintain and incorporate
existing wooded areas, meadows and hedgerows and treelines between fields or
meadows, especially those containing significant wildlife habitats.
      (3)   Conservation of sloping land. The road system and buildings should
be located to minimize changes to the topography and the need for cutting and
filling.
      (4)   Conservation of existing scenic vistas and visual quality of the
environment. Buildings should be located to ensure that scenic views and vistas
are unblocked or uninterrupted.
      (5)   Conservation of cultural resources. Sites of historic,
archaeological or cultural value and their environs should be protected insofar
as needed to safeguard the character of the feature, including stone walls,
spring houses, barn foundations, underground fruit cellars, earth mounds and
burial grounds.
   (B)   General street design criteria. Interior streets in a conservation
subdivision should be planned as the minimum necessary to provide adequate and
safe movement through the development. Street alignments should follow natural
contours and be designed to conserve natural features. Streets shall be
constructed with curbs and planned to avoid excessive stormwater runoff and the
need for storm-sewers. The Planning Commission may determine that certain areas
do not require curbs.
   (C)   Pedestrian circulation systems. A pedestrian circulation system shall
be included in the conservation subdivision and shall be designed to ensure
that pedestrians can walk safely and easily throughout the development.
      (1)   The pedestrian system shall provide connections between properties
and activities or special features within the restricted open space system and
need not always be located along streets.
      (2)   Trails for which public right of passage has been established
should be incorporated in the pedestrian circulation system.
   (D)   Sewage disposal. Development shall be served by individual or public
sewage disposal structures consistent with the county systems. Individual
sewage disposal systems shall comply with all applicable regulations of the
County Combined General Health District and may be located within restricted
open space areas when approved by the city and the County Combined General
Health District. Public sewage disposal structures shall comply with all
applicable regulations of the Ohio EPA.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.15 PROJECT REVIEW PROCEDURES.
   Under the authority established in R.C. § 711.101, the Planning Commission
shall review and approve development plans for a proposed conservation
development according to the procedures set forth in this section and the
general rules and regulations for major subdivisions as established in these
subdivision regulations.
   (A)   Submission requirements for preliminary development plan. The
applicant shall submit a conservation subdivision development plan application
to the city’s Planning Administrator. Maps shall be drawn at an engineer scale
not less than one inch equals 100 feet, except that projects over 200 acres may
be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet. The application shall include
documentation illustrating compliance with the standards and criteria set forth
in this chapter. Twenty-five copies of the plan are required. The application
and documentation shall include, but not necessarily be limited to:
      (1)   Identification of existing site characteristics, including a
general depiction of:
         (a)   Boundaries of the area proposed for development, dimensions and
total acreage;
         (b)   Contour lines at vertical intervals of not more than five feet,
highlighting ridges, rock outcroppings and other significant topographical
features;
         (c)   Location of wetlands (and potential wetlands), the floodway
boundary and floodway elevation as delineated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, rivers and streams and their related river or stream bank,
ponds and watercourses;
         (d)   Existing soil classifications;
         (e)   Locations of all wooded areas, tree lines, hedgerows and
specimen trees;
         (f)   Delineation of existing drainage patterns on the property,
existing wells and well sites;
         (g)   Description of significant existing vegetation by type of
species, health, quality and the like;
         (h)   Existing buildings, structures and other significant human-made
features on the site and within 200 feet of the project boundary;
         (i)   Description of all structures and areas of known or potential
historical significance; and
         (j)   Existing viewsheds and identification of unique vistas.
      (2)   The proposed preliminary development plan documentation and maps
shall include:
         (a)   A summary of the proposed development including the total
acreage, number of residential units, type of dwellings, density by type of
dwelling and acreage of restricted open space to be conserved;
         (b)   A sketch layout of standard single family lots, if any;
         (c)   The location of the restricted open space and any proposed
recreational facilities;
         (d)   Natural features to be conserved and any required buffer areas;
         (e)   Natural features to be altered or impacted by the development
and areas where new landscaping will be installed and the like;
         (f)   General location of public street rights-of-way;
         (g)   Proposed utility easement locations;
         (h)   An outline of the method/structure to perpetually preserve the
required restricted open space which indicates:
            1.   The structure of the association;
            2.   Membership requirements;
            3.   Financial responsibilities; and
            4.   The relationship of the entity to public agencies having
responsibilities related to the project.
         (i)   A description of the project phasing including the phased
construction of open space improvements.
   (B)   Review for completeness. Within five business days of receiving the
application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the application to determine
that the application includes all the items required in division (A)
(Submission Requirements for Preliminary Development Plan) of this section. If
the application is deemed complete and the application fee paid, the Zoning
Administrator shall officially accept the application on that date.
   (C)   Review of development plan by others. The Zoning Administrator shall
distribute the preliminary development plan application to the following
officials and agencies for review and comment within ten days from the date
distributed against applicable standards and criteria of the reviewing
agencies:
      (1)   Regulatory agencies which have statutory authority to subsequently
review and approve any aspect of the development, including, but not limited
to, the County Combined General Health District, the County Sanitary Engineer,
the County Water and Soil District and the state’s Environmental Protection
Agency;
      (2)   Other agencies which, at the discretion of the city, may have
appropriate technical expertise;
      (3)   Appropriate city administrative officials, including the city’s
legal advisor (ten copies); and
      (4)   Consultants retained by the city.
   (D)   Site visit. The Planning Commission shall, together with the applicant
and the applicant’s consultant(s), visit the site to gain a thorough
understanding of the characteristics of the site and evaluate the application
against the design criteria in the conservation subdivision regulations and the
applicable standards and criteria of other reviewing agencies.
   (E)   Review and approval by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall review the general development plan and the comments received from
division (C) (Review of the Development Plan by Others) of this section.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall take action on the submitted general
development plan by either:
         (a)   Approving the general development plan as submitted;
         (b)   Approving the general development plan subject to specific
conditions not included in the plan as submitted, such as, but not limited to,
improvements to the general building layout or open space arrangement; or
         (c)   Denying approval of the general development plan.
      (2)   Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 30 days from the
date the application was determined complete, or an extended period as may be
agreed upon, shall at the election of the applicant be deemed a denial of the
general development plan.
   (F)   Significance of approved plan. Approval of the general development
plan shall:
      (1)   Establish the development framework for the project, including the
general location of open space, development areas, densities, unit types,
recreational facilities and street alignments;
      (2)   Be the basis for the application to proceed with detailed planning
and engineering in reliance on the approved general development plan;
      (3)   Provide the benchmark for the Planning Commission to consider and
approve amendments to the general development plan when Planning Commission
determines that the amended plan is equal to or better than the approved
general development plan; and
      (4)   Authorize the applicant to apply for all other required regulatory
approvals for the project or subsequent phases thereof.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.16 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   After a preliminary development plan has been approved, an applicant shall
submit for review and approval a final development plan. The final development
plan may be submitted either for the entire project or for each construction
phase. Twenty-five copies of the plan are required.
   (A)   Submission requirements for final development plan. The final
development plan shall include:
      (1)   A site plan drawn at a scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet
indicating:
         (a)   Boundaries of the area proposed for development, accurate
dimensions and total acreage;
         (b)   The exact location and dimension of private streets, common
drives and public street rights-of-way;
         (c)   Exact location of building footprints or envelopes within which
dwelling units are to be constructed, and lot lines with dimensions for all
residential units for which individual ownership is proposed;
         (d)   Dimensions of building/unit spacing;
         (e)   The extent of environmental conservation and change and the
exact location of all no cut/no disturb zones; and
         (f)   Designated restricted open space areas and a description of
proposed open space improvements.
      (2)   A grading plan drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet,
showing all information pertaining to surface drainage;
      (3)   A detailed landscaping plan for new landscaping, including entry
features and signs;
      (4)   The declaration, articles of incorporation and either bylaws (for a
condominium association) or code of regulations (for a homeowners’ association)
and any other final covenants and restrictions and maintenance agreements to be
imposed upon all the use of land and pertaining to the ownership, use and
maintenance of all common areas, including restricted open space; and
      (5)   Conditions imposed by other regulatory agencies.
   (B)   Review for completeness. Within five business days of receiving the
application, the Zoning Administrator shall review the application to determine
that the application includes all the items required in division (A)
(Submission Requirements for Final Development Plan) of this section. If the
application is deemed complete and the application fee paid, the Zoning
Administrator shall officially accept the application on that date.
   (C)   Distribution of final development plan. The Zoning Administrator shall
distribute the final development plan application to the Planning Commission,
the city legal advisor and other appropriate administrative departments or
professional consultants for review and comment. Any reports, comments or
expert opinions shall be compiled by the Planning Administrator and transmitted
to the Planning Commission prior to the time of the Commission’s review.
   (D)   Review by the city legal advisor. The city’s legal advisor shall
review the declaration, articles of incorporation and either bylaws (for a
condominium association) or code of regulations (for a homeowners’ association)
and any other final covenants and restrictions and maintenance agreements to be
imposed upon the conservation development. A written legal opinion shall be
provided to the Planning Commission by the applicant certifying that the above
demonstrate full compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state
law.
   (E)   Review and approval by Planning Commission. The Planning Commission
shall review the final development plan and the comments received from
divisions (C) (Distribution of Final Development Plan) and (D) (Review by City
Legal Advisor) of this section.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall determine if the final development
plan is in compliance with the general development plan and take action on the
submitted final development plan by either:
         (a)   Approving the final development plan as submitted;
         (b)   Approving the final development plan subject to specific
conditions not included in the plan as submitted, such as, but not limited to,
improvements to the general building layout or open space arrangement; or
         (c)   Denying approval of the general development plan.
      (2)   Failure of the Planning Commission to act within 30 days from the
date the application was determined complete, or an extended period as may be
agreed upon, shall at the election of the applicant be deemed a denial of the
general development plan.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
§ 155.17 FEES.
   Filing fees for the conservation subdivision preliminary development plan
and final development plan process shall be the same as for a preliminary plan
review.
(Ord. 06-O-02, passed 4-5-2006)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
156.001   Title
   
156.002   Effective date
   
156.003   Jurisdiction
   
156.004   General purpose
   
156.005   Severability
   
156.006   Conflicts
   
156.007   Applicability
   
156.008   Authorized agent
Administration
   
156.020   Zoning Administrator
   
156.021   Planning and Zoning Commission
   
156.022   Board of Zoning Appeals
   
156.023   Public hearings
   
156.024   Appeals
Application Procedures
   
156.040   Zoning certificates
   
156.041   Schedule of fees, charges and expenses
   
156.042   Conditional use review
   
156.043   Variance review
   
156.044   Appeals
   
156.045   Architectural design review
   
156.046   Site plan review (major and minor)
   
156.047   Amendments to zoning text and map
Establishment of Zoning Districts and Zoning Map
   
156.060   Districts and intent
   
156.061   Zoning map and interpretation of boundaries
Permitted and Conditional Land Uses
   
156.075   Land use matrix
Development Standards
   
156.090   General development standards
   
156.091   Development standards matrix by district
   
156.092   Supplemental district standards
Nonconforming Use Regulations
   
156.105   Purpose
   
156.106   Continuance
   
156.107   Discontinuance or abandonment
   
156.108   Restoration of nonconforming uses
   
156.109   Reconstruction of nonconforming uses
   
156.110   Extension of nonconforming uses
   
156.111   Substitution of nonconforming uses
Supplemental Land Use Regulations
   
156.125   Accessory structures and uses
   
156.126   Outside storage and display
   
156.127   Agricultural uses
   
156.128   Specific requirements for conditionally permitted uses
   
156.129   Home occupations
   
156.130   Utility services; underground utilities
   
156.131   Wireless telecommunications facilities
   
156.132   Sexually oriented business regulations
   
156.133   Oil and gas well regulations
   
156.134   Junk motor vehicle regulations
   
156.135   Litter and trash regulations
   
156.136   Alternative energy system regulations; outdoor wood-fired boilers
Architectural Design Standards
   
156.150   Purpose
   
156.151   General architectural design requirements
Landscaping Regulations
   
156.165   Purpose
   
156.166   Applicability
   
156.167   Registered engineer or architect
   
156.168   Contents of landscaping plan
   
156.169   Approval
   
156.170   Building landscaping standards
   
156.171   Screening and landscaping of parking lots
   
156.172   Landscaping along the street frontage
   
156.173   Screening and buffering of residential areas
   
156.174   Landscaping materials and installation standards
   
156.175   Maintenance of landscaping and bufferyards
   
156.176   Modification
Natural Resource Preservation Regulations
   
156.190   Riparian development setback regulations
   
156.191   Erosion and sediment control and post construction storm water
quality regulations
Off-Street Parking, Loading and Access Management
   
156.205   Off-street parking
   
156.206   Loading requirements
   
156.207   Access management standards for off-street parking and loading
Sign Regulations
   
156.220   Purpose
   
156.221   Sign definitions
   
156.222   Measurement standards
   
156.223   Design and construction standards
   
156.224   Supplemental regulations
   
156.225   Signs exempt from regulation
   
156.226   Signs prohibited under this Zoning Code
   
156.227   Administrative procedures
   
156.228   Maintenance
   
156.229   Alteration/removal of unsafe, obsolete and nonconforming signs
   
156.230   Violations and penalties
   
156.231   Maximum sign area and height regulations
Definitions
   
156.245   Interpretation
   
156.246   Definitions
 
   
156.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 156.001 TITLE.
   This Zoning Code shall be known and may be cited to as the “City of New
Franklin Zoning Code”.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.002 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The provisions in this Zoning Code were originally adopted by Ordinance 08-
O-03, passed on May 20, 2009. Subsequent amendments to Ordinance 08-O-03 are
reflected in legislative histories which are footnoted following the amended
sections.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.003 JURISDICTION.
   This Zoning Code shall be effective throughout the corporate boundaries of
the City of New Franklin, Summit County, Ohio.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.004 GENERAL PURPOSE.
   The provisions of this Zoning Code as most recently amended, shall be
interpreted and applied to promote the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity and general welfare pursuant to R.C. Chapter 713 and
the exercise of the police power authority pursuant to the home rule amendment
of the Ohio Constitution in Article XVIII § 3.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.005 SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section, clause or provision of this Zoning Code be declared by
the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the Zoning
Code as a whole or any part thereof, other than the section, clause or
provision so declared to be invalid.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.006 CONFLICTS.
   (A)   It is not intended that this Zoning Code permit that which is
forbidden or prohibited by specific state or federal law related to the same
subject matter, and vice versa. This limitation shall not preclude this Zoning
Code from concurrent regulation of subject matter where the potential conflict
is not precluded by state or federal law.
   (B)   It is not intended by this Zoning Code to interfere with or abrogate
or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties;
provided, however, that where this Zoning Code imposes a greater restriction
than are imposed or required by any easements, covenants, agreements, other
ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this Zoning Code
shall govern.
   (C)   In the event any of the requirements or regulatory provisions of these
regulations are found to be inconsistent with one another, the more restrictive
requirements shall be deemed in each case to be applicable.
   (D)   All city zoning ordinances in conflict with this Zoning Code or
inconsistent with the provisions of this Zoning Code are hereby repealed to the
extent necessary to give this Zoning Code full force and effect.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.007 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   All new zoning applications shall meet the requirements of this Zoning
Code. All land uses shall further comply with all applicable codes, standards
and requirements as adopted by the City Council and as administered by the
various city departments.
   (B)   No person or persons may use, arrange to use, design to use, occupy,
sell or authorize or permit the use of any land or structures or part thereof
except in conformance with this Zoning Code.
   (C)   No person or persons may erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge,
convert, move or structurally alter property, or construct public or private
improvements, nor shall any building or land be used in a manner which does not
comply with all of the provisions established by these regulations for the
zoning districts in which the building or land is located.
   (D)   No person shall subdivide, re-subdivide or otherwise reduce the
dimension or area of a lot or yard existing at the time of passage of this
Zoning Code below the minimum requirements set forth herein.
   (E)   No person shall record a major or minor subdivision in the office of
the County Fiscal Office Recorder’s Division until it has been approved in the
manner prescribed herein. In the event any such unapproved plat is recorded, it
shall be considered invalid; and the city may institute proceedings to have the
plat stricken from the county records.
   (F)   No person shall implement the design of any subdivision improvements,
including grades of streets, type of pavement, drainage, sidewalks, sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, detention or retention ponds, water distribution
facilities, street lighting facilities, or electric, fiber, cable or wireless
communication and data transfer until such shall conform to the requirements
and regulations of this Zoning Code and be approved in the manner prescribed
herein.
   (G)   No person shall continue performance of any work in or about a
structure or premises after revocation of a conditional use certificate.
   (H)   This Zoning Code shall not be construed as discontinuing, reducing,
modifying or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue. However, all
administrative procedures and penalties shall follow those set forth by this
Zoning Code.
   (I)   This Zoning Code shall not be construed as eliminating or reducing any
action now pending under, or by virtue of, an existing law or previous zoning,
subdivision or related regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.008 AUTHORIZED AGENT.
   An owner may authorize an agent to act on the owner’s behalf in any
application or request contained in this Zoning Code. Written proof of
authority by the owner may be required by the city for any such application or
request.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 156.020 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Appointment. For the purposes of enforcing the provisions of this
Zoning Code, the Mayor shall appoint the Zoning Administrator and/or such
assistants as shall be deemed necessary. The City Council shall have the power
to establish rates of compensation, and any other such conditions as specified
by the City Council.
   (B)   Duties of the Zoning Administrator.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the power to grant zoning
certificates and make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry
out his or her duties in the enforcement of this Zoning Code.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall review all plans and/or applications
for any zoning certificates in detail prior to approval or denial of such
applications and/or plans.
      (3)   The Zoning Administrator shall approve proposed projects and
determine zoning compliance for completed projects when compliant with this
Zoning Code, or deny the same in the event of noncompliance.
      (4)   The Zoning Administrator shall not refuse to issue a zoning
certificate when the applicant complies with conditions imposed by this Zoning
Code despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements
which may occur upon the granting of said permit.
      (5)   The Zoning Administrator shall record all nonconforming uses
existing at the effective date of this Zoning Code.
      (6)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the inspection of
all improvements to ensure conformity with the approved plans and
specifications as contained in the applicant’s application and zoning
certificate approval.
      (7)   Under no circumstances is the Zoning Administrator permitted to
make changes to this Zoning Code nor to vary the terms of this Zoning Code in
carrying out his or her duties as Zoning Administrator.
      (8)   The Zoning Administrator shall not be authorized to revoke, alter
or waive any requirements of the approved specifications or plans.
      (9)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the collection of
designated fees for certificates, applications; permits and processes described
by this Zoning Code, and shall ensure the preparation and conveyance of said
applications with reports as necessary to the appropriate boards and/or
commission, and City Council.
      (10)   The Zoning Administrator shall prepare and maintain all records
necessary and appropriate for the administration and enforcement of the Zoning
Code, including records of the issuance/denial of all certificates of zoning
compliance and zoning plan approvals and receipt of complaints of violation of
this Zoning Code and enforcement actions taken.
      (11)   The Zoning Administrator shall make determinations of violations
of this Zoning Code and take all necessary steps to remedy any condition found
in violation by ordering in writing the correction and/or the discontinuance
(stop work order) of illegal uses or illegal work in progress.
      (12)   Upon receipt of a recommendation from the Board of Zoning Appeals
or the Property Maintenance Enforcement Board, the Zoning Administrator shall
undertake abatement of violations, seek civil remedies and/or seek criminal
penalties as authorized by this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.021 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
   A Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby created and shall have all the
powers and duties prescribed by law, by City Charter and by this Zoning Code.
   (A)   Composition and appointment. The Planning and Zoning Commission also
known as the “Commission” shall consist of five members pursuant to § 7.05 of
the City Charter.
   (B)   Organization. The Commission shall elect a Chairperson from its
membership, shall appoint a Recording Secretary, and shall prescribe rules for
the conduct of its affairs.
   (C)   Meetings. The Commission shall meet at the call of its Chairperson and
at such other time as it may determine. All meetings of the Commission shall be
open to the public.
   (D)   Quorum and voting. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum at all meetings. A concurring vote of three members shall be necessary
to effect an order, take action, make a decision, or act on any authorization.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the
following powers and duties: review, interpret and approve all major and minor
subdivisions, major site plans, architectural designs, zoning text amendments,
zoning map amendments and all conditionally permitted uses (for conditional
uses, to interpret and administer the conditional use zoning certificates
section of this Zoning Code).
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 17-O-01, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 156.022 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   A Board of Zoning Appeals also known as the “Board” is hereby created and
shall have all the powers and duties prescribed by law, by City Charter and by
this Zoning Code.
   (A)   Composition and terms of appointment. The Board shall consist of five
members plus one alternate appointed by the Mayor and approved by City Council.
Each member shall serve until his or her successor is appointed and qualified.
   (B)   Organization. The Board shall elect a Chairperson from its membership,
shall appoint a Recording Secretary, and shall prescribe rules for the conduct
of its affairs.
   (C)   Meetings. The Board shall meet at the call of its Chairperson and at
such other time as it may determine.
      (1)   All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public.
      (2)   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official
actions all of which shall be immediately filed in the Zoning and Planning
Department and shall be a public record.
   (D)   Quorum and voting. Three members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum at all meetings. A concurring vote of three members shall be necessary
to effect an order, take action, make a decision or act on any authorization.
   (E)   Powers and duties. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the
following powers and duties:
      (1)   Appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is
error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning
Administrator in the enforcement of this Zoning Code; and
      (2)   Variances. To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases, such
variance from the terms of the zoning regulations as will not be contrary to
the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement
of this Zoning Code will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit
of this Zoning Code shall be observed and substantial justice done. In granting
a variance, the Board may impose such conditions as it may deem necessary to
protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity and general
welfare and in furtherance of the purposes and intent of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 17-O-01, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 156.023 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   The administrative hearing duties of the Board of Zoning Appeals and the
Planning and Zoning Commission are undertaken through adjudicatory hearings,
since they involve the rights of specific persons and whether such rights
should be granted based on evidence presented at the hearing.
   (A)   Application. When an application requiring a public hearing is deemed
to be complete by the Zoning Administrator or a notice of appeal has been filed
in proper form with the Zoning Administrator, the Secretary of the appropriate
administrative board shall place the said request upon the calendar for public
hearing.
   (B)   Notice of public hearings. At least ten days prior to the date of a
public hearing, the Secretary of the administrative board shall cause the
following notices to be provided to indicate the place, time and subject of the
hearing. The administrative board, at its discretion, may send out additional
notices to publicize such hearings. In addition, the notice shall state that
the public may examine or obtain copies of the relevant text, maps, plans,
reports and agenda relating to the hearing at the office of the Zoning
Administrator.
      (1)   Written notice to parties of interest. Written notice is to be
served personally or mailed by first class U.S. mail to the parties of
interest. Such parties of interest shall include the applicant and all owners
of property within and contiguous to, three on each side of and three directly
across the street from the subject parcel. Owners and their addresses are to be
determined from the County Fiscal Office current tax list. In addition, such
parties of interest shall include any person who provides written request for
any notice of public hearings. The failure of delivery of any such written
notice shall not invalidate the decision made following the public hearing.
      (2)   Publication. Notice of the public hearing shall be published in at
least one publication of a newspaper of general circulation in the city and as
per City Charter § 5.15.
   (C)   Format for the hearing. The following procedure is advised for public
hearings conducted by administrative boards in the city.
      (1)   Recording of all hearings. A complete record of the proceedings of
a public hearing and all public input should be maintained by the Zoning
Administrator in case the decision of the administrative board is appealed. The
hearing should be audio recorded. The applicant shall provide payment to the
city if transcription is necessary or if a court stenographer is desired to be
present to prepare a complete record.
      (2)   Opening of the hearing. The Chairperson opens the hearing.
         (a)   The Chairperson should announce the subject and summarize the
application.
         (b)   The applicant may be given a right to a continuance if only
three members of the administrative board are in attendance.
         (c)   The Chairperson should summarize the hearing procedure and
inform participants that Robert’s Rules of Order shall cover parliamentary
issues.
         (d)   If city legal counsel is not present, the Chairperson should
announce that if the administrative board is in doubt as to how to proceed on a
legal issue, it shall recess for an opinion by its own counsel.
         (e)   At this time, recognition of the required public notice
publication should be made for the record.
      (3)   Abstentions. The Chairperson should call for and recognize
abstentions by any member in the event that there is a personal conflict of
interest. The member should be made responsible for explaining the validity of
the nature of the conflict of interest.
      (4)   Ex-parte communications. The Chairperson should call for voting
members of the administrative board to acknowledge any prior ex-parte (off-the-
record) communications so that its substance may be contested during the public
hearing.
         (a)   The nature of any oral communication or a copy of any written
communication should be placed in the record of the hearing.
         (b)   Where possible prior to a public hearing, a summary of the
nature of an oral ex-parte communication or a copy of any written ex-parte
communication should immediately be provided to the Zoning Administrator so
that the communication can be timely placed in the applicant’s case file for
public inspection and distributed to parties required to receive notice by
mail. Otherwise, such summaries or copies of ex-parte written materials should
be included in the meeting agenda or made available at the hearing so that all
parties can review them.
      (5)   Staff report and summary. The Chairperson should ask staff to
present its report. Visual aids, such a photographs, flip charts, maps or
projected images should be employed to make or clarify critical points.
      (6)   Testimony of witnesses. The Chairperson should seek testimony first
from the applicant and those favoring the proposal and then from those opposing
the proposal. At the end of each witness’ testimony, the Chairperson should
seek questions from members of the administrative board regarding the
presentation.
         (a)   All testimony should be taken under oath. The Board Chairperson,
or acting Chairperson may administer oaths to witnesses and the Board may
compel the attendance of witnesses in all matters coming within the purview of
the Board. All witnesses may be represented by legal counsel.
         (b)   All testimony, questions from the administrative board, and
responses shall be directed through the Chairperson.
         (c)   Presentation time shall be generally limited to three to five
minutes for each individual.
         (d)   Testimony shall be taken in the form of reliable, probative and
substantial evidence from experts and non-experts. Where testimony involves
technical matters, such as the effect of development on the value of property,
the testimony should be based on demonstrably accurate evidence. Absent facts,
mere expressions of concern and speculative comments or opinion rarely suffice
as reliable, probative and substantial evidence.
         (e)   Hearsay evidence shall not be considered or admitted in an
arbitrary manner. Factors bearing on arbitrariness include whether any party
objected to the hearsay; whether both sides take advantage of liberalized
evidentiary rules regarding hearsay; whether the hearsay carried a marginal
level of reliability; and whether the Administrative Board blindly accepted the
accuracy of the hearsay evidence.
         (f)   All testimony should be subject to cross examination and
rebuttal.
         (g)   Members of the Administrative Board should probe views of
witnesses to separate fact from opinion and lay opinion from expert opinion.
      (7)   Conclusion of the hearing. Upon motion of a member of the
Administrative Board, the Chairperson may close or continue the hearing. The
Chairperson may recess such hearings from time to time, and, if the time and
place of the continued hearing be publicly announced at the time of
adjournment, no further notice shall be required.
   (D)   Decision by the Administrative Board.
      (1)   Within 30 days of the conclusion of the public hearing, the
Administrative Board shall deliberate upon the application prior to rendering a
decision.
      (2)   Every decision of the Administrative Board shall be in writing.
   (E)   Written notice of decision to applicant. A copy of the decision of the
Administrative Board shall be transmitted to the applicant and to the Zoning
Administrator within five days of the date such decision is made.
   (F)   Effect of decision. Such decisions shall be binding upon the Zoning
Administrator and shall be incorporated with any terms and conditions of the
same in the zoning certificate or conditional use zoning certificate to the
applicant or appellant whenever a certificate is authorized by the Board.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.024 APPEALS.
   Decisions of the Board of Zoning Appeals and the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be final, except where action by the City Council is required
under this Zoning Code. Appeals from final decisions of the Board of Zoning
Appeals and the Planning and Zoning Commission may be taken to a court of
record in accordance with the laws of the state, by any proper and interested
party, including the city.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
APPLICATION PROCEDURES
§ 156.040 ZONING CERTIFICATES.
   Before constructing, or altering any fence, sign, structure or building,
including accessory buildings and agricultural buildings, application shall be
made for a zoning certificate. All applications for zoning certificates shall
be submitted to the Zoning Administrator who may issue zoning certificates when
it is determined that the application complies with all applicable provisions
of this Zoning Code.
   (A)   Application requirements. All zoning certificate applications shall
include an application form prepared by the Zoning Administrator and a plot
plan, or if required, a site plan or development plan, drawn to scale showing
the exact dimensions and area of the lot to be built upon. A plot plan shall
include:
      (1)   The property owner’s full name, address and phone number;
      (2)   The builder or remodeling contractor’s full name, address and phone
number;
      (3)   The exact location, including the street name, street number and
parcel number;
      (4)   The intended use of the site, building or structure, including
accessory and agricultural structures;
      (5)   The use of fences to be erected including exact size, height,
length, style, type and location. The repair or replacement of an existing
fence shall not require an application for a certificate;
      (6)   The installation of signage including exact size, height, width,
length, style, type and location;
      (7)   Written approval from the County Public Health Department for all
residential dwellings (except fences) in non-sewer service areas or written
approval from the state’s Environmental Protection Agency for all multi-family
residential (three-family dwellings or more), commercial or industrial uses
both within a designated sewer service area or in a non-sewer service area;
      (8)   A copy of a driveway opening permit issued by the Service Director
if no access had been previously established to the site;
      (9)   The exact dimensions, height and bulk of the use, building or
structure, including accessory and agricultural structures;
      (10)   The yard, open area and parking space dimensions;
      (11)   The proposed number of sleeping rooms, dwelling units, occupants,
employees and other uses; and
      (12)   Any other pertinent data as may be necessary to determine and
provide for the enforcement of this Zoning Code.
   (B)   Determination of completeness. Within five business days after the
receipt of an application and the specified fee, the Zoning Administrator shall
make a determination of application completeness. The Zoning Administrator
shall confer with the applicant to ensure understanding of the Zoning
Administrator’s interpretation of the applicable requirements of this Zoning
Code, that the applicant has submitted all of the information intended to be
submitted, and that the application represents precisely and completely what
the applicant proposes to do.
      (1)   If a finding is made that the application is complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall certify the determination of completeness on the
application and the application shall then be processed.
      (2)   If the application is incomplete, the Zoning Administrator shall,
within such five working-day period, send the applicant a notice the
application is incomplete together with a brief written statement of the
specific ways in which the application is deficient, including appropriate
references to the applicable sections of this Zoning Code.
   (C)   Issuance of zoning certificate. Within 30 days after the receipt of
application or upon required authorization from an administrative board of this
city or other legal authority, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning
certificate if the application complies with the requirements of this Zoning
Code.
   (D)   Expiration of zoning certificate. The zoning certificate shall become
void at the expiration of one year after the date of issuance unless
construction is started. If no substantial amount of construction is started or
the use changed pursuant to the zoning certificate within one year of the date
of permit, proper application for a new zoning certificate is required.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.041 SCHEDULE OF FEES, CHARGES AND EXPENSES.
   (A)   In order to be complete, all applications and requests for an
interpretation, exception, variance or appeal shall be accompanied by a minimum
fee as established by the City Council by separate ordinance and shall not be
refundable.
   (B)   In the event that any administrative board finds it is necessary to
engage qualified consultants or to maintain a strict record of public hearing
procedures, the applicant shall bear all direct and related costs. Examples
include when planning, legal or engineering special studies or expert testimony
is required, or if the proposed use may cause the emission of dangerous or
objectionable elements. All such reports shall be furnished to the
administrative board as soon as it is practicable.
   (C)   Prior to the commencement of any work, the zoning certificate, and all
other applicable permits, shall be obtained on behalf of the property owner.
Failure to obtain a city zoning certificate, and all other applicable permits,
prior to the commencement of any work, will result in a penalty of 200% of the
regular permit fee, in addition to the regular permit fee requirement.
   (D)   New permit fees are required on all expired permits.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 16-O-05, passed 7-20-2016)
§ 156.042 CONDITIONAL USE REVIEW.
   All applications for a conditional use zoning certificate for any
conditionally permitted land use or structure under this Zoning Code shall be
processed in accordance with the following procedures.
   (A)   Application submitted to the Zoning Administrator. Any application for
a conditional use zoning certificate shall be made to the Zoning Administrator
on a conditional use zoning application form prepared by the Zoning
Administrator for that purpose. Upon a determination of completeness, the
Zoning Administrator shall indicate the Planning and Zoning Commission file
number on the application and forward the application to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
   (B)   Data required with conditional use zoning application. In addition to
the requirements of §
156.040(A) (Application Requirements) and §
156.041 (Schedule of Fees, Charges and Expenses), the applicant shall submit:
      (1)   Complete plans and specifications for all proposed development and
construction, and where appropriate, reclamation; and
      (2)   A statement supported by substantiating evidence regarding the
requirements enumerated in division (G) of this section.
   (C)   Review and decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The
Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the proposed development as
presented on the submitted plans and specifications in terms of the standards
established in this Zoning Code pursuant to the procedure outlined in §
156.023 (Public Hearings). Such review by the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be completed and made public within 95 days of the date of submission.
      (1)   Basis of determination. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall
establish that the general standards pertinent to each use indicated herein
shall be satisfied by the completion and operation of the proposed development.
The Planning and Zoning Commission may also impose such additional conditions
and safeguards deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of
individual property rights, and for ensuring that the intent and objectives of
this Zoning Code will be observed.
      (2)   Issuance of conditional use zoning certificates. Only upon
conclusion of hearing procedures relative to a particular application and
adequate review and study may the Planning and Zoning Commission issue a
conditional use zoning certificate.
   (D)   Revocation - violation and penalty. The breach of any condition,
safeguard or requirement shall automatically invalidate the certificate
granted, and shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Code.
   (E)   Reapplication. No application for a conditional use zoning certificate
which has been denied wholly or in part by the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be resubmitted until the expiration of one year or more from the date of
such denial, except on the grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of
changed conditions which would be sufficient to justify reconsideration as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. At the expiration of one year
from the date of the original application each reapplication shall be
accompanied by a fee as set by the City Council.
   (F)   Expiration of approval. The conditional use zoning certificate shall
become void at the expiration of one year after date of issuance unless the use
or construction on the structure or alteration thereof is substantially
started.
   (G)   Standards for approval of a conditional use. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each proposed
use in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate evidence
showing that such use on the proposed location:
      (1)   Will be harmonious with and in accordance with the general
objectives or with any specific objective of the comprehensive land use plan of
current adoption;
      (2)   Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended
character of the general vicinity and that such use will not change the
essential character of the same area;
      (3)   Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future
neighboring uses;
      (4)   Will not be detrimental to property in the immediate vicinity or to
the community as a whole;
      (5)   Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal and schools; or that the persons or agencies
responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide
adequately any such service;
      (6)   Will be in compliance with federal, state, county and city
regulations; and
      (7)   Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public
streets or roads.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.043 VARIANCE REVIEW.
   All applications for a variance for any land use or structure permitted
under this Zoning Code shall be processed in accordance with the following
procedures.
   (A)   Application submitted to the Zoning Administrator. All applications
for a variance shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on a variance
application form prepared by the Zoning Administrator for that purpose. Upon a
determination of completeness, the Zoning Administrator shall indicate the
Board of Zoning Appeals file number on the application and forward the
application to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   Data required with variance application. In addition to the
requirements of §
156.040(A) (Application Requirements) and §
156.041 (Schedule of Fees, Charges, and Expenses), the applicant shall submit:
      (1)   A statement which refers to the specified provision of the Zoning
Code involved sets forth the interpretation that is claimed, the details of the
variance that is applied for, and the grounds on which it is claimed that the
variance should be granted, as the case may be; and
      (2)   A statement addressing the standards enumerated in §
156.042(G).
   (C)   Review and decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of
Zoning Appeals shall review the proposed variance as presented on the submitted
plans and specifications in terms of the standards established in this Zoning
Code pursuant to the procedure outlined in §
156.023 (Public Hearings).
      (1)   Basis of determination.
         (a)   Within its powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination as in its opinion ought to be done, and to that end shall have
all the powers of the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken, and
it may issue or direct the issuance of a permit or certificate.
         (b)   In granting a variance, the Board may impose such conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety or
welfare, for the protection of individual property rights, and for ensuring
that the intent and objectives of this Zoning Code will be observed.
      (2)   Issuance of variance certificates. Only upon conclusion of hearing
procedures relative to a particular application and adequate review and study
may the Board of Zoning Appeals issue a variance certificate.
   (D)   Revocation - violation and penalty. The breach of any condition,
safeguard or requirement shall automatically invalidate the certificate
granted, and shall constitute a violation of this Zoning Code.
   (E)   Reapplication. No application for a variance certificate which has
been denied wholly or in part by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
resubmitted until the expiration of one year or more from the date of such
denial, except on the grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of changed
conditions which would be sufficient to justify reconsideration as determined
by the Board of Zoning Appeals. At the expiration of one year from the date of
the original application each reapplication shall be accompanied by a fee as
set by the City Council.
   (F)   Expiration of approval. The variance certificate shall become void at
the expiration of one year after date of issuance unless the use or
construction on the structure or alteration thereof is substantially started.
   (G)   Standards for approval of a variance. Where there are practical
difficulties in carrying out the strict letter of this Zoning Code regarding
yard, height, parking, and sign requirements, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
weigh the interests of the owner against those of the neighboring property
owners and the community as a whole and may grant a variance only after it
finds adequate evidence that most of the following tests of the existence of
practical difficulties apply:
      (1)   Whether the variance is in harmony with the general purpose, spirit
and intent of the Zoning Code;
      (2)   Whether the variance will not adversely affect the delivery of
governmental services;
      (3)   Whether the property owner purchased the property with knowledge of
the zoning restriction, unless such modification of the yard or lot area or
width regulations is necessary to secure the appropriate improvement of a
legally nonconforming parcel of land that is too small to be appropriately
improved without such modification, provided the parcel was separately owned at
the time of passage of this chapter, or is adjacent to buildings that do not
conform to the general restrictions applicable to their location;
      (4)   Whether there are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applying to the property involved or to the intended use or
development of the property that do not apply generally to other properties or
uses in the same zoning district or neighborhood that cannot be resolved by
some manner other than the granting of a variance;
      (5)   Whether the granting of the variance will not alter the essential
character of the locality or substantially impair environmental quality,
property values or public safety or welfare in the vicinity;
      (6)   Whether a variance is necessary for the applicant to enjoy a
substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same zoning
district and does not confer a special privilege ordinarily denied to other
properties in the district; and
      (7)   Whether the grant of a variance is necessary, not because it will
increase the applicant’s economic return, although it may have this effect, but
because without a variance the applicant will be deprived of beneficial use or
enjoyment of, or reasonable economic return from the property.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.044 APPEALS.
   (A)   Board of Zoning Appeals to hear appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall hear and determine appeals by any person or by any officer, board or
department of the city adversely affected by the decision of the Zoning
Administrator or any decision in which the Board has original jurisdiction.
   (B)   Notice of appeal.
      (1)   Notice of any such appeal shall be in writing and must be filed
with the Zoning Administrator within 20 days after the decision. The appellant
shall post security for the cost of all action required for the hearing of the
appeal.
      (2)   Every appeal or application shall refer to the specified provision
of the Zoning Code or zoning map involved, and shall exactly set forth the
interpretation that is claimed, the details of the appeal that is applied for,
and the grounds on which it is claimed that the appeal should be granted, as
the case may be.
      (3)   Within five business days, the Zoning Administrator shall indicate
the Board of Zoning Appeals file number on the application and forward the
notice of appeal and copies of all relevant materials in the case file to the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (C)   Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator whose
decision is appealed, shall certify to the Board of Zoning Appeals after the
notice of the appeal has been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed by other than a
restraining order granted by a court having lawful jurisdiction.
   (D)   Review and decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of
Zoning Appeals shall act in accordance with the public hearing procedure
specified by law and §
156.023 (Public Hearings) of this Zoning Code.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall decide all such appeals within a
reasonable time after the date of the hearing.
      (2)   Within its powers, the Board of Zoning Appeals may reverse or
affirm, wholly or in part or modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination as in its opinion ought to be done, and to that end shall have
all the powers of the Zoning Administrator from whom the appeal is taken, and
it may issue or direct the issuance of a permit or certificate.
      (3)   In granting an appeal, the Board may impose such conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to protect the public health, safety or
welfare, for the protection of individual property rights, and for ensuring
that the intent and objectives of this Zoning Code will be observed.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.045 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REVIEW.
   (A)   Architectural design review required. All new structures and additions
to existing buildings shall be subject to architectural design review by the
Planning and Zoning Commission pursuant to the standards and guidelines
enumerated in §§
156.150 and
156.151 (Architectural Design Standards) of this chapter.
      (1)   Exception. Single-family and two-family residential dwellings and
agricultural buildings/structures are exempt from these regulations.
      (2)   Application requirements.
         (a)   A completed architectural design review application form signed
by the property owner or authorized representative;
         (b)   The appropriate fee as established by City Council; and
         (c)   Elevation drawings or renderings, with scale clearly shown, of
all sides of the proposed structures, illustrating the proposed designs of the
elevations of the buildings, signs, fences and other structures and identifying
materials and colors thereof. Locations and dimensions of all wall openings,
including windows and doors, vents and the like. Locations and dimensions,
finish and colors of all roof and wall-mounted fixtures, equipment, poles,
including locations of utility service installations, electrical and phone
meters or service boxes. Material samples and/or paint chips of roofing,
exterior wall surfaces, and other prominent features and surfaces.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Concurrent review. The applicant shall have the option where major
site plan review is required, pursuant to §
156.046(D) (Major Site Plan Review Required), to have the architectural design
review application concurrently reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission
with the major site plan application. Upon such concurrent review, the major
site plan review procedure of §
156.046(D)(3) shall apply.
      (2)   Separate review. Where major site plan review is not required or
concurrent review is not desired by the applicant, the architectural design
review procedure shall require an administrative hearing pursuant to §
156.023 (Public Hearings).
         (a)   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve, approve with
conditions, or disapprove the architectural design review application based on
findings of fact consistent with the purposes of these regulations. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may attach to the approval of the architectural
design review application conditions reasonably required to promote the
purposes of the architectural design standards and this Zoning Code.
         (b)   Written approval of the site plan application shall be indicated
by signature of the Chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission on one
copy of the architectural design review application, marked with such
amendments and conditions as the Planning and Zoning Commission may require.
      (3)   Expiration of approval. Approval of an architectural design review
application by the Planning and Zoning Commission shall expire 12 months from
the date of approval unless construction has commenced. Extensions not to
exceed six months each may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission
after written request by the applicant.
      (4)   Resubmittal. Subsequent to disapproval of an architectural design
review application, no applicant shall resubmit, within a period of six months
from the date of disapproval, an architectural design review application which
does not rectify the underlying reasons for disapproval or which the Planning
and Zoning Commission deems substantially similar to the previously disapproved
site plan.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.046 SITE PLAN REVIEW (MAJOR AND MINOR).
   (A)   Purpose. Site plan review is required to ensure proper design of sites
for the efficient use of land; to protect adjoining properties from adverse
impacts of site and structure design and uses; and to promote high standards in
the layout, design, landscaping, and construction of development. It is also
intended to supplement the requirements of the subdivision regulations and to
further the purposes and provisions of this Zoning Code and the plans adopted
by the city.
      (1)   This section lists the requirements applicable to the development
of land for certain uses, structures and developments of land and in certain
zoning districts and to prescribe the standards for the preparation and
submission of site plans.
      (2)   In order to ensure adequate public review of significant site plans
in a public meeting, this section provides for major site plans subject to
review by the Planning and Zoning Commission. This section also provides for
review of minor site plans by the Zoning Administrator only.
   (B)   Site plan review required.
      (1)   No use or construction for which a site plan is required shall be
established or commenced until a site plan application has been submitted and
approved by the Zoning Administrator or by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
as required herein.
      (2)   If a proposed site plan application also requires the granting of a
variance or other special approval from the Board of Zoning Appeals, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall do one of the following:
         (a)   1.   Review the site plan in advance of the Board of Zoning
Appeals proceedings and approve the site plan on the assumption and condition
that the variance or other action will be approved by the Board of Zoning
Appeals; and
            2.   Such action shall not constitute a position by the Planning
and Zoning Commission in support of the application for a variance or other
action and shall not be received in evidence in any proceedings before the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
         (b)   Table its review of the site plan until such time as the Board
of Zoning Appeals has taken action on the variance or other action request; and
         (c)   Review the site plan in advance of the Board of Zoning Appeals
proceedings and disapprove the site plan.
      (3)   The procedures prescribed by this section are not intended to be a
substitute for, and are in addition to any procedures required by the
subdivision regulations for subdivision of a parcel.
      (4)   No zoning certificate shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator
or any other city official for the construction of any building or improvement
subject to a site plan except in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning
Code and the duly approved site plan.
   (C)   Minor site plans.
      (1)   Minor site plan required. A minor site plan shall be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator to determine or document compliance, for any site
improvement for which a major site plan is not specifically required in
division (D) of this section. Such site improvements include, but are not
limited to:
         (a)   New dwellings, additions to dwellings;
         (b)   Accessory structures, including, but not limited to, fences and
signs;
         (c)   Paved areas; and
         (d)   Agricultural buildings/structures.
      (2)   Application requirements. A minor site plan shall be a scaled
drawing or other documentation which illustrates the intended construction and
which is approved by the Zoning Administrator as a sufficient record of the
intended construction and compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code.
      (3)   Procedure. A minor site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator who shall review the site plan and either approve or disapprove
it within five working days after submittal.
   (D)   Major site plan.
      (1)   Major site plan required. A major site plan shall be submitted for
the following:
         (a)   Any use for which a conditional use zoning certificate is
required (except for agricultural uses requiring a conditional use zoning
certificate);
         (b)   The establishment of a new use, or a substantial change of use;
         (c)   In any residential district, any new building (other than a
single family dwelling or accessory to a single-family dwelling) or a change of
use of such a building;
         (d)   In any multi-family, business, industrial and recreation
districts and in any other districts required by this Zoning Code, any new
construction, substantial renovation or expansion of a building, structure or
other site improvement; and
         (e)   Substantial renovation or expansion shall be defined according
to the table below:
 
When Existing Structure Is: A Substantial Expansion Is:
0—1000 sq. ft.            50% or greater
1,001—10,000 sq. ft.      40% or greater
10,001—25,000 sq. ft.     30% or greater
25,001—50,000 sq. ft.     20% or greater
50,001 sq. ft. and larger   10% or greater
 
      (2)   Application requirements. A major site plan application shall
include the following information unless the Zoning Administrator determines
that certain information is not necessary for review of the particular site
plan:
         (a)   A completed site plan application form; signed by the property
owner or authorized representative;
         (b)   A fee as established by City Council;
         (c)   Name of the development and the name, address and phone number
of the owner and applicant;
         (d)   Drawing scale, north arrow and date of preparation;
         (e)   Locations and dimensions of lot lines based on a survey, deed,
plat or other legal delineation;
         (f)   Existing topography, proposed topography and proposed finished
grades, at a maximum one-foot contour interval;
         (g)   Locations, acreage and floor areas of existing and proposed
uses, easements, and encroachments on the property;
         (h)   Location of all required yards;
         (i)   Proposed building locations, dimensions, net floor area,
locations of entrances and exits, height and number of stories, and finished
grade elevations. Locations, dimensions and description or illustration of all
other structures including fences and signs. For multi-family residential
developments, the number, type and minimum floor area of dwelling units;
         (j)   Drainage plan, including all open and enclosed drainage
structures and surface drainage, and calculations of off-site impacts in a
manner approved by the City Engineer;
         (k)   Locations of existing and proposed refuse disposal facilities
and plans for screening;
         (l)   Vehicular and pedestrian circulation plan, that is, a plan
showing the planned route of vehicles and pedestrians onto, through, and out of
the site, including any safety considerations. Proposed location, layout,
dimensions and area for all parking areas, loading areas, drives, and walkways,
curbs, and curb cuts. Surface types of all paved areas. Number of parking
spaces provided and the number of spaces required by this Zoning Code;
         (m)   Planting and landscape plan including botanic names, common
names, location, quantity, diameter and height at installation and at maturity
of all proposed living and non-living landscape materials and existing
materials to be preserved; types and locations of proposed ground covers and
mulches; dimensions, materials, colors and appearance of all sides of fences,
walls, ornamental lighting and other landscape and screening features
(including location and contours of proposed berms at one-foot intervals);
measures to be taken to protect new and preserve existing trees during
construction; identification of existing trees, large shrubs, formal planting
areas and hedges to be removed;
         (n)   Lighting plan showing locations, dimensions and types of
fixtures;
         (o)   Proposed routing of utilities including valve or meter
locations;
         (p)   Illustrate all Fire Department connections, hydrant locations,
Knox boxes and transformers and other items relating to life safety controls or
disconnects; and
         (q)   Such other relevant data as may be required to ascertain the
compliance of the proposed development with the plans and laws of the city.
      (3)   Major site plan review procedure.
         (a)   Preliminary discussion. It is recommended that every applicant
request informal preliminary discussion with the Zoning Administrator in order
to review the requirements prior to submitting an application for site plan
review.
            1.   If an applicant has submitted and requested preliminary review
of a site plan application, then the Planning and Zoning Commission may review
and comment upon the application at a regular meeting of the Commission, but
shall not take formal action upon such application.
            2.   The Planning and Zoning Commission may advise the applicant of
the information which shall be required for review of a complete site plan
application.
            3.   Review of a preliminary site plan application shall not cause
or imply any commitments, authorizations, or rights for the applicant.
         (b)   Application submittal. The applicant for site plan review, who
shall be the owner of the subject property or the duly authorized
representative of the owner, shall submit copies of the site plan application
(in the number of copies as required by policy of the Planning and Zoning
Commission) which shall include the items required per division (D)(2) of this
section. The application shall be submitted according to the submittal and
review schedule established by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (c)   Staff review. A site plan application shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Administrator for completeness and compliance with all applicable
regulations.
         (d)   Planning and Zoning Commission site plan review and decision.
            1.   Public hearing required. Prior to any decision on a major site
plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing pursuant
to §
156.023 (Public Hearings).
            2.   Decision by Planning and Zoning Commission. If an applicant
has submitted a complete site plan application, the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the site plan
application within 60 days of the public hearing. Decisions shall be based on
findings of fact consistent with the purposes of these regulations.
            3.   Approval with conditions. The Planning and Zoning Commission
may establish, in the approval of a site plan, such conditions as it deems
necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare, to promote the purposes of
this Zoning Code, and to ensure completion and maintenance of the site plan as
approved in conformance with this Zoning Code.
            4.   Form of approval. Written approval of the site plan
application shall be indicated by signature of the Chairperson of the Planning
and Zoning Commission on one copy of the site plan, marked with such amendments
and conditions as the Planning and Zoning Commission may require, and shall
constitute authorization to proceed with issuance of required permits and
construction in compliance with the approved site plan, provided that all
conditions are satisfied and the site plan complies with all other requirements
of law.
   (E)   Resubmittal. Subsequent to disapproval of a site plan, no applicant
shall resubmit, within a period of six months from the date of disapproval, a
site plan which the Planning and Zoning Commission deems substantially similar
to the previously disapproved site plan.
   (F)   Amendment of site plan. Any site plan may be revised. Such revision
shall be accomplished in the same manner as the original approval, provided,
however, minor technical changes which do not substantially alter the original
site plan may be authorized by approval of the Zoning Administrator.
   (G)   Expiration of approval. Approval of a site plan by the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall expire 12 months from the date of approval unless
construction has commenced. Extensions, upon showing of good cause not to
exceed six months each, may be granted by the Planning and Zoning Commission
after written request by the applicant.
   (H)   Guarantees.
      (1)   All on-site and off-site improvements indicated on the site plan
application or conditions required by the Planning and Zoning Commission or
required by other local ordinance shall be installed at the expense of the
owner of the property consistent with the provisions of the city’s subdivision
regulations.
      (2)   All required improvements shall be installed in accordance with
construction standards adopted by the city and the standards established by the
City Engineer.
      (3)   The City Engineer shall be authorized to require and execute with
the owner or developer such development agreements or construction bonds as the
City Engineer may deem necessary to ensure proper protection, construction or
restoration of any required physical improvements located within public rights-
of-way or easements or connected to any public facility, or to ensure repair of
any damage done to existing curb, gutter, sidewalk, street pavement,
landscaping or other items within the right-of-way adjacent to a project. The
form and amount of such guarantees shall be as approved by the City Engineer
and the City Law Director.
      (4)   Design standards for major site plans for site developments shall
conform to the following standards.
         (a)   Site plans shall demonstrate that the proposed development will
be in compliance with all applicable plans, laws and ordinances.
         (b)   Consideration shall be given to providing uses of land and
structures consistent with recommendations of plans adopted by the city in the
area addressed by the site plan.
         (c)   All development features, including principal buildings, open
spaces, service roads, driveways and parking areas shall be located to minimize
the possibility of adverse effects upon current and future adjacent
development. Visual and auditory privacy for surrounding properties shall be
provided through good design and the use of proper building materials and
landscaping.
            1.   Screening of parking areas and service areas from surrounding
properties shall be provided through landscaping, ornamental walls, fences or
other means.
            2.   To ensure the protection of property values and to promote
effective transition of land use from one district to another, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall have the power to determine the need for, location and
the amount of planting materials, walls, walks or fences or any combination
thereof.
         (d)   The design and installation of high quality, attractive
landscape planting, screening, fences and other site improvements is required.
            1.   These improvements shall be designed as integral elements of
the overall site plan, selected to complement the site and surrounding sites,
and designed to provide visually and spatially attractive areas in all parts of
the site.
            2.   The locations and designs of buildings and other site
improvements shall be developed with consideration given to minimizing the
removal of trees and natural native vegetation and changes of topography.
         (e)   1.   Thoroughfares, service roads, points of ingress and egress,
driveways, and parking and loading areas shall be designed to promote safe and
efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety on both private and public
lands.
            2.   On-site traffic circulation shall be designed to permit
adequate fire and police protection.
         (f)   Provision shall be made for the disposal of wastes generated by
the proposed use. Screening of temporary storage areas and containers shall be
provided to minimize visual impacts on abutting properties, especially adjacent
residential uses.
         (g)   Grading, surface drainage, and erosion provisions shall be
designed to prevent adverse effects on abutting properties, streams, and public
streets, during as well as after construction. Adequate drainage for the
disposition of storm and natural waters both on and off-site shall be provided.
The extent of both on-site and off-site drainage facilities and the
requirements for on-site storm water management shall be based on the
requirements and standards established by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.047 AMENDMENTS TO ZONING TEXT AND MAP.
   (A)   Amendments to the Zoning Code. The city may, from time to time, amend
by ordinance the number, shape, area or regulations of districts established on
the zoning districts maps or the regulations set forth in this Zoning Code.
   (B)   Initiation of amendments. Amendments to the Zoning Code may be
initiated by one of the following methods:
      (1)   Motion of the Planning and Zoning Commission;
      (2)   Passage of resolution by City Council and certification to the
Planning and Zoning Commission; or
      (3)   Filing of an application with the city by one or more owners of
property within the area proposed to be changed or affected by the proposed
amendment to the Zoning Code.
   (C)   Contents of application for amendment to the Zoning Code. All
applications for an amendment shall include:
      (1)   Evidence that the existing Zoning Code is unreasonable with respect
to the particular property, and it deprives the property owner of his or her
lawful and reasonable use of the land. For purposes of this Zoning Code, a
limitation upon the financial gain from the land in question shall not
constitute unreasonable zoning;
      (2)   Evidence the proposed amendment would materialize in an equal or
better Zoning Code than the existing Zoning Code;
      (3)   A statement giving the names and addresses of the owners of all
properties lying within 500 feet of any part of the property, the zoning of
which would be changed by the proposed amendment if enacted; and
      (4)   A fee as set by City Council shall accompany the application and
shall not be refundable.
   (D)   Public hearing by Planning and Zoning Commission. Upon the initiation
of an amendment to the Zoning Code, the following procedure shall be used:
      (1)   Within five days of receipt of a complete application, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall set a date for a public hearing thereon, preceded
by one publication in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city
at least 30 days before the date of such hearing and as per City Charter §
5.15; and
      (2)   If the proposed amendment or supplement intends to rezone or
redistrict ten or less parcels of land, as listed on the tax duplicate, written
notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the Planning and Zoning Commission, by
first class mail, at least 20 days before the date of the public hearing to all
owners of property within and contiguous to and directly across the street from
such area proposed to be rezoned or redistricted to the addresses of such
owners appearing on the County Fiscal Office tax mailing list. The failure of
delivery of such notice shall not invalidate any such amendment or supplement.
The published and mailed notices shall set forth the time and place of the
public hearing, the nature of the proposed amendment or supplement.
   (E)   Action of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning and Zoning
Commission shall, within 30 days after such hearing, recommend the approval or
denial or the proposed amendment or the approval of some modification thereof
and submit such recommendation together with such application or resolution and
the text and map pertaining thereto to the City Council.
   (F)   Public hearing by City Council. City Council shall, upon receipt of
such recommendation, set a time for a public hearing on such proposed amendment
or supplement, which date shall not be less than 30 days from the date of the
notice of such public hearing by the City Council by publication in one or more
newspapers of general circulation in the city for two consecutive weeks. The
published notice shall set forth the time and place of the public hearing and a
summary of the proposed amendment.
   (G)   Action of City Council. Within 90 days after the public hearing, City
Council shall either adopt or deny the recommendations of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, or adopt some modification thereof. In the event City
Council adopts, modifies or denies the recommendations of the Planning and
Zoning Commission, concurrence by a majority of the full City Council members
shall be required.
   (H)   Amendments to definitions. Whenever an amendment is made to the Zoning
Code, the appropriate definitions pertinent to such amendments shall be
included in §
156.246 of this chapter.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
§ 156.060 DISTRICTS AND INTENT.
   (A)   C-D Conservation (Very Low Density) District. This district has been
established to provide for very low density of not more than one dwelling unit
per each five aces of residential development for the following purposes:
      (1)   To preserve and protect the values of distinctive geologic,
topographic, botanical, historic or scenic areas;
      (2)   To protect the ecological balance of such an area;
      (3)   To conserve the natural resources, such as river valley, wetlands
and tracts of forest land; and
      (4)   To reduce the problems created by intensive development of areas
having excessively high water tables, or which are subject to flooding, or
which are topographically unsuited for urban type uses.
   (B)   R-1 Rural Residential (Low Density) District. This district has been
established to accommodate low density of not more than one dwelling unit per
each two acres of residential development in areas which cannot be reasonably
serviced by central water and/or sanitary sewer facilities.
   (C)   R-2 Residential (Medium Density) District. This district has been
established to accommodate medium density of up to two dwelling units per acre
of single-family and two-family dwellings in areas that may reasonably be
expected to be provided with central sewer facilities. The stipulated densities
are intended to maintain the suburban character of the community.
   (D)   R-3 Residential (High Density) District. This district has been
established to encourage single-family, two-family and multi-family development
at high densities. These regulations are intended to restrict the overcrowding
of land and to encourage the provision of urban amenities in areas offering
unique regional transportation, recreational and/or scenic advantages, and in
areas where centralized water and sewer facilities exist or can be provided as
projects are developed.
   (E)   R-L Residential Lakefront (High Density) District. This district has
been established to accommodate single-family dwellings in lakefront areas. The
stipulated densities are intended to maintain the suburban lakefront character
of the community. For purposes of zoning and building on the site, the
lakefront property will be classified and designated the front of the home. The
front of the property will be considered the pool elevation of the lake which
is 989 feet above mean sea level. The rear is to be designated that portion of
the property that abuts a designated right-of-way used for public
transportation. The minimum lot width at the street right-of-way line shall be
80 feet.
   (F)   B-1 (Light Commercial) District. This district has been established to
allow single or planned integrated groupings of retail businesses. This
includes retail convenience and comparison goods stores that offer personal and
professional services within the city and surrounding area.
   (G)   B-2 (Heavy Commercial) District. This district has been established to
provide for and to accommodate heavy commercial uses in the fields of repair,
storage, wholesaling and distribution, free from the encroachment of
residential uses. The uses allowed are those which, because of their normally
unobjectionable characteristics, can be in relatively close proximity to
residential and commercial districts.
   (H)   I-1 (Light Industrial) District. This district has been established to
provide for and to accommodate clean manufacturing activities in an industrial
park setting. This setting shall be developed so that it shall not diminish the
natural landscape and beauty of the surrounding areas. This district shall be
free from encroachment of residential, commercial, retail and institutional
uses so that it may develop for purely industrially oriented purposes.
Activities that produce significant quantities of hazardous substances are
specifically prohibited as regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency.
   (I)   I-2 (Manufacturing and Storage) District. This district has been
established to provide for industrial, storage and uses which may have external
physical effects which will negatively impact surrounding areas. Activities
that produce significant quantities of hazardous substances are specifically
prohibited as regulated by the Environmental Protection Agency.
   (J)   CH (Canal Heritage Overlay) District.
      (1)   This district has been established to preserve and protect the
traditional character of the Ohio-Erie Canal Corridor which is characterized by
         (a)   Natural open space;
         (b)   Support of commercial activities which accommodate visitors and
which are consistent with the character of the corridor; and
         (c)   The maintenance of the rustic and rural look of the area with
small buildings, natural development and existing landscaping preservation of
existing landscaping.
      (2)   This district endeavors to protect and promote the educational,
cultural and general welfare of the public through the restoration,
preservation and protection of the traditional character of the Ohio Erie Canal
Corridor by limiting development to those uses which are consistent with the
preservation of the area, will serve to benefit the area.
   (K)   HOD (Historic Overlay) District. The Historic Overlay District is a
predominately late Victorian and Edwardian residential district built almost
entirely between 1875 and 1915, with houses including, but not limited to, the
Second Empire, Queen Anne, Eastlake and shingle styles, Richardsonian
Romanesque, Chateauesque, Georgian Revival, Renaissance Revival and Neo-
Classical Revival styles.
      (1)   It is the general purpose of the Historical Overlay District to
safeguard the heritage of certain identified parcels, groups of structures,
neighborhoods or other areas in the historic areas of the city through the
preservation, protection and enhancement of land uses that reflect the area’s
history and provide the neighborhood with its unique and desired character.
      (2)   Specific purposes of the HOD are to: preserve site and structures
representing the area’s legacy; stabilize and improve property values;
strengthen the economy of the city; protect and enhance the area’s attractions
to residents, tourists and visitors; enhance the visual and aesthetic
character, diversity and interest of the city; foster civic pride in the
notable accomplishments of the past; and to promote the future preservation of
the identified Historic Overlay District for education and the general welfare.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.061 ZONING MAP AND INTERPRETATION OF BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The districts and their boundary lines are indicated upon a map
entitled “Zoning Districts Map of the City of New Franklin, Ohio”. The said
districts map together with all notations, references, and other matters shown
thereon are hereby incorporated declared a part of this Zoning Code.
   (B)   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the
aforesaid districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall
apply.
      (1)   Where boundaries approximately follow streets, alleys or highways.
Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
centerline or right-of-way line of streets, the centerline or alley line of
alleys, or the centerline or right-of-way lines of highways, such lines shall
be construed to be such district boundaries.
      (2)   Where boundaries parallel street right-of-way lines, alley lines or
highway right-of-way lines. Where district boundaries are so indicated that
they are approximately parallel to the centerlines or right-of-way lines of
streets, the centerlines or alley lines of alleys, or the centerlines or right-
of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being
parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the map. If no
distance is given; such dimensions shall be determined by the use of the scale
shown on said zoning map.
      (3)   Vacation of public ways. Whenever any street or public way is
vacated in the manner authorized by law the Zoning Districts adjoining each
side of the street or public way shall be automatically extended to the center
of such vacations and all area included in the vacation shall thereafter be
subject to all regulations of the extended zoning districts.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL LAND USES
§ 156.075 LAND USE MATRIX.
   (A)   Permitted uses. The Zoning Administrator shall issue zoning
certificates for applications for permitted land uses indicated with a “P” in
the following table subject to finding that the proposed land use meets all
requirements of this Zoning Code.
   (B)   Conditional uses. The Zoning Administrator shall issue conditional use
zoning certificates for conditional land uses indicated with a “C” in the
following table subject to the approval of the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals
and general and specific requirements contained in this Zoning Code.
   (C)   Prohibited uses. If a use is not specified in this section, it shall
be considered prohibited until, by amendment; such uses are written into these
regulations, or by interpretation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, such
use is determined to be reasonably similar to another use permitted or
conditionally permitted herein.
Land Use Categories
 C-D R-1 R-2 R-3 R-L B-1 B-2 I-1 I-2
Land Use Categories
                                                                            C- R- R- R- R- B- B- I- I-
                                                                            D  1  2  3  L  1  2  1  2
Residential Uses:
   Single-family dwelling                                                P  P  P  P  P  P
   Two-family dwelling                                                         P  P
   Three-family dwelling                                                          C
   Four- or more family dwelling                                                  C     C
   Bed and breakfast residence                                           C           C  C  C
   Bed and breakfast inn                                                             C  C  C
   Child day care center and child day care home type A                                 C  C
   Model home                                                            C  C  C  C  C
   Conservation subdivision                                              P  P  P  P  P
Office, Professional Service Uses:
   Professional service providers such as doctor, dentist, accountant,                  P  P
attorney
   Real estate and insurance agency                                                     P  P
   Office business park                                                                       P
Retail and Service Uses:
   Retail sales establishment such as appliance store; clothing and apparel
store; department store; drug store; electrical supply store; food sales,
including supermarkets; furniture store; variety store; piece goods store;                 P  P
radio, television, music store; paint, glass, wallpaper, hardware store;
jewelry store; hobby and toy shop; camera and photography store; florist
and gift shop
   Personal service establishments such as barber and beauty shop; optical
goods store and service; shoe repair shop; tailor and dressmaker;                          P  P
laundromat; dry cleaning and laundry agency
   Bank and drive-in banking facility                                                   P  P
   Delicatessen, meat market, dairy store                                               P  P
   Preparation and processing of food and drink to be retailed on the
premises (bakery, confectionery, restaurant, ice cream parlor, soda                        P  P
fountain, tavern)
   Pet supply store                                                                     P  P
   Carpenter, cabinet upholstering, plumbing, heating, roofing, air                     P  P
conditioning, sign painting, painting, and other similar establishment
   Tractor and lawn mower repair                                                        P  P  P
   Drive-in and drive-thru eating establishment                                         C  C
   Motel                                                                                C  C
   Kennel                                                                                  C  C
   Musical instruments, toys, novelties, rubber or metal stamps, and other              P  P
small rubber products (cleaning, servicing, testing or repair).
   Pottery and figurines (cleaning, servicing, testing, or repair)                      P  P
   Electrical and electric appliances, instruments and devices, computers,
electronics, television sets, radios, household appliances (cleaning,                      P  P
servicing, testing or repair)
   Sexually oriented business                                                                 P
   Funeral homes                                                                        P  P
   Marine related land use                                                              C  C  C  C
Vehicular Services:
   New vehicle agency (used vehicles an accessory use)                                  P  P
   Used vehicle agency                                                                  C  C
   Off-street public parking lot and garage                                             C  P  P
   Gasoline filling station                                                             C  C
   Machinery and equipment repair services, including repair garages, and
motor, body and fender, radiator, motor tune-ups, muffler shops, tire                         C  C
repairing sales and service including vulcanizing and towing
Recreational, Entertainment Uses:
   Indoor commercial recreational                                                       C  C
   Outdoor commercial recreational                                                      C  C
Storage and Distribution:
   Plant greenhouse                                                                     P  P  P
   Warehousing of bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals,
toiletries, food products (except fish or meat products, sauerkraut, yeast                    P  P
and rendering or refining of fats or oils) wood, glass, and similar
materials
   Wholesale establishment                                                                 P  P
   Building materials, sales yard and lumberyard including millwork                           P  P
performed within a completely enclosed building.
   Contractor’s equipment storage yard or plant, or storage and rental of                   P  P
equipment commonly used by contractors
   Fuel, food and goods distribution station, warehouse, and storage                          P  P
(excluding coal and coke)
   Public storage garage and yard                                                       C  C  P  P
   Motor freight garage, truck, or transfer terminal, office, warehousing,                    C  P
and storage
   Mini-storage facility                                                                C  P  P
Industrial, Manufacturing Facilities:
   Industrial parks                                                                           C
   Products from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas,
cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather,
plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, metal (except where                        C  P
presses over 20 tons rated capacity are employed), shell, textiles,
tobacco, wax wood (where saw and planning mills are used within a
completely enclosed building), yarns
   Electric and neon signs, billboards and other commercial advertising                       P  P
structures
   Laboratories and processing - experimental, film or testing                                C  P
   Bag, carpet and rug cleaning, provided necessary equipment is installed                    P  P
and operated for the effective precipitation or recovery of dust
   Welding, or other metal working shops, including machine shop operations                   C  P
or the tool, die, and gauge types, including sheet metal
   Foundry, casting lightweight non-ferrous metals                                            C  P
   Ice manufacturing and cold storage plant, creamery and bottling plant                      P  P
   Laundry, cleaning and dyeing plant                                                         P  P
   Stone or monument works                                                                    P  P
Community Facilities:
   Religious land use                                                    C  C  C  C  C  P  P  C
   Veterinarian hospital or clinic                                                         C
   Cemetery                                                              C  C  C        P  P
   Governmentally or privately owned and/or operated picnic area,
playground, private park, swimming facility, golf course, tennis club,
country club, riding academy and other similar recreational facility or use C  C  C  C  C  C  C
(excluding drive-in theater, miniature golf course, golf driving range,
rifle range, skeet shooting range, pistol range)
   Governmentally or privately owned and/or operated park, recreational
area, and campground where camping in tents, trailers and other vehicles,
cabins, or lodges is permitted by fee, membership or otherwise, and for     C  C  C  C  C  C  C
overnight or longer periods of time, and day camp, summer camp, health
camp, and other type of outdoor facility and/or recreationally-oriented use
which involves facilities for group activity and accommodation
   Governmental owned and/or operated facility                           C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C  C
   Public and parochial school                                              C  C  C     C  C
   Institution for higher education                                                     C  C
   Quasi-public, institutionally or organizationally owned and/or operated
recreational, instructional, and meeting facility, such as those developed              C  C  C
and used by the YMCA, YWCA, Boy Scout or various fraternal or community
service groups
   Health care facility                                                                 C  C
   Wildlife refuge and game preserve                                     P
Other Uses:
   Public utility rights-of-way and pertinent structure                  C  C  C  C  C  P  P  P  P
 
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 17-O-01, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 17-O-02,
passed 8-2-2017)
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
§ 156.090 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   Regulations contained in this subchapter as well as land use and district
regulations in the following subchapters shall generally apply to all
development.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.091 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS MATRIX BY DISTRICT.
Lot Requirements                   Yard Requirements
                  Minimum                          Minimum         Minimum
          Minimum Lot     Minimum  Minimum Minimum Side    Maximum Floor   Other
Zoning    Lot     Width   Lot      Front   Rear    Yard    Bldg    Area    Requirements
Districts Area    at Bldg Frontage Yard    Yard    Width   Height  (sq.    (1)
          per     Line    (ft.)    Depth   Depth   on Each (ft.)   ft.)
          Unit    (ft.)            (ft.)   (ft.)   Side
                                                   (ft.)
Lot Requirements                         Yard Requirements
                        Minimum                          Minimum         Minimum
                        Lot     Minimum  Minimum Minimum Side    Maximum Floor   Other
Zoning   Minimum Lot    Width   Lot      Front   Rear    Yard    Bldg    Area    Requirements
DistrictsArea per Unit  at Bldg Frontage Yard    Yard    Width   Height  (sq.    (1)
                        Line    (ft.)    Depth   Depth   on Each (ft.)   ft.)
                        (ft.)            (ft.)   (ft.)   Side
                                                         (ft.)
                                                                         See
C-D      5 acres        300     300      100     50      25      35      foot-
                                                                         note
                                                                         (2)
                                                                         See
R-1      2 acres        120     120      70      50      20      35      foot-
                                                                         note
                                                                         (2)
  S-F   Without 1 acre 100     100
         sewer
                                                                         See
R- S-F   With    1/     80      80       70      50      15      35      foot-
2        sewer   2 acre                                                  note
                                                                         (2)
                 2
  2-F   Without acres  160     160
         sewer   per
                 bldg.
         With    1 acre
  2-F   sewer   per    120     120
                 bldg.
  S-F   Without 1 acre
         sewer
         With    15,000 80      80
  S-F   sewer   sq.
                 ft.
                 1-1/
  2-F   Without 2 acre
         sewer   per
                 bldg.  110     110
                 20,000                                                  See
R- 2-F   With    sq.                     45      20      10      40      foot-
3        sewer   ft.                                                     note
                                                                         (3)
                 2-1/
  3-F   Without 2 ac.
         sewer   per
                 bldg.  140     140
         With    30,000
  3-F   sewer   sq.
                 ft.
                 3
  4-F   Without acres
         sewer   per    200     200
                 bldg.
  4-F   With    1 ac.
         sewer   (5)
                                                                         See
R- S-F   Without 1 acre 100     100      50      25      15      35      foot-
L        sewer                                                           note
                                                                         (2)
  S-F   With    1/     80      80
         sewer   2 acre
B-1      3/4            100     100      50      50      15      35      N/A
B-2      1              125     125      50      50      15      35      N/A
                                                 30 plus 1                       50% of lot
                                                 additional ft.                  area
I-1      N/A            150     150      50      for each ft. of 40      N/A     required as
                                                 building height                 minimum
                                                 in excess of 30                 useable open
                                                 ft. (6)                         space
                                                 30 plus 1
                                                 additional ft.
I-2      1 acre         150     150      50      for each ft. of 75      N/A      
                                                building height
                                                 in excess of 30
                                                 ft. (6)
Footnotes to Development Standards Matrix:
(1)   Other requirements shall include off-street parking, landscaping, signage and other
specified development standards contained in separate articles of this Zoning Code.
(2)   The following minimum floor area shall be required per family for each specified
dwelling size:
   1 BR dwelling: 700 sq. ft.; 2 BR dwelling 1,100 sq. ft.; 3 BR dwelling: 1,400 sq. ft.; 4
BR dwelling: 1,700 sq. ft.; 5 or more BR dwelling: 2,000 sq. ft.
(3)   The following minimum floor area shall be required per family for each specified
dwelling size (dwelling type: single-family and two-family)
   1 BR dwelling: 1,000 sq. ft.; 2 BR dwelling 1,200 sq. ft.; 3 BR dwelling: 1,400 sq. ft.; 4
BR dwelling: 1,700 sq. ft.; 5 or more BR dwelling: 2,000 sq. ft.
(4)   Each dwelling unit shall have the use of a minimum lot area of 5,000 sq. ft.
(5)   The minimum rear yard depth shall be 150 feet when such yard is adjacent to a
residential district.
(6)   Properties adjacent to the Nimisila Reservoir shall maintain a minimum front yard
setback of 100 feet. This front yard shall remain tree-covered to provide a visual barrier
from the street and the lake.
 
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.092 SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Lot requirements. Flag lots: future creation of flag lots shall be
discouraged, and must be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission and
approved as a variance by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   Required yards.
      (1)   Projections into yard areas. Every part of a required yard shall be
open to the sky, unobstructed, except as follows:
         (a)   In a rear yard:
            1.   Accessory buildings and accessory structures (subject to
requirements of §
156.125); and
            2.   Bay windows and other cantilevered structures may project into
the required rear and front yards no greater than two feet.
         (b)   In a side yard:
            1.   Terraces, decks and ornamental features which do not extend
more than three feet above the level of the ground (first) story, provided they
be distant at least two feet from the adjacent lot line; and
            2.   Accessory buildings and accessory structures (subject to
requirements of §
156.125).
         (c)   In a front yard:
            1.   An open uncovered porch or paved terrace may project in the
required front yard no greater than ten feet; and
            2.   Accessory buildings and accessory structures (Subject to
requirements of §
156.125).
         (d)   In any yard:
            1.   The ordinary projections of chimneys or flues; and
            2.   The ordinary projections of skylights, sills, belt-courses,
corbels, cornices and ornamental features projecting no greater than 12 inches.
      (2)   Computing lots, yards, and open space area for a building. No space
which, for the purpose of a building, has been counted or calculated as part of
a side yard, rear yard, front yard or other open space required by these
regulations may, by reason of change in ownership or for any other building.
      (3)   Varying front yard setbacks in residential districts. In a C-D, R-
1, R-2 or R-3 Zoning Districts where the average depth of at least two existing
front yards on lots within 200 feet of the lot in question and within the same
block front is less or greater than the least front yard depth prescribed
elsewhere in these regulations, the required depth of the front yard on such
lot may be modified. In such case, this shall not be less than the average
depth of said existing front yards on the two lots immediately adjoining, or,
in the case of a corner lot, the depth of the front yard on any lot shall not
be less than 25 feet and need not exceed 100 feet. In the R-L (Residential
Lakefront) District this regulation shall apply only upon approval by the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
      (4)   Corner lots.
         (a)   Corner lots in all districts are required to have the minimum
front yard requirements, as indicated in that district, facing each street.
         (b)   No obstruction in excess of two feet in height shall be placed
on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street right-of-way
lines and a line connecting them at points 30 feet from the intersection of the
street lines, except that street trees are permitted which are pruned at least
eight feet above the established grade of the roadway so as not to obstruct
clear view by motor vehicle drivers.
      (5)   Cul-de-sac lots. Lots that have frontage on a cul-de-sac circle
shall have a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet in all zoning districts.
      (6)   Flag and irregularly-shaped lots (with less than the required
minimum lot frontage).
         (a)   Structures shall only be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered on legal nonconforming flag or irregular-
shaped lots as permitted within this Zoning Code.
   REQUIRED SETBACKS ON A FLAG LOT/IRREGULARLY SHAPED LOT
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1650.png]
 
         (b)   Where “minimum lot width at building line” is not possible
within the “minimum front yard depth” due to lot dimensions, the building line
shall be revised to include a setback equal to the “minimum side yard width” or
equal to the proposed building height (whichever is greater) from the point
where the “minimum lot width at building line” can be achieved. A side lot line
shall be considered anything that is not a rear or front lot line (with street
frontage).
         (c)   Accessory buildings on flag and irregularly shaped lots shall be
setback from the property line per §
156.125(A)(5) for side and rear setbacks, but shall not be required to be set
back as far as the front wall of the principal building per §
156.125(A)(4).
   (C)   Permitted height exceptions (except agricultural-related structures).
See §
156.127.
      (1)   Except as specifically stated in other parts of these regulations,
no structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally allowed to exceed the height limit established for the district in
which the building is located, except that penthouse or roof structures for the
housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment
required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls,
skylights, towers, steeples, stage lofts and screens, flagpoles, chimneys,
smokestacks, radio and television aerials, wireless masts, water tanks or
similar structures may be erected above the height limits herein.
         (a)   No such structure may be erected to exceed by more than 20 feet
the height limits of the district in which it is located.
         (b)   No such structure shall have a total area greater than 25% of
the roof area of the building.
         (c)   No such structure shall be used for any purpose other than a use
incidental to the main use of the building.
         (d)   Public or quasi-public buildings, when permitted in a district,
may be erected to a height not to exceed 45 feet, except that churches and
temples may be erected to a height not to exceed 75 feet if the building is set
back from each yard line at least one foot for each one foot of additional
building height above the height limit otherwise provided in the zoning
district in which the building is located.
         (e)   Such structure shall be set back from side yard line at least
one foot for each one foot of structure height.
   (D)   Principal building. No more than one dwelling shall be permitted on
any lot unless otherwise specifically stated in these regulations and every
dwelling shall be located on a lot having required frontage on a public street,
except when permitted in a conservation subdivision.
   (E)   Temporary buildings. Temporary buildings for use incidental to
construction work may be erected in any of the zone districts herein
established, however, such temporary building or buildings shall be removed
upon the completion or abandonment of the construction work. Construction work
shall be considered abandoned if no construction work is performed for a period
of 60 consecutive days.
   (F)   Compliance with building regulations and health code regulations. All
structures shall comply with the standards and requirements of the building
regulations adopted and administered by the Summit County Building Department
and shall comply with the standards and requirements of the health code
regulations administered by the County Public Health Department.
   (G)   Conversions of dwellings to more than one unit. An existing dwelling
unit may not be converted to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units
unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The conversion is in compliance with all other local codes and
ordinances, and any applicable state or federal regulations;
      (2)   The zoning district within which the residence is located is so
regulated as to allow such an increase in dwelling units;
      (3)   The yard dimensions still meet the yard dimensions required by this
Zoning Code for new structures in that zoning district;
      (4)   The lot area per family equals the lot area requirements for new
structures in that district;
      (5)   The floor area per dwelling unit is not reduced to less than that
which is required for new construction in that district; and
      (6)   The conversion is in compliance with all other relevant codes and
ordinances.
   LUMINAIRE WITH LESS THAN 90 DEGREE CUTOFF
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/62c240dd69d6366f9d0d8fe9669835107bb76764/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1648.png]
 
   (H)   Lighting regulations. All lighting in all zoning districts shall be
controlled in such a way as to not shine up into the sky or onto any
neighboring properties. Light sources shall be fully shielded and shall feature
sharp cutoff capability so as to minimize up-light, spill-light, glare and to
minimize light trespass onto adjacent property.
      (1)   Where used for security purposes or to illuminate walkways,
roadways, equipment yards and parking lots, only fully shielded light fixtures
shall be utilized.
      (2)   Where used for signs or for decorative effects or recreational
facilities, such as for building or landscape illumination, the outdoor light
fixtures shall be equipped with automatic timing devices and shielded and
focused to minimize light trespass.
      (3)   All outdoor light fixtures installed and maintained upon private
property shall be turned off between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except when used
for security purposes or to illuminate walkways, roadways, equipment yards and
parking lots.
      (4)   All outdoor light pole fixtures, except for ball field lighting,
shall not exceed a maximum height of 16 feet in residential zoning districts
and 30 feet in commercial and industrial districts. Ball field lighting may
exceed 30 feet in height but shall be so designed to minimize light trespass
onto adjacent properties.
      (5)   All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the
combustion of fossil fuels, (such as kerosene lanterns or gas lamps), all low-
voltage lighting rated 24 volts or less and holiday lighting shall be exempt
from the requirements of this section.
      (6)   Island canopy ceiling light fixtures shall be recessed so that
direct light cannot radiate onto adjacent properties or roadways.
      (7)   In addition to the provisions of this subchapter, all outdoor light
fixtures shall be installed in conformity with all other applicable provisions
of this chapter.
      (8)   Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility and
their limited hours of operation, ball diamonds, playing fields, tennis courts
and other similar outdoor public and commercial recreational uses are exempt
from these lighting regulations, except that such uses must meet the following
standards.
         (a)   The outdoor recreational uses (ball diamonds, playing field and
tennis courts) may exceed a total cutoff angle of 90 degrees, provided that the
luminaire is shielded to prevent light and glare spillover to adjacent
residential property.
         (b)   Exterior lighting shall be extinguished no later than 11:00 p.m.
   (I)   Home sales. Home sale means a sale of personal property, which is not
produced upon the premises, to the general public, conducted in or on any
portion of residential premises within a residential zoning district, and
includes, but is not limited to all sales entitled “garage sale”, “lawn sale”,
“yard sale”, “patio sale”, “attic sale”, “room sale”, “carport sale”, “basement
sale”, “driveway sale”, “flea market sale”, “rummage sale” or the like.
      (1)   General restrictions. No person, firm or corporation shall conduct
a home sale within the city in violation of the following regulations:
         (a)   No home sale shall be conducted on the same residential premises
for longer than three consecutive days;
         (b)   After each three-day duration, all items incident to the sale,
including signage, shall be removed and stored indoors;
         (c)   No more than three home sales shall be conducted on the same
residential premises during any calendar year; and
         (d)   One sign permitted as per §
156.224(C)(15).
      (2)   Exceptions. The home sale provisions shall not apply to or affect
the following.
         (a)   Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court
of competent jurisdiction;
         (b)   Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as
public officials;
         (c)   Any person selling an item or items of personal property
publicized solely by classified newspaper advertising which describes or
identifies the specific item or items offered for sale and does not designate
the date, hours, or location of the sale other than by stating the name,
address or telephone number of the seller;
         (d)   Any sale conducted by any merchant or mercantile or other
business establishment from or at a place of business wherein such sale would
be permitted by the Zoning Code of the city or under the protection of the
nonconforming use section thereof;
         (e)   Any bona fide corporations not for profit, churches, temples,
schools, fraternities, sororities, associations, clubs, lodges, and
educational, cultural or governmental institutions or organizations;
         (f)   Any sale conducted by an auctioneer, not living on or owning the
property at which the sale is being held, and having a license issued by the
Department of Commerce of the state; and
         (g)   The sale of agricultural-related products.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 13-O-02, passed 9-4-2013; Ord. 13-O-01,
passed 11-6-2013)
NONCONFORMING USE REGULATIONS
§ 156.105 PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to R.C. § 713.15, the purpose of this section is to provide for the
continuation of legal, nonconforming land uses that do not conform to the
existing zoning, but which were in operation prior to the enactment of this
Zoning Code or amendments thereto, and to provide for their discontinuance upon
certain conditions. It is the legislative intent of the city to discourage the
survival of nonconforming uses, to prevent their unreasonable enlargement or
expansion, and to minimize their establishment elsewhere in the same district.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.106 CONTINUANCE.
   The lawful use of any structure or land existing at the effective date of
this Zoning Code or amendments thereto may be continued, although such use does
not conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code.
   (A)   Change of tenancy, ownership or management. Nothing is this Zoning
Code shall prohibit the completion or construction and use of a nonconforming
structure where there is a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any
existing nonconforming uses of land, of structures or of structures and land in
combination.
   (B)   Preexisting applications.
      (1)   Any zoning application filed with the township, village or city and
determined to be fully complete prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code
shall be regulated, even if submitted as a phased project, by the terms and
conditions of the recorded plats, development text, standards or regulations
that were in place at the time the application was determined to be fully
complete. If such application is no longer required by the terms of this Zoning
Code, the application will be dismissed.
      (2)   If a proposed development or use requires additional approvals
pursuant to the terms of this Zoning Code that were not required under the
previous Zoning Code, the application will be amended and revised to bring the
entire proposed development into complete compliance with the Zoning Code.
   (C)   Completion of nonconforming use. Nothing in this Zoning Code shall
prohibit the completion of construction and use of a nonconforming structure
provided that each of the following events shall have occurred:
      (1)   A lawful zoning certificate was issued by the city and is still
valid;
      (2)   Actual construction was approved and lawfully begun prior to the
effective date of this Zoning Code, or any amendment thereto;
      (3)   Construction is carried on diligently for a continuous period and
without interruption exceeding 30 days; and
      (4)   The entire building is completed within two years after the
issuance of the zoning certificate.
   (D)   Legal nonconforming lots. If a parcel or subdivision was approved as a
buildable lot by the Zoning Administrator, the Planning and Zoning Commission,
or the Board of Zoning Appeals prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code,
a building and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any such single
lot of record after the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning
Code subject to any yard requirement variances which may be obtained through
approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals. This provision shall apply even though
such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are
generally applicable in the district; provided that:
      (1)   The lot has been platted and held in single and separated ownership
prior to nonconformance;
      (2)   The land use was legal at the time this Zoning Code or amendment
came into effect;
      (3)   A valid, nonconforming use permit has been issued for the property;
and
      (4)   Any legal nonconforming lot of record, including corner lots, or
lot for which a land contract has been issued or any lot within an unrecorded
allotment of which at least one-half of said lots are of record or have been
sold on land contract on the effective date of these regulations, may be used
for a single-family dwelling irrespective of the area, depth, or width of said
lot such that:
         (a)   The width of the side yard of any such lot need not exceed 10%
of the width of the lot, provided, however, that in no instance shall the
minimum dimensions of the side yards be less than five feet;
         (b)   The depth of the rear yard need not exceed 20% of the depth of
the lot, provided, however, that in no instance shall the minimum dimensions of
the rear yard be less than 20 feet respectively; and
         (c)   Yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area, or
width, or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in
which such lot is located.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.107 DISCONTINUANCE OR ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued or abandoned for a
continuous period of six months or more, any further use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this Zoning Code. Land and structures occupied by
seasonal or agricultural uses shall be exempted from this provision unless the
nonconforming use has been discontinued or abandoned for a period of two years.
   (B)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in
combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the
nonconforming status of the land.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.108 RESTORATION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   Where a previously legal, nonconforming land use has been found to be a
nuisance, it shall not be reestablished as a legal nonconforming use.
   (A)   Where a permit is granted in violation of this Zoning Code, there
shall be no valid restoration of a nonconforming use.
   (B)   Uses that are merely incidental to the main, legal, nonconforming use
on a property shall not qualify for restoration with legal, nonconforming
status.
   (C)   The existence of a legal, nonconforming use on a portion on a parcel
or on adjacent parcels shall not impart legality of the use on the whole parcel
or all adjacent parcels when the use had not previously been used in that
manner.
   (D)   The right of a landowner to maintain a legal, nonconforming use shall
be restricted to the subject parcel and shall not be transferable to another
parcel.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.109 RECONSTRUCTION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prevent the reconstruction,
repairing, rebuilding and continued use of any legal nonconforming building or
structure damaged by fire, collapse, explosion, or acts of God, subsequent to
the date of this Zoning Code.
   (B)   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall be deemed to prevent the
strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof
declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public
safety, upon order of such official.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.110 EXTENSION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   A legal, nonconforming use of a structure, a legal, nonconforming use of
land, or a legal, nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be
altered, improved, extended or enlarged after passage of this Zoning Code,
except that extension or expansion of nonconformities shall be permitted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals subject to the following conditions.
   (A)   The extension or expansion shall not exceed 50% of the cubic feet of
volume of such structure or square feet of land area of the use as originally
existed at the time such use became legally nonconforming.
   (B)   Only one such 50% extension, enlargement, alteration or addition
involving the same premises shall ever be permitted unless the building or
structure is changed to a conforming use.
   (C)   Setbacks appropriate to the nature of the nonconforming use are
maintained.
   (D)   The extension or expansion cannot reasonably be expected to adversely
affect adjacent conforming uses by reducing the market value of such adjacent
property, by interfering with ingress and egress thereto, or obstructing its
existing light and air. The burden of establishing such probable injury shall
be upon the adjacent property owner or user and in the absence of satisfactory
evidence, no injury to adjacent property shall be presumed by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
   (E)   No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use.
   (F)   In permitting such change, the Board of Zoning Appeals may require
conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this Zoning
Code.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.111 SUBSTITUTION OF NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   A legal, nonconforming land use shall not generally acquire or impart
legality for a major change of use to any other proposed nonconforming use or
combination of uses.
   (B)   A legal, nonconforming land use may be changed to another
nonconforming land use provided that the proposed nonconforming use is in less
conflict with character and use of the district than the existing nonconforming
use as determined by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (C)   Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land
in combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it shall not
thereafter be changed to a less conforming use.
   (D)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a
nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to
the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the
nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
SUPPLEMENTAL LAND USE REGULATIONS
§ 156.125 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND USES.
   (A) General accessory building and accessory structure requirements and/or
uses. Accessory buildings and accessory structures which are not attached to
the principal building, on a lot, shall be:
      (1)   Permitted in conservation subdivisions on a lot of less than three-
fourths acres in size with a size limitation of 144 square feet. Otherwise, all
accessory building and accessory structure regulations shall apply;
      (2)   Permitted in the R-L (Residential Lakefront) District in accordance
with the following:
         (a)   Due to the undulating character of the shoreline, all accessory
buildings and accessory structures in the R-L (Residential Lakefront) District
shall be subject to review and approval by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
Board of Zoning Appeals shall review all accessory buildings and structures
with regards to the following considerations:
            1.   Whether the accessory building or structure is in harmony with
the general purpose, spirit and intent of the Zoning Code;
            2.   The accessory building or structure will not adversely affect
the delivery of government services;
            3.   Whether the accessory building or structure would require a
variance in any other residential Zoning District;
            4.   Allowing the accessory building or structure will not alter
the essential character of the locality or substantially impair environmental
quality, property values or public safety or welfare in the vicinity;
            5.   Whether the accessory building or structure is necessary for
the applicant to enjoy a substantial property right possessed by other
properties in the same Zoning District and does not confer a special privilege
ordinarily denied to other properties in the district; and
            6.   Whether the accessory building or structure is necessary, not
because it will increase the applicant’s economic return, although it may have
this effect, but because without a variance the applicant will be deprived of
beneficial use or enjoyment of, or reasonable economic return from the
property.
         (b)   The above guidelines are meant to assist the Board of Zoning
Appeals and are neither exclusive, nor all inclusive. Each request is to be
viewed in terms of its own circumstances;
         (c)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, an R-L property owner is
permitted to have one accessory building or structure no greater than four feet
in height, four feet in width and four feet in length without review by the
Board of Zoning Appeals. The permitted structure however does require a zoning
permit; and
         (d)   Otherwise, all accessory building and accessory structure
regulations shall apply.
      (3)   Located no closer than ten feet from any other building or
structure on the same parcel (this applies to distances between accessory
buildings only);
      (4)   Accessory buildings and accessory structures, except fences, shall
be built not closer than five feet of the rear and side lot lines. (Refer to
division (G) of this section (General Fence, Wall and Hedge Regulations));
      (5)   Designed so that storm water does not drain onto adjacent property;
      (6)   Subordinate to the principal building in length, width and height;
      (7)   Not to exceed 20 feet in height to the peak of the structure (see
definition of “building, height” under § 156.246);
      (8)   A style, siding, color and roof pitch similar to the principal
building;
      (9)   Not constructed of canvas, fabric, tarp or mesh material;
      (10)   Permitted structures shall be securely mounted on a permanent
foundation and be engineered to withstand 50 mph winds; and
      (11)   On lots of less than two acres, a maximum of one detached garage
and one storage building may be built according to division (B) of this
section.
   (B)   Private residential, accessory garage or carport.
      (1)   Attached garages. A garage is considered attached to the dwelling
when its structural members are permanently attached to the dwelling. The
maximum size of attached garages shall be as follows:
         (a)   For dwellings with living space up to 2,400 square feet shall be
1,000 square feet; and
         (b)   For dwellings with living space greater than 2,400 square feet
shall be 33% of the living space of the dwelling.
      (2)   Detached garages. No more than one detached garage or carport may
be built in a side or rear yard of any lot, except as permitted elsewhere in
this Zoning Code. A detached private garage or carport shall:
         (a)   Not exceed 1,000 square feet in size; and
         (b)   Be allowed a second-story for non-living space purposes only.
      (3)   Nonconforming garages. A nonconforming garage may be replaced under
these regulations, without going before the Board of Zoning Appeals and, in
fact, may be increased in size by 50%, provided that it shall be no larger than
1,000 square feet.
   (C)   Storage building.
      (1)   A storage building shall not exceed 400 square feet. No more than
one allowed per lot.
      (2)   Shall have minimum side yard and rear yard setbacks not less than
five feet or not be located closer to the required front yard setback than the
front wall of the principal building;
      (3)   No more than one storage building may be built in a side or rear
yard of any lot, except as permitted elsewhere in this Zoning Code;
      (4)   (a)   Generally. Portable storage units are not permitted as a
principal permitted use, permitted accessory use or as a conditional use in any
zoning districts except when used in the following situations.
         (b)   Temporary construction sites.
            1.   When necessary to facilitate clean-up and/or restoration
activities resulting from a natural disaster of fire of flood for a period of
not more than 180 days provided that a zoning certificate is obtained from the
Zoning and Planning Department; and
            2.   When the occupant of the property is relocating, a portable
storage unit may be located on the property for a period not to exceed 30
consecutive days and not more than twice per year, provided that a zoning
certificate is obtained from the Zoning and Planning Department and that the
unit is not placed in the public street, road, alley or public right-of-way.
      (5)   Storage of hazardous materials is prohibited.
   (D)   Additional accessory building.
      (1)   On a lot of two acres in size or greater, accessory buildings as
listed in division (A)(11) of this section, and, one additional accessory
building shall be permitted.
      (2)   The additional accessory building shall be as follows:
         (a)   When two acres to five acres in lot size: 1,200 square feet
maximum;
         (b)   When five acres to ten acres in lot size: 2,400 square feet
maximum; and
         (c)   When ten acres or greater in lot size: 3,600 square feet
maximum.
   (E)   Satellite television antenna. Satellite television antennas are
permitted as accessory structures in all zoning districts and shall be subject
to any permits required for an accessory building, except for those of one
meter or less in diameter shall not require a permit.
      (1)   Roof-mounted satellite television antennas requiring permits shall
be permitted in commercial, industrial and multi-family residential zoning
districts only.
      (2)   Roof mounted antennas shall not exceed more than ten feet above the
height limit established for the zone in which the structure is located.
   (F)   Projections of exterior ornamental features. See §
156.092(B)(1) (Projections into Yard Areas).
   (G)   General fence, wall, and hedge requirements. (Except for agricultural
uses, see §
156.127.)
      (1)   Regulations applicable to all zoning districts.
         (a)   Visibility at corner lots: no obstruction to view in excess of
two feet in height shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area
formed by the street right-of-way lines and a line connecting them at points 30
feet from the intersection of the street lines, except that street trees are
permitted which are pruned at least eight feet above the established grade of
the roadway so as not to obstruct clear view by motor vehicle drivers.
         (b)   Fences, walls and hedges shall be well maintained and will be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing character of the
immediate area in which it is to be located, and will not be hazardous to
existing neighboring uses.
         (c)   No sharp wire or points shall project from the top, either side,
end or bottom of any fence.
         (d)   No electrified fence or fence containing broken glass, barbed
wire, scrap materials or any other substance reasonably calculated to do bodily
harm shall be permitted in any zoning district without the express approval of
the Board of Zoning Appeals.
         (e)   No wall, fence or hedge shall be placed on top of a berm or
earth form that is higher than 18 inches.
         (f)   When walls or fences are used to fulfill screening requirements,
they shall be detailed on the landscaping plan. They are to be of weather-proof
materials. This includes pressure treating or painting of lumber if it is not
redwood or cedar and using aluminum or galvanized hardware.
         (g)   No fence or wall shall be constructed in any platted no-build
zone, conservation/ no disturb zone, floodway, floodplain or drainage easement
for any parcel or subdivision which would be detrimental to the public health
and safety. A fence or wall shall not be located so as to adversely affect the
vision of drivers on the public streets or from driveways intersecting public
streets.
         (h)   Supporting members for fences and walls shall be located inside
of the fenced or wall area away from the adjoining property unless the fence is
designed such that the supporting members are identical in appearance on both
sides of the fence or wall. In any case, all supporting members for fences and
walls shall be located on the fence owner’s property.
         (i)   All portions of the property shall remain accessible from
outside the fence area by means of a gate or other opening.
         (j)   The height of a fence shall be measured from the established
grade line to the highest point of the fence including posts and finials. The
height of the fence in a side or rear yard may not be artificially increased by
the use of mounding unless otherwise required by this subchapter.
         (k)   Chain link fences with or without wooded or synthetic slat
material shall not be allowed when used to satisfy buffer yard and landscaping
requirements.
      (2)   Accent fences and picket fences. Accent fences and picket fences
shall be permitted in all zoning districts if limited to four feet in height as
measured from grade, and if designed only to partially enclose an area and
serve only an ornamental purpose.
      (3)   Arbors and trellises. Arbors or trellises shall be permitted in all
zoning districts except for the R-L (Residential Lakefront) District, where
they are subject to Board of Zoning Appeals approval. Arbors or trellises,
which are detached from the building, may encroach on a required side yard,
side yard which abuts a street and forward of the principal structure provided
that:
         (a)   The surface of the arbor or trellis shall be at least 50% open;
and
         (b)   Such arbors and trellises shall be of a size no greater than the
following maximum dimensions:
 
Maximum height 8 feet
Maximum width  5 feet
Maximum depth  3 feet
 
      (4)   Solid fences. Solid fences of an approved type shall be permitted
in all zoning districts only in rear yards or to enclose a deck, patio or pool.
Solid fences shall not be located within a required side yard. Solid fences
shall not be used to enclose the entire perimeter of the property except when
used to enclose junk yards, land fills or highly nuisance-oriented land uses.
      (5)   Brick, stone or masonry walls. Brick, stone or masonry walls are
permitted, but forward of the building line shall not exceed three feet in
height.
      (6)   Regulations applicable to C-D, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts
only.
         (a)   Fences, walls and hedges may be permitted in any required yard
or along the edge of any yard, provided that no fence, wall, or hedge between
the front building line of the main structure and the road right-of-way shall
be more than four feet in height above grade.
         (b)   Fences, walls or hedges may be permitted along the side or rear
lot lines to a height of not more than six feet above the grade. Informal
planting, however, may be higher than six feet. Hedges and living fences shall
be located so that future growth shall not extend over the lot line.
      (7)   Regulations applicable to the R-L (Residential Lakefront) District
only.
         (a)   From the lakefront towards the street, the height of a fence,
wall or hedge shall not exceed three feet in height for the first 20 feet back
from the waters edge. From this first 20 feet to not closer than 12 feet of the
public right-of-way; it shall be not higher than four feet.
         (b)   If the fence is a completely see-through security fence with all
metal construction; then the fence shall not exceed four feet in height along
its total run.
         (c)   No fence, wall or hedge shall be erected within 12 feet of the
public right-of-way.
      (8)   Regulations applicable to all other districts.
         (a)   Security or industrial fences: security, electrified and
industrial fences can be conditionally permitted in business and industrial
zoning districts as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (b)   Such fences may not be placed forward of the primary structure
and are restricted to side and rear yards.
         (c)   Such fences may be erected parallel to and on, or approximately
on, the common property line to a height not exceeding six feet above the
established grade.
      (9)   Retaining wall regulations.
         (a)   Retaining walls shall be permitted in all zoning districts along
all lot lines to a height of not more than six feet above the existing natural
grade prior to construction, provided that any retaining wall shall be well
maintained, will be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing
character of the immediate area in which it is to be located, and will not be
hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses.
         (b)   Retaining walls shall be subject to site plan review by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City Engineer and/or his or
her designee when they meet any of the following conditions:
            1.   The wall is three feet or over in height above grade to the
top of the wall;
            2.   The wall is supporting an additional load, such as a structure
or driveway; and
            3.   The wall is containing a surcharge for driveways and sidewalks
when they are more than three feet above an adjacent grade point that is within
five feet of the edge of the drive.
         (c)   All retaining walls shall be subject to the requirements of
division (G)(1) of this section ensuring proper visibility at corner lots.
         (d)   A retaining wall site plan shall include the following:
            1.   The distance to all property lines;
            2.   The contours of all adjacent grades that indicate the flow of
the surface water on the lot that may be affected by the wall, and the height
and type of fill contained by the wall;
            3.   The location of any easements near the proposed wall; and
            4.   Technical drawings indicating the height, length, width,
reinforcing, and drainage of the walls, the type of soil or other material
being retained are required to be submitted prior to permit approval. Retaining
walls shall be designed to ensure stability against overturning, sliding,
excessive foundation pressure and water uplift.
   (H)   Swimming pools.
      (1)   Public or private in-ground or above-ground swimming, wading or
other pools containing over one and one-half feet of water depth shall be
considered as structures for the purpose of permits, shall not be located in
the front or side yards, and shall conform to all required yard setback lines.
The construction, plumbing and electrical requirements, inspection and other
safety facilities shall be regulated by local and/or county codes.
      (2)   Every pool defined as a structure shall be completely surrounded by
a fence or wall not less than four feet in height; and comply with Ohio
Building Code railing requirements, except for doors or gates which shall be
equipped with suitable locking devices to prevent unauthorized intrusion. An
accessory building for the housing of pool supplies may be used in or as part
of such enclosure. Pools above-ground having vertical surfaces of at least four
feet in height shall be required to have fences and gates only where access may
be had to the pool.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 13-O-01, passed 11-6-2013; Ord. 17-O-01,
passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 18-O-09, passed 12-5-2018; Ord. 18-O-10, passed 12-5-
2018)
§ 156.126 OUTSIDE STORAGE AND DISPLAY.
   Outdoor storage or display locations shall be subject to and approved by the
Zoning Administrator upon the application of the record owner of the property.
   (A)   Commercial or industrial outdoor bulk storage or display. The
following regulations shall apply to business, commercial or industrial outdoor
bulk storage or displays.
      (1)   Display of merchandise. No outdoor storage or commercial display of
furniture, lawn monuments or other manufactured goods and materials may occur
outside of a building in any required yards, except:
         (a)   New vehicles, boats and trailers displayed for sale;
         (b)   Used vehicles, boats and trailers displayed for sale when in
conjunction with new vehicle sales on the lot; and
         (c)   Lawn and garden centers, plant nurseries or other merchandise
for sale or rental may be displayed in front yards of commercial districts
other than the minimum required yards, provided that they are suitably screened
or fenced from street level view from the public right-of-way or adjacent
residential properties.
      (2)   Display of bulk goods. The outdoor storage or display of bulk goods
including seasonal items such as firewood and mulch shall be controlled by the
following regulations.
         (a)   The outdoor storage or display of merchandise, inventory or
materials shall not interfere with parking or the safe and unobstructed use of
vehicular or pedestrian access ways or walkways.
         (b)   The outdoor storage or display of merchandise, inventory or
materials shall not be located within the first 20 feet of the minimum front
yard area within the lot, and not within the minimum side yards.
         (c)   Outdoor storage areas shall be buffered from adjoining
properties as required by the landscaping regulations.
         (d)   No storage of raw materials, building materials, unlicensed or
inoperative vehicles, recreation vehicles, merchandise, waste products, junk,
or other material or equipment shall be stored or displayed on any lot outside
of a fully, enclosed building unless expressly permitted by this section.
            1.   Raw materials. No raw materials used as inventory or for
value-added retail or other processing may be stored or displayed outside of a
building on the premises.
            2.   Building materials. Building materials or equipment intended
for use in connection with construction upon the premises may be stored or
placed in yards other than minimum required yards for a period not to exceed
one year only upon receipt of a permit for such outside storage from the Zoning
Administrator as long as the materials or equipment are screened or fenced in
such a way so that the same are not visible from any residential zoning
district or the public right-of-way by persons standing at the street level;
provided further, that all construction debris shall be removed from any
premises within 30 days after occupancy thereof.
               a.   Building materials shall include, but shall not be limited
to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, dirt, topsoil, gravel, mulch,
plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment,
shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other materials used
in landscaping and construction.
               b.   Such screening or fencing shall be constructed and
maintained at a height of not less than four feet and not more than six feet
above grade, and shall be constructed of similar materials to match or blend
with the building in appearance and color. If decorative masonry or wood is
used, upright evergreens shall, in addition thereto, be planted on the side of
the wall or fence nearest to the residential district or the public right-of-
way. The maximum spacing between such plantings shall not exceed five feet.
         (e)   Applications for outdoor storage or display areas shall be on a
form provided by the Zoning Administrator and shall be submitted with a site
plan depicting the location of the said storage or display areas with
supporting documentation indicating the impact of the storage or display area
on the property as a whole. The Zoning Administrator may request the specific
review and approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission of any application.
The review and approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission may also be
requested by any applicant whose application has been rejected or modified by
the Zoning Administrator, which request must be made in writing and must be
made within ten days of such rejection or modification.
      (3)   Service structures. Service structures shall include, but not be
limited to, loading docks, dumpsters, electrical transformers, utility vaults
which extend above electrical and other equipment or exterior components of
plumbing, processing, heating, cooling and ventilating systems (including, but
not limited to, piping, tanks, stacks, collectors, heating, cooling and
ventilating equipment fans, blowers, duct work, vents, louvers, meters,
compressors, motors, incinerators, ovens and the like).
         (a)   Service structures shall be screened with fencing or landscaping
and shall not be directly visible at ground level from the public right-of-way
or any residential district.
         (b)   Exterior components of plumbing, processing, heating, cooling
and ventilating systems and their screening devices which will be visible from
upper floors of adjacent buildings shall be installed in a neat and compact
fashion and shall be painted such a color as to allow their blending with their
visual backgrounds.
         (c)   The location and dimensions of trash receptacles and/ or any
other solid waste disposal facilities shall have adequate capacity for the
proposed use of the site. Trash dumpsters with screening shall be accessible
without occupying required parking, loading or vehicular movement areas.
      (4)   Waste products or junk. Waste products or junk may be stored or
placed in yards other than minimum required yards for a period which does not
exceed 30 days, provided the matter shall be adequately screened from view of
the public right of way and residential areas and not create a nuisance.
         (a)   The term WASTE PRODUCTS shall include discarded or salvage
materials, including, but not limited to, waste materials, remnants of lumber,
metal, or any other used building materials, used glass, paper, rags, rubber in
any shape or form, barrels or other material of this character.
         (b)   The term JUNK shall include parts of machinery or motor
vehicles, unused or inoperable appliances stored in the open, or other castoff
materials of any kind whether or not same could be put to any reasonable use.
      (5)   Hazardous materials.
         (a)   No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall
be stored in bulk above ground, except tanks or drums of fuel directly
connected with energy devices or heating appliances located and operated on the
same lot as the tanks or drums of fuel. All outdoor storage facilities for fuel
shall be enclosed by an approved safety fence.
         (b)   All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or
which constitute a fire hazard, or which may be edible or otherwise attractive
to rodents or insects, shall be stored outdoors only if enclosed in containers
which are adequate to eliminate such hazards.
      (6)   Natural resource protection. No materials or wastes shall be
deposited upon a lot in such form or manner that they may be transported off
the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall any substance which can
contaminate a stream or watercourse or otherwise render such stream or
watercourse undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation, or which
will destroy aquatic life, be allowed to enter any stream or watercourse.
   (B)   Manufactured homes and mobile homes.
      (1)   Mobile homes are not permitted except a legal nonconforming mobile
home within an existing trailer park. In addition, trailers and mobile homes
used or intended to be used for residential purposes and trailer parks shall
not be permitted in any of the zoning districts.
      (2)   The parking of a manufactured or mobile home for periods exceeding
24 hours on lands not approved for manufactured or mobile homes shall be
expressly prohibited.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.127 AGRICULTURAL USES.
   (A)   Purpose. It is considered to be in the best interests of the city to
regulate agricultural land uses. Such uses shall only be permitted in the C-D,
R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts. However, the growing of fruits, vegetables,
flowers or trees for the owner’s consumption or enjoyment shall be permitted in
any zoning district and no zoning permit shall be required.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AGRICULTURAL BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES. Buildings or structures used in
connection with agriculture as defined in R.C. § 3781.06, including shelter for
livestock and storage of farm machinery, equipment and supplies. Shelter shall
be defined as a human-made enclosure, windbreak, sunshade or natural windbreak
or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree development or
vegetation as per R.C. § 959.13.
      AGRICULTURE.
         (a)   The use of land for farming; dairying; pasturage; ranching;
aquaculture; apiculture; horticulture; silviculture, viticulture; animal
husbandry, including, but not limited to, the care and raising of livestock,
equine and fur-bearing animals; poultry husbandry and the production of poultry
and poultry products; the production of field crops, fruits, vegetables,
nursery stock, ornamental shrubs and trees, flowers, sod or mushrooms; any
combination of the foregoing; the processing, drying, storage and marketing of
agricultural products when those activities are conducted in conjunction with,
but are secondary to, such husbandry or production.
         (b)   The above agricultural pursuits shall not include the feeding of
garbage or refuse to animals. A use shall be considered agricultural if it is
the primary use of the property.
      FARM MARKET - CLASS A. A business for the retail sale of agricultural
products produced on site and operated without any additional or permanent site
facilities than are otherwise associated with agriculture use. Roadside stands
or truck sales are examples of such uses, however the intensity and frequency
of such sales shall be so that no additional roads, structures, warehouses or
other storage facilities are necessary on the site.
      FARM MARKET - CLASS B. A business for the retail sale of agricultural
products produced on site or on other farms and consisting of additional or
permanent site facilities that are otherwise associated with agricultural uses.
      ORCHARDS or NURSERY. A use of land and facilities for growing trees and
plants for the retail or wholesale sale and distribution of the trees or plants
or the byproducts of the trees or plants.
   (C)   General regulations. Buildings or structures incident to the use of
the land for agricultural purposes shall consist of structures associated with
agricultural use including barns, coops, silos, granaries, cribs and storage
sheds for agricultural equipment such as tractors, combines, balers and
spreaders, but exclude commercial storage, industrial usage, vehicle storage,
or the accumulation of non-operative motorized equipment. All agricultural-
related buildings, fences and structures shall require a zoning certificate
except as defined in §
156.040(A)(5).
      (1)   Housing of animals. All domestic animals whether harbored for
agricultural or any other purpose, shall be properly sheltered and maintained
in such sanitary conditions as not to be offensive to neighboring properties
according to generally accepted agricultural practices.
      (2)   Roadside stands. Roadside stands for the display and sale of farm
and truck garden and forest products of which at least 75% are grown on the
premises is permitted provided there is only one such stand on the premises and
that such stand does not exceed 100 square feet in area. There is no minimum
front yard setback for a roadside stand, but it shall not be located in the
road right-of-way. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided as per §
156.205(B) (Parking Space Matrix).
      (3)   Operation of a farm market - Class B. A Class B farm market shall
be permitted only upon the issuance of a conditional use zoning certificate by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. Such use shall be subject to the following
standards:
         (a)   Be considered a separate use on an active farm site;
         (b)   Be confined to an area within an existing barn or similar
structure or, if new construction is proposed, the scale and design shall be
compatible with the residential/agricultural area;
         (c)   Shall have its primary means of access from a public street and
adequate parking shall be provided. Such uses shall be considered open-air
markets for parking space determination;
         (d)   Shall be limited to the sale of the following items: fruits,
vegetables, plants, flowers, trees, shrubs and similar items, processed foods
such as wines, jams, conserves, preserves, pickled foods, honey, maple syrup,
baked goods, eggs and similar products grown or produced within the city, as
well as a full range of dairy products, which may be produced on or off-site.
The facility may provide seating for the public and tables where food and
beverages may be consumed. The Planning and Zoning Commission may permit the
sale of items not produced or grown within the city where it is necessary to
supplement the variety of items for retail sale;
         (e)   Such uses shall be separated from all other buildings or
occupancies as per the Ohio Building Code;
         (f)   The facility shall meet all state and local codes and health
requirements and shall be classified as occupancy group Class M per the Ohio
Building Code and have a certificate of occupancy issued by the County Building
Standards Department;
         (g)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may limit the size and scope
of the facility in relation to the size of the farm based on acreage and
production; and
         (h)   One non-illuminated freestanding sign with a maximum size of 32
square feet and one wall sign with a maximum size of 32 square feet shall be
permitted.
      (4)   Keeping of horses, fowl and other animals, except hogs and mink,
whether harbored for agricultural or any other purposes, is permitted only when
the building, yards and all other confinements for said animals are located at
least 100 feet distant from any building used for human habitation or
occupancy, other than the residence of the owner, manager or caretaker of these
animals. Horses shall be prohibited on a lot of less than two acres in size. A
maximum of two horses, both of which are owned by the lot occupant, may be
permitted on a lot of two acres in size. For each non grain-fed horse over two,
at least one and one-half acres of pasture per horse is required. There is no
maximum limit for grain-fed horses.
      (5)   Keeping of hogs or mink, whether harbored for agricultural or any
other purpose, is permitted only when the building, yard and all other
confinements for said animals are located at least 300 feet distant from any
building used for human habitation or occupancy, other than the residence of
the owner, manager, or caretaker of these animals, and at least 100 feet
distant from all property lines, reservoirs, or public streets. The keeping of
hogs or mink harbored for agricultural or any other purpose shall be permitted
only upon the issuance of a conditional zoning certificate by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
      (6)   Buildings and structures incident to the use of the land for
agricultural purposes shall be permitted according to the following
regulations.
         (a)   On lots greater than one acre but not greater than five acres in
size, such buildings or structures shall be regulated as follows.
            1.   Front setback building lines shall be subject to the
restrictions of the use district in which the agricultural use is located. Side
yard and rear yard setbacks shall be 20 feet with an additional setback of one
foot for each additional one foot of additional building height above 20 feet
as measured from the peak of the building’s roof.
            2.   One such building or structure up to 1,800 square feet in size
shall be permitted.
            3.   Maximum height of agricultural buildings or structures shall
be 40 feet. Silos and storage towers for agricultural purposes only shall be
exempt from the height restriction as long as they are set back from all
property lines at least the height of the structure.
         (b)   On lots of five acres to ten acres in size, such buildings or
structures shall be regulated as follows.
            1.   Front setback building lines shall be subject to the
restrictions of the use district in which the agricultural use is located. Side
yard and rear yard setbacks shall be 20 feet with an additional setback of one
foot for each additional one foot of additional building height above 20 feet
as measured from the peak of the building’s roof.
            2.   Total lot coverage of such buildings or structures shall be
limited to no more than 10% of the lot area.
            3.   Maximum height of agricultural buildings or structures shall
be 40 feet. Silos and storage towers for agricultural purposes only shall be
exempt from the height restriction as long as they are set back from all
property lines at least the height of the structure.
         (c)   On lots of greater than ten acres in size, such buildings or
structures shall be regulated as follows.
            1.   Front setback building lines shall be subject to the
restrictions of the use district in which the agricultural use is located. Side
yard and rear yard setbacks shall be 20 feet with an additional setback of one
foot for each additional one foot of additional building height above 20 feet
as measured from the peak of the building’s roof.
            2.   No restriction on size or number of agricultural-related
buildings or structures.
            3.   Maximum height of agricultural buildings or structures shall
be 40 feet. Silos and storage towers for agricultural purposes only shall be
exempt from the height restriction as long as they are set back from all
property lines at least the height of the structure.
      (7)   Fences incident to the use of the land for agricultural purposes
shall be regulated as follows:
         (a)   Maximum height: six feet;
         (b)   No required set back from property line;
         (c)   Generally accepted types of agricultural fencing are permitted,
including low impedance electric fencing and barbed wire fencing, provided the
barbed wire strands are located not less than four feet above the ground; and
         (d)   Only perimeter fences defining the boundaries of agricultural-
related parcels shall require a permit. Fencing of interior feedlots and such
shall not require a permit.
      (8)   Signs used to advertise agricultural products shall be permitted
with a maximum size of 32 square feet.
      (9)   No obstruction to view in excess of two feet in height shall be
placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street right-
of-way lines and a line connecting them at points 30 feet from the intersection
of the street lines, except that street trees are permitted which are pruned at
least eight feet above the established grade of the roadway so as not to
obstruct clear view by motor vehicle drivers.
   (D)   Permitted and conditional uses. The following table indicates
agricultural land uses and whether the uses are permitted uses (P) or
conditional uses (C) requiring the issuance of a conditional use zoning
certificate by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Agricultural Land Uses Districts
                       C-D R-1 R-2
Agricultural Land Uses                                                          Districts
                                                                                C- R- R-2
                                                                                D  1
On lots within a platted subdivision of less than two acres or, on lots of one       
acre or less outside of a platted subdivision
   Growing of fruits, vegetables, flowers or trees for the owner’s consumptPonP  P
or enjoyment
On lots within a platted subdivision of two acres or greater                         
   Growing of fruits, vegetables, flowers or trees for the owner’s consumptPonP  P
or enjoyment
   Orchards, nursery                                                         P  P  P
   Domestic animals kept for the use of the property owner or lessee thereof
and his or her family and/or friends invited to use said animal(s) without the  P  P  P
payment of any fee
   Riding academies and the keeping, training, and otherwise harboring of    C  C  C
domestic animals for a fee
On lots outside of a platted subdivision of greater than one acre                    
   Domestic animals kept for the use of the property owner or lessee thereof
and his or her family and/or friends invited to use said animal(s) without the  P  P  P
payment of any fee
   Riding academies and the keeping, training, and otherwise harboring of    C  C  C
domestic animals for a fee
   Crop farming                                                              P  P  P
   Growing of fruits, vegetables, flowers or trees for the owner’s consumptPonP  P
or enjoyment
   Orchards, nursery                                                         P  P  P
   Raising of domestic animals (except hogs and mink)                        P  P  P
   Raising of hogs and mink                                                  C  C  C
   Farm market - Class A                                                     P  P  P
   Farm market - Class B                                                     C  C  C
   Apiculture                                                                P  P  P
   Viticulture                                                               P  P  P
   Growing of sod                                                            P  P  P
   Cultivation of mushrooms                                                  P  P  P
 
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 11-O-02, passed 3-2-2011; Ord. 17-O-01,
passed 5-17-2017)
§ 156.128 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Bed and breakfast residence facility (small scale).
      (1)   Building must be compatible with the surrounding land uses and
contain no more than three guestrooms.
      (2)   The bed and breakfast dwelling unit and any accessory buildings
shall conform to all building, environmental, health, safety and zoning
regulations of the city and other applicable governmental entities. Parking
shall be located on the property, and comply with §
156.205 (Off-Street Parking).
      (3)   Permits are not transferable and shall not run with the land. All
permits shall expire upon the sale, transfer or lease of the property to a new
owner or tenant.
      (4)   All activities shall be conducted solely within the bed and
breakfast dwelling unit and accessory buildings. No outside activity or
operations shall be permitted.
      (5)   No such uses and/or equipment shall be used that creates a nuisance
due to noise, traffic, odor, dust, fumes, smoke, glare, vibrations, electrical
interference or other causes, which can be detected at or beyond the property
line.
      (6)   Shall be located on parcel abutting, or adjacent to an arterial
street, park, body of water or commercial district.
      (7)   Meals shall be provided only to residents and guests taking lodging
in the facility.
      (8)   Guestrooms shall not contain cooking facilities. A common lounge
area may be provided for guests.
      (9)   Only retail sales customary to overnight facilities shall be
permitted.
      (10)   No food and laundry deliveries shall be made to the facility.
      (11)   The building shall not contain a commercial kitchen.
   (B)   Bed and breakfast residence inn.
      (1)   The bed and breakfast dwelling unit and any accessory buildings
shall conform to all building, environmental, health, safety and zoning
regulations of the city and other applicable governmental entities.
      (2)   Permits shall not be transferable and shall not run with the land.
All permits shall expire upon the sale, transfer or lease of the property to a
new owner or tenant.
      (3)   All activities shall be conducted solely within the bed and
breakfast dwelling unit and accessory buildings. No outside activity or
operations shall be permitted.
      (4)   No such uses and/or equipment shall be used that creates a nuisance
due to noise, traffic, odor, dust, fumes, smoke, glare, vibrations, electrical
interference or other causes, which can be detected at or beyond the property
line.
      (5)   Shall be located on parcel abutting, or adjacent to an arterial
street, park, body of water or commercial district.
      (6)   Meals shall be provided only to guests taking lodging in the
facility.
      (7)   Guestrooms shall not contain cooking facilities. A common lounge
area may be provided for guests.
      (8)   Only retail sales customary to overnight facilities shall be
permitted.
      (9)   Building shall contain a minimum of four and a maximum of eight
guestrooms.
      (10)   Include a commercial kitchen that has been licensed by the Summit
County Public Health Department.
      (11)   Food and laundry deliveries shall be made to the rear of the
building and only during daylight hours.
   (C)   Campground.
      (1)   Such uses shall not require uneconomical extensions of utility
services at the expense of the community.
      (2)   A minimum of 50 acres shall be required for a use proposed under
these regulations.
      (3)   All facilities and structures shall meet all county and/or state
health, building, electrical, plumbing, HVAC and other applicable codes.
      (4)   A conditional use zoning certificate for a use permitted under
these regulations shall be issued for a three-year period only. After a three-
year period has elapsed, a new conditional use zoning certificate shall be
required and may be issued provided that the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the Zoning Administrator determine that the said use has been and is being
operated according to the specifications of the Zoning Code and the previous
conditional use zoning certificate. If necessary, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may make additional requirements for the continued operation of the
use as a prerequisite for re-issuance of the conditional use zoning
certificate.
      (5)   No campsite shall be continuously occupied by the same occupant or
group for a period longer than 30 consecutive days, or be used as a principal
residence. No cabin, lodge, room or other rental accommodations shall be
occupied by the same occupant or group for a period longer than 30 consecutive
days.
      (6)   Only retail uses which are customarily accessory or incidental to
the main recreational use shall be permitted as part of the park, recreational
area or campground. Included as such retail uses are refreshment stands,
souvenir stands, concession stands, park office and the limited sale of
groceries when the customers are primarily the campers using the park.
      (7)   All structures and activity areas should be located at least 100
feet from all property lines.
      (8)   All points of entrance or exit should be located no closer than 200
feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares; or no closer than 100
feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local or collector
thoroughfare.
      (9)   Loudspeakers which cause a hazard or annoyance shall not be
permitted.
      (10)   There shall be no more than one advertisement oriented to each
abutting road identifying the activity.
      (11)   No lighting shall constitute a nuisance and shall in no way impair
safe movement of traffic on any street or highway; no lighting shall shine
directly on adjacent properties.
      (12)   Such uses should be properly landscaped to be harmonious with
surrounding residential uses.
      (13)   All permitted installations shall be maintained in a neat, orderly
condition so as to prevent injury to any single property, any individual or to
the community in general.
      (14)   All activities, programs and other events shall be adequately and
properly supervised so as to prevent any hazard and to assure against any
disturbance or nuisance to surrounding properties, residents, or to the
community in general.
   (D)   Cemetery.
      (1)   All points of entrance or exit should be located no closer than 200
feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares; or no closer than 100
feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local or collector
thoroughfare.
      (2)   Such developments should be located on major thoroughfares or at
intersections of major and/or collector thoroughfares.
      (3)   The area proposed for a cemetery shall be used for cemetery
purposes only, and shall meet the following requirements.
         (a)   Except for office uses incidental to cemetery operations, no
business or commercial uses of any kind shall be permitted on the cemetery
site.
         (b)   Minimum area required for a cemetery site to be 40 acres.
         (c)   A building shall be provided for storage of maintenance
equipment and/or materials.
         (d)   Pavement width of driveways shall be at least 20 feet, ten feet
per moving lane.
         (e)   Refer to the city’s subdivision regulations for drive
requirements and site plan review procedures.
         (f)   Pavement is to be installed as development progresses and as
indicated on the final plans approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (g)   Sufficient parking space shall be provided as to not deter
traffic flow within the cemetery.
         (h)   Only signs designating entrances, exits, traffic direction and
titles shall be permitted, and must be approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
         (i)   Adequate screening with shrubs, trees or compact hedge shall be
provided parallel to property lines adjacent to or abutting residential
dwellings; such shrubs, trees, and hedges shall not be less than two feet in
height and must be maintained in good condition.
         (j)   Provisions shall be made for landscaping throughout the
cemetery.
         (k)   Location of cemetery buildings and all other structures shall
conform to front, side and rear yard building lines of the particular district
in which it is located.
         (l)   No gravesites shall be located within 100 feet of the right-of-
way lines of any publicly dedicated thoroughfare.
         (m)   A gravesite shall not be within 200 feet of an existing
residence unless the owner of such residence gives his or her written consent.
      (4)   Guarantees shall be made that the cemetery will be developed as
proposed on the plans approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City
Engineer, and the County Public Health Department. Guarantees shall be in a
form approved of by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (E)   Child day care center and child day care home - Type A.
      (1)   Such developments should be located on major thoroughfares or at
intersections of major and/or collector thoroughfares.
      (2)   Such uses shall not require uneconomical extensions of utility
services at the expense of the community.
      (3)   The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable
licensing requirements of the state.
      (4)   All structures and activity areas should be located at least 100
feet from all property lines.
      (5)   All points of entrance or exit should be located no closer than 200
feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares; or no closer than 100
feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local or collector
thoroughfare.
      (6)   Curb cuts, parking, drop-off and pick-up areas shall be designed to
accommodate peak traffic at the facility in a safe and efficient manner without
causing obstruction of the public road. Parking shall not be permitted on the
public road for purposes of the proposed use.
      (7)   Such uses should be properly landscaped to be harmonious with
surrounding residential uses.
      (8)   The site shall provide sufficient fenced outdoor space for outdoor
recreation for the children and located in a manner which minimizes disturbance
of abutting residential areas.
      (9)   Loudspeakers which cause a hazard or annoyance shall not be
permitted.
      (10)   All permitted installations shall be maintained in a neat, orderly
condition so as to prevent injury to any single property, any individual, or to
the community in general.
   (F)   Corporate offices.
   (G)   Drive-in and drive-through establishment.
      (1)   Such facilities shall be located at the extremity of the business
districts so as not to interfere with the pedestrian interchange between stores
in the district and provided further, that it would not limit expansion of the
pedestrian-oriented facilities.
      (2)   At least a six inch high pedestrian safety curb shall be installed
along all street right-of-way lines except at driveway approaches.
      (3)   No more than two driveway approaches shall be permitted directly
from any thoroughfare and shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the property
line. If the property fronts on two or more streets, the driveways shall be
located as far from the street intersections as is practical.
      (4)   Loudspeakers which cause a hazard or annoyance shall not be
permitted.
      (5)   All permitted installations shall be maintained in a neat, orderly
condition so as to prevent injury to any single property, any individual or to
the community in general.
   (H)   Foundry.
   (I)   Gasoline station and/or convenience store.
      (1)   Such developments should be located on major thoroughfares or at
intersections of major and/or collector thoroughfares at the extremity of the
business districts so as not to interfere with the pedestrian interchange
between stores in the district and provided further, that it would not limit
expansion of the pedestrian-oriented facilities.
      (2)   At least a six-inch high pedestrian safety curb shall be installed
along all street right-of-way lines except at driveway approaches.
      (3)   No more than two driveway approaches shall be permitted directly
from any thoroughfare and shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the property
line. If the property fronts on two or more streets, the driveways shall be
located as far from the street intersections as is practical.
      (4)   All activities, except those required to be performed at fuel
pumps, shall be carried on inside a building; if work is performed on a
vehicle, said vehicle shall be entirely within a building.
      (5)   Must have a public restroom available for use.
   (J)   Government facility.
      (1)   Such developments should be located on major thoroughfares or at
intersections of major and/or collector thoroughfares adjacent to
nonresidential uses such as churches, parks, industrial or commercial
districts.
      (2)   All points of entrance or exit should be located no closer than 200
feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares; or no closer than 100
feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local or collector
thoroughfare.
      (3)   Such uses should be properly landscaped to be harmonious with
surrounding residential uses.
   (K)   Indoor commercial recreation.
      (1)   At least a six-inch high pedestrian safety curb shall be installed
along all street right-of-way lines except at driveway approaches.
      (2)   No more than two driveway approaches shall be permitted directly
from any thoroughfare and shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the property
line. If the property fronts on two or more streets, the driveways shall be
located as far from the street intersections as is practical.
      (3)   Loudspeakers which cause a hazard or annoyance shall not be
permitted.
      (4)   All permitted installations shall be maintained in a neat, orderly
condition so as to prevent injury to any single property, any individual or to
the community in general.
   (L)   Institution for higher education.
      (1)   Such developments should be located on major thoroughfares or at
intersections of major and/or collector thoroughfares.
      (2)   All structures and activity areas should be located at least 100
feet from all property lines.
      (3)   All points of entrance or exit should be located no closer than 200
feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares; or no closer than 100
feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local or collector
thoroughfare.
      (4)   There shall be no more than one advertisement oriented to each
abutting road identifying the activity.
      (5)   Such uses should be properly landscaped to be harmonious with
surrounding residential uses.
      (6)   Loudspeakers which cause a hazard or annoyance shall not be
permitted.
   (M)   Health care facility.
      (1)   Such developments should be located on major thoroughfares or at
intersections of major and/or collector thoroughfares.
      (2)   Such uses shall not require uneconomical extensions of utility
services at the expense of the community.
      (3)   All points of entrance or exit should be located no closer than 200
feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares; or no closer than 100
feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local or collector
thoroughfare.
      (4)   All structures and activity areas should be located at least 100
feet from all property lines.
      (5)   Loudspeakers which cause a hazard or annoyance shall not be
permitted.
      (6)   Such uses should be properly landscaped to be harmonious with
surrounding residential uses.
   (N)   Kennel.
      (1)   A conditional use zoning certificate for a use permitted under
these regulations shall be issued for a three-year period only. After a three-
year period has elapsed, a new conditional use zoning certificate shall be
required and may be issued provided that the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the Zoning Administrator determine that the said use has been and is being
operated according to the specifications of the Zoning Code and the previous
conditional use zoning certificate. If necessary, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may make additional requirements for the continued operation of the
use as a prerequisite for re-issuance of the conditional use zoning
certificate.
      (2)   All structures and activity areas should be located at least 100
feet from all property lines.
      (3)   There shall be no more than one advertisement oriented to each
abutting road identifying the activity.
      (4)   Sanitation practices shall assure that odors will not be noticed
off the lot.
      (5)   Adequate soundproofing shall be provided to reduce the noise level
and the proper management of animals shall be provided to control noise in
outdoor exercise runs.
   (O)   Laboratories and/or processing.
   (P)   Machinery and/or equipment repair services.
      (1)   No outdoor storage of used, salvage equipment or parts.
      (2)   All repair activities shall occur within an enclosed building.
      (3)   Storage of junk, wrecked, abandoned vehicles shall be prohibited.
   (Q)   Mini-storage facility.
      (1)   Activities on the site shall be limited to the storage of property
only.
      (2)   All storage shall be within an enclosed building except where the
nature and location of outdoor storage is specifically approved by the Planning
and Zoning Commission. Outdoor vehicle, trailer or boat storage shall only be
permitted in locations on the site specifically approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
      (3)   An on-site leasing office shall be provided.
      (4)   A minimum of five parking spaces shall be provided near the leasing
office.
      (5)   All drives, parking, loading and unloading areas shall be paved and
shall be located only as approved in the site plan.
      (6)   Sufficient space shall be provided in the paved lanes serving the
storage units to accommodate on-site movement of vehicles and the parking and
loading and/or unloading of trucks, vans, trailers and automobiles of persons
using the units.
      (7)   No dwelling will be permitted on the same lot.
      (8)   Fencing of the perimeter shall be provided as permitted by this
Zoning Code and as determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission in a manner
which promotes security and presents an appropriate appearance to abutting
properties. The fence shall be landscaped as required in the approved site
plan.
      (9)   Door openings facing residential districts shall not be permitted
unless approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (10)   Hours of operation shall only be as approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission, after consideration of the impact of the proposed use upon
the character, safety, and tranquility of the neighborhood.
   (R)   Model homes.
      (1)   Such use shall be a temporary conditional use and shall
automatically lapse and be null and void after two years from the date of the
Planning and Zoning Commission approval.
      (2)   A paved parking area for visitors shall be provided.
      (3)   No business other than new home sales or leasing shall be conducted
from the model home.
      (4)   A model home shall not be open for public viewing or business
before 9:00 a.m. or later than 8:00 p.m.
   (S)   Motel.
      (1)   Such developments should be located on or immediately adjacent to
state highways at the extremity of the business districts so as not to
interfere with the pedestrian interchange between stores in the district and
provided further, that it would not limit expansion of the pedestrian-oriented
facilities.
      (2)   Such uses shall not require uneconomical extensions of utility
services at the expense of the community.
      (3)   At least a six-inch high pedestrian safety curb shall be installed
along all street right-of-way lines except at driveway approaches.
      (4)   No more than two driveway approaches shall be permitted directly
from any thoroughfare and shall not exceed 30 feet in width at the property
line. If the property fronts on two or more streets, the driveways shall be
located as far from the street intersections as is practical.
   (T)   Motor freight garage. Shall only be located along an arterial street.
   (U)   Multi-family dwelling. Proposed multi-family dwelling projects shall
conform to all requirements and/or conditions as the Planning and Zoning
Commission may deem necessary and shall meet the following criteria.
      (1)   Utilities. Such uses shall not require uneconomical extensions of
utility services at the expense of the community. The property must be served
by centralized sewer and water facilities approved by the state’s Environmental
Protection Agency and/or county’s Public Health Department, as well as operated
and maintained according to the inspection and rules of the County Public
Health Department and the county’s Department of Sanitary Sewers regulations.
      (2)   Courtyard requirement. Each multi-family dwelling shall be designed
with a courtyard. The courtyard shall be unoccupied by any building or other
structures, except fire hydrants, utility poles, or other street improvements.
The courtyard shall have an unobstructed opening, not less than 30 feet wide,
onto the front yard of a lot which has a width not less than that required in
the district in which it is located.
         (a)   Each one story group multi-family dwelling development shall
have a minimum courtyard of 30 feet in width and 30 feet in length, in addition
to its required yards.
         (b)   Each two or two and one-half story group multi-family dwelling
development shall have a minimum courtyard of 40 feet in width and 40 feet in
length, in addition to its required yards.
         (c)   All dwelling structures of the group except those facing a
public street shall face upon the courtyard.
      (3)   Setbacks. Where more than one multi-family dwelling is located on a
lot, the entire group of buildings shall be considered as one building for the
purpose of determining front, side and rear yard requirements.
         (a)   The entire group shall require one front and rear and two side
yards as specified for dwellings in the appropriate district.
         (b)   In such a group dwelling development, no two separate dwelling
structures shall be closer to each other along the sides or end of a courtyard
than 15 feet.
      (4)   Access and circulation.
         (a)   Vehicular approaches to the property shall be so designed as not
to create an interference with traffic on surrounding public streets or roads.
         (b)   On-site circulation shall be designed to make possible adequate
fire and police protection.
         (c)   Paved vehicular access drives of at least ten feet in width
shall be required for parking areas of ten vehicles or less capacity, and two-
way drives of 20 feet paving width minimum shall be required for parking areas
of 11 or more vehicle capacity.
      (5)   Parking. Paved off-street parking and service areas shall be
required.
         (a)   No parking or service areas shall be permitted between any
street and the main building.
         (b)   Parking spaces shall contain at least 200 square feet and be
provided at the rate of two spaces per dwelling unit in each apartment
building.
         (c)   All parking and service areas shall be paved with asphalt or
concrete and shall be located no closer than 20 feet from any residential
structure.
         (d)   In large parking areas, visual relief shall be provided through
the use of trees planted along the perimeter of the lot and landscaped
dividers, islands, and walkways.
      (6)   Building design and landscaping.
         (a)   The architectural design of apartment buildings should be
developed with consideration given to the relationship of adjacent development
in terms of building height, mass, texture, line and pattern, and character.
         (b)   Maximum possible privacy for each apartment shall be provided
through good design and use of proper building materials and landscaping.
Visual privacy should be provided through structural screening and landscaping
treatment. Auditory privacy should be provided through soundproofing.
         (c)   Building location and placement should be developed with
consideration given to minimizing removal of trees and change of topography.
         (d)   Such uses should be properly landscaped to be harmonious with
surrounding residential uses.
         (e)   TV antennas shall be centralized.
      (7)   Site plan review.
         (a)   No zoning certificate shall be issued until final site plans
have been submitted and approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (b)   A performance bond or other financial guarantee acceptable to
the City Council shall be placed to ensure that the landscaping will be
installed, that the hard surfacing of the access drives and parking and service
areas will be installed, and that adequate storm water drainage will be
installed, all in accordance with the City Council and Planning and Zoning
Commission approved plans.
   (V)   Used vehicle agency.
      (1)   The conditional use zoning certificate shall be issued for a three-
year period only. After a one three-year period has elapsed, a new conditional
use zoning certificate shall be required and may be issued provided that the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Zoning Administrator determine that the
said use has been and is being operated according to the specifications of the
Zoning Code and the previous conditional use zoning certificate. If necessary,
the Planning and Zoning Commission may make additional requirements of the
continued operation of the use as a prerequisite for reissuance of the
conditional use zoning certificate.
      (2)   Structures for offices must be located on the site of the
dealership. (Vacant lots of used cars are not permissible without a local, on-
site office.)
      (3)   The parking lot must be paved.
      (4)   All vehicles must be operable and driveable.
      (5)   No outside repairs will be allowed (only sale preps).
      (6)   No bodywork of any kind will be permitted outside.
      (7)   There shall be no vehicle dismantling, dismantled, wrecked, junk or
partially dismantled vehicles permitted outside.
   (W)   Off-street parking lot and garage.
      (1)   Commercial and utility vehicle parking lots shall be enclosed with
an eight foot high “see-through” security fence and utilize a gated key-card
access system in lieu of a security guard post. Such a facility shall not be
located adjacent to a residential zoning district.
      (2)   No vehicle repair shall be permitted.
   (X)   Outdoor commercial recreational.
      (1)   A conditional use zoning certificate for a use permitted under
these regulations shall be issued for a three-year period only. After a three-
year period has elapsed, a new conditional use zoning certificate shall be
required and may be issued provided that the Planning and Zoning Commission and
the Zoning Administrator determine that the said use has been and is being
operated according to the specifications of this Zoning Code and the previous
conditional use zoning certificate. If necessary, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may make additional requirements for the continued operation of the
use as a prerequisite for reissuance of the conditional use zoning certificate.
      (2)   Such uses shall not require uneconomical extensions of utility
services at the expense of the community.
      (3)   All facilities and structures shall meet all county and/or state
health, building, electrical, plumbing, HVAC and other applicable codes.
      (4)   All points of entrance or exit should be located no closer than 200
feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares; or no closer than 100
feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local or collector
thoroughfare.
      (5)   Such uses should be properly landscaped to be harmonious with
surrounding residential uses.
      (6)   There shall be no more than one advertisement oriented to each
abutting road identifying the activity.
   (Y)   Public and private school.
      (1)   Elementary school structures should be located on a collector
thoroughfare.
      (2)   All structures and activity areas should be located at least 100
feet from all property lines.
      (3)   All points of entrance or exit should be located no closer than 200
feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares; or no closer than 100
feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local or collector
thoroughfare.
   (Z)   Public utility.
      (1)   All structures and activity areas should be located at least 100
feet from all property lines.
      (2)   Site locations should offer natural or human-made barriers that
would lessen the effect of intrusion into a residential area.
      (3)   Such uses should be properly landscaped to be harmonious with
surrounding residential uses.
   (AA)   Religious land use for public worship.
      (1)   Such developments should be located on major thoroughfares or at
intersections of major and/or collector thoroughfares.
      (2)   Such structures should be located adjacent to parks and other
nonresidential uses such as schools and shopping facilities where use could be
made of joint parking facilities.
      (3)   All structures and activity areas should be located at least 100
feet from all property lines.
      (4)   All points of entrance or exit should be located no closer than 200
feet from the intersection of two major thoroughfares; or no closer than 100
feet from the intersection of a major thoroughfare and a local or collector
thoroughfare.
   (BB)   Veterinary hospital/clinic.
      (1)   The boarding of animals shall be restricted to allow overnight
lodging only as necessary for animals receiving medical attention.
      (2)   Such uses shall not be permitted adjacent to any residential
district.
      (3)   Outdoor pens and exercise runs shall be kept in a sanitary
condition and screened from adjacent properties and streets.
      (4)   Sanitation practices shall assure that odors will not be noticed
off the lot.
      (5)   No dead animals shall be buried on the premises and incineration
shall not create odors or smoke off the premises.
      (6)   Adequate soundproofing shall be provided to reduce the noise level
and the proper management of animals shall be provided to control noise in
outdoor exercise runs.
   (CC)   Welding or other metal working shop.
   (DD)   Marine related uses.
      (1)   The conditional use zoning certificate shall be issued for a three-
year period only. After one three-year period has lapsed, a renewed conditional
use zoning certificate shall be required and may be reissued provided that the
Planning and Zoning Commission and the Zoning Administrator determine that the
use has been and is being operated according to the specifications of the
Zoning Code and the previous conditional use zoning certificate. If necessary,
the Planning and Zoning Commission may make additional requirements of the
continued operation of the use as a prerequisite for reissuance of the
conditional use zoning certificate.
      (2)   Structures for offices must be located on the site of the marine
related business. Vacant lots for storage of marine vehicles are not permitted
without a local, on site office.
      (3)   There shall be no dismantled, wrecked, junk or partially dismantled
vehicles of any kind (marine or otherwise) permitted outside.
      (4)   Outdoor storage of marine vehicles shall be in the rear of the
property. Areas for outside storage of marine vehicles may be on paved or
gravel surfaces.
      (5)   Outdoor storage that abuts residential uses will require natural
screening buffers in addition to privacy fencing and must adhere to landscaping
and buffer yard standards as outlined in §§
156.165 through
156.176.
      (6)   Any new or used marine vehicles being offered for sale by the
marine related business may be placed on the side or the front of the business
as long as the location of the marine vehicles for sale is part of the site
plan approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (7)   The storage and handling of inflammable liquids, liquefied
petroleum gases and explosives shall comply with rules and regulations falling
under the jurisdiction of the City Fire Chief, the laws of the state and other
local ordinances.
      (8)   Outdoor displays for the marine related business must comply with
the regulations outlined in §§
156.125 through
156.136.
      (9)   All lighting shall adhere to the lighting requirements outlined in
§§
156.090 through
156.092.
      (10)   All signage requirements shall adhere to §§
156.220 through
156.231.
      (11)   Any marine related business that is opened for the sole purpose of
operating a retail store for marine equipment is not subject to this division
(DD) and shall be treated as a retail business under the city’s Zoning Code.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 17-O-01, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 17-O-02,
passed 8-2-2017)
§ 156.129 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of the home occupation provisions and regulations
is to control the nonresidential uses of any residential dwelling unit and to
limit the scope of the nonresidential use to that of an accessory use. These
provisions and regulations are intended to allow accessory home occupations
that are located and conducted in such a manner that existence of the home
occupation is not detectable, except for possibly a permitted nameplate on the
outside of the dwelling unit.
   (B)   Classes of home occupations. The city has established two classes of
home occupations as follows:
      (1)   Class A. Home occupation uses that have little or no impact on the
surrounding residential area. Examples of Class A businesses include
accountants, attorneys, artists, sculptors and dressmakers; and
      (2)   Class B. Home occupation uses that can impact the surrounding
residential area. Examples of Class B businesses include barbers, beauticians,
landscapers, computer and/or electronic repair technicians. Trade businesses
include, but are not limited to electricians, plumbers and carpenters.
   (C)   Procedure. No home occupation activities shall be conducted until an
application for a home occupation Class A permit or Class B permit is submitted
to the Zoning Administrator for home occupation classification, review and
approval.
      (1)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the power to review, approve,
disapprove or revoke a Class A home occupation permit.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall submit all professional service,
repair service and trade business Class B home occupation conditional use
applications to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and approval.
   (D)   Prohibited uses. The following uses and activities shall be prohibited
as a home occupation:
      (1)   Automotive, truck, recreational vehicle, trailer, motorcycle, all-
terrain and boat bodywork, customization, detailing, painting, reconditioning
and mechanical repair;
      (2)   Lawn mower and/or small engine repair or reconditioning;
      (3)   New or used automotive and/or vehicle sales or rentals;
      (4)   Bed and breakfast inns;
      (5)   Boarding houses;
      (6)   Funeral homes;
      (7)   Hotels and motels;
      (8)   Massage parlors;
      (9)   Medical and/or dental offices and laboratories;
      (10)   Restaurants;
      (11)   Retail sales and services;
      (12)   Sexually oriented businesses; and
      (13)   Veterinary facilities and/or small animal clinics or kennels.
   (E)   Standards. The city shall permit home occupations in the C-D, R-1, R-
2, R-3 and R-L Zoning Districts only if the following provisions and
regulations are met throughout the duration of the home occupation.
      (1)   Home occupation businesses are subject to all provisions and
regulations as stated in this Zoning Code. The Zoning Administrator shall
monitor and enforce all home occupation provisions and regulations.
      (2)   All said uses should be clearly subordinate and incidental to the
residential use of the property in order to protect the character of the
surrounding residential neighborhood, while recognizing that with changing
technology and the changing job market that traditional workplaces are also
changing.
      (3)   Home occupations shall not occupy more than 25% of the total gross
floor area of the principal dwelling unit.
      (4)   No changes in the exterior appearance of the dwelling to
accommodate the home occupation shall be permitted. The home occupation
dwelling shall not differ from the character of the surrounding residential
neighborhood.
      (5)   The residence may be the base of operation for the business, but
the conduct of any phase of the trade on the property shall be prohibited.
      (6)   Only one home occupation shall be permitted per property.
      (7)   A home occupation shall only be permitted for a resident of the
dwelling unit in which the home occupation is to be conducted or an immediate
family member of the owner or resident. If the resident rents the dwelling
unit, the resident shall provide evidence of written permission from the
dwelling unit’s owner as part of the home occupation permit application. Not
more than one person who is not a resident of the dwelling unit may be employed
or engaged in the home occupation.
      (8)   The dwelling unit or accessory building in which the home
occupation is conducted shall conform to all building, environmental, health,
safety and zoning regulations of the city and other applicable governmental
entities.
      (9)   Home occupation permits shall not be transferable and shall not run
with the land. All home occupations shall expire upon the sale, transfer, or
lease of the property to a new owner or tenant.
      (10)   All activities associated with the home occupation shall be
conducted solely within the dwelling unit or accessory building. No outside
activity or operations shall be permitted.
      (11)   No equipment shall be used that creates a nuisance due to noise,
traffic, odor, dust, fumes, smoke, glare, vibrations, electrical interference
or other causes, which can be detected at or beyond the property line.
      (12)   There shall be no storage of toxic or hazardous materials,
including ammunition, gunpowder and chemicals, not normally associated with a
home occupation.
      (13)   There shall be no commodities sold or services rendered that
require receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment by other than a
passenger vehicle or by parcel or letter carrier mail service using vehicles
typically employed in residential deliveries. No excessive deliveries by
tractor- trailers are permitted.
      (14)   Sales of commodities not produced on the premises may be
permitted, provided that the commodities are specified in the home occupation
application and are reasonably related to the home occupation use.
      (15)   No display of products may be visible from the street or adjoining
properties.
      (16)   Personal and professional services shall be provided on an
appointment only basis between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
      (17)   Written evidence shall be provided that the appropriate
governmental agency has approved the water and sewage treatment requirements
for a home occupation.
      (18)   Only one unlighted name plate of not more than two square feet in
area announcing the name of the home occupation shall be permitted.
      (19)   No outdoor storage of materials or equipment in conjunction with
the home occupation shall be permitted.
      (20)   All equipment, supplies, stock material and trailers used for
landscaping, lawn maintenance, construction, remodeling or a related business
shall be parked or stored only within an enclosed garage or accessory building.
      (21)   A home occupation shall provide additional off-street parking area
adequate to accommodate all needs created by the home occupation, but in no
case shall provide more than two additional off-street parking spaces. Required
off-street parking to serve a home occupation shall not be permitted in the
front yard of the dwelling unit, other than in a driveway.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 17-O-01, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 156.130 UTILITY SERVICES; UNDERGROUND UTILITIES.
   All electric power lines (not including transformers or enclosures
containing electric equipment which may be pad mounted), telephone, gas
distribution and cable television lines shall be placed underground in
accordance with the specifications and policies of the respective utility
service providers.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.131 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   In order to provide for the regulation of, and to establish
guidelines for, the site process and construction of wireless
telecommunications towers (cellular towers) located in the city, and to ensure
the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort and welfare or the citizens
of the city. The regulations provided in this Zoning Code are presented as
minimum standards and requirements.
      (2)   The construction of new wireless telecommunications towers and
related facilities is hereby determined to be a conditionally permitted use in
all zoning districts by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The placing of
wireless telecommunications antennas on any legal tower, building or structure
within the city is determined to be a conditionally permitted use in all zoning
districts by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   All new construction, or the placement of equipment shall conform
to the regulations of the district in which it is located and to the additional
development standards and supplementary regulations contained herein.
   (B)   General construction standards. Proposed new telecommunication towers
and/or facilities shall comply with the following development standards.
Wireless telecommunications towers/facilities are permitted as a sole use on a
lot or when combined with another use, subject to all existing regulations in
each zoning district and the following.
      (1)   The tower must be set back from the any property line or existing
structure off the lot on which the tower is to be located by a distance equal
to the vertical height of the tower.
      (2)   The tower must not exceed 150 feet (including antenna) if designed
for use by a single user, 175 feet if designed for use by two co-users, and 200
feet if designed for use by three co-users. Due to the proximity of the Akron-
Canton Regional Airport, all wireless telecommunications towers must also
receive written Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) clearance and concurrence
of the FAA decision by the airport director before construction may proceed.
      (3)   The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall be 300 square feet,
or if there is more than one shelter, a total of 750 square feet.
      (4)   When a wireless telecommunications tower/facility is to be located
on a property with an existing use:
         (a)   The existing use need not be affiliated with the wireless
telecommunications provider;
         (b)   The wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully
automated and unattended on a daily basis and shall be visited only for
periodic and necessary maintenance (except during construction or an
emergency); and
         (c)   The service access to the equipment shelter shall, whenever
feasible, be provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use.
      (5)   Security fencing, eight feet in height, shall surround the tower,
the equipment shelter and any guy-wires, either completely or individually, as
determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (6)   A vegetative screen shall be planted that consists of one row of a
mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees or privet hedge planted five feet on
center maximum. A landscaping plan is required to be submitted that indicates
how the wireless telecommunications facility will be screened from adjoining
properties.
      (7)   Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall be preserved to the
maximum extent possible.
      (8)   Any applicant requesting permission to install a new tower shall
provide evidence of written contact with all wireless service providers who
supply service within a mile of the proposed facility. The applicant shall
inquire about potential co-location opportunities at all technically feasible
locations. The contacted providers shall be requested to respond in writing to
the inquiry within 60 days. The applicant shall present proof of mailing as
well as responses to the Planning and Zoning Commission as a means of
demonstrating the need for a new tower. If a contacted wireless service
provider fails to respond to a written request for co-location from the
applicant within 60 days, the Planning and Zoning Commission may accept the
non-response as proof that co-location on an existing tower is not feasible.
      (9)   No advertising is permitted anywhere on the facility, with the
exception of identification signage.
      (10)   “No Trespassing” signs shall be posted around the facility with a
telephone number of who to contact in the event of an emergency.
      (11)   Applicants will provide evidence of legal access to the tower site
and maintain this access regardless of other developments that may take place
on the site.
      (12)   No tower shall be artificially lighted except to assure safety or
as required by the FAA. Security lighting around the equipment shelter is
prohibited, unless specifically requested by the applicant and need is proved
to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (13)   The tower shall be painted in a neutral tone (e.g., desert sand
and/or khaki) as to minimize its visibility, unless otherwise required by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA).
      (14)   The electromagnetic field levels of the tower shall conform to the
standards developed by the National Council on Radiation Protection and
Measurement (NCRP Report No. 86) or by the American National Standards
Institute and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (ANSI/IEEE
C95.1-1992).
      (15)   A report prepared by a state registered engineer that the antenna
(s) and/or tower(s) to be constructed are in compliance with all applicable
federal, state and local regulations pertinent to the construction.
      (16)   A soil report prepared by a licensed professional engineer
complying with the standards of Appendix I: Geotechnical Investigations,
ANSI>EIA 222-E, as amended, shall be submitted to the city to document and
verify the design specifications of the foundation for the tower, and anchors
for the guy-wires, if used.
   (C)   Construction in residential districts. The construction of wireless
telecommunications towers and/or facilities within residential zoning districts
shall conform to all applicable existing zoning regulations, all development
standards contained herein and the following supplementary regulations.
      (1)   In applying for a permit to construct a wireless telecommunications
tower and/or facility in any residential district, the applicant must present
substantial evidence as to why it is not technically feasible to locate in a
more appropriate nonresidential zone. Once those efforts to locate in a
nonresidential zone have been exhausted, a wireless telecommunication facility
may be located in a residential district.
      (2)   When the telecommunications facility is located on property with
another principal use, the applicant shall present documentation that
documentation that the owner of the property has granted an easement or entered
into a lease for the proposed facility and that vehicular access is provided to
the facility.
   (D)   Placement of antennas and equipment. The placing of wireless
telecommunications antennas on any legal tower, building or structure within
the city is determined to be a conditionally permitted use in all zoning
districts by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The placement of equipment
shall conform to the regulations of the zone in which it is located, as well as
the following.
      (1)   Business and industrial districts. No wireless telecommunications
antenna shall be higher than 20 feet or 20% of the building height, whichever
is greater, above the existing tower, building or structure in a business or
industrial zoning district.
      (2)   Residential zoning districts. No wireless telecommunications
antenna shall be higher than 20 feet above the existing tower, building or
structure within a residential zoning district.
      (3)   Equipment shelters. If the applicant proposes to locate the
telecommunications equipment in a separate shelter (not located on or attached
to the building), the shelter shall comply with all applicable development
standards contained herein. Also, vehicular access to the shelter shall not
interfere with the parking or vehicular circulation on the site for the
principal use.
   (E)   Review and approval of plans. No person or entity shall construct a
wireless telecommunications tower and facility, or place a wireless
telecommunications antenna, on any legal tower, building or structure, without
a site plan review, a public hearing, and approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, as specified below.
      (1)   The site plan for the construction of a wireless telecommunications
tower and related facility shall be reviewed and approved according to the
standards and procedures set forth in this Zoning Code.
      (2)   The placing of a wireless telecommunications antenna on any legal
tower, building or structure (which may or may not involve co-location with
another wireless service provider) shall be reviewed and approved according to
the standards and procedures set forth in this Zoning Code, and the site plan
shall consist of a drawing and depiction which accurately conveys the following
information:
         (a)   A vicinity map indicating the location of the site and existing
structure;
         (b)   The location of the antenna on the structure; and
         (c)   The location of the equipment shelter. If the equipment shelter
is separate from the structure, its size, fencing, landscaping, setbacks and
evidence of legal access to the site shall be indicated.
   (F)   other applicable site plan review procedures. All other applicable
site plan review procedures, as set forth in this Zoning Code, shall also be
adhered to.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 17-O-01, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 156.132 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A sexually oriented business may be located only in accordance with
the following restrictions:
      (1)   No such business shall be located on any parcel within 500 feet of
any residential district;
      (2)   No such business shall be located on any parcel within 1,000 feet
of any public library, private or public elementary or secondary school, public
park or church;
      (3)   No such business shall be located on any parcel within 1,000 feet
of another sexually oriented business; and
      (4)   Such business shall only be located in the I-1 Light Industrial
District.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A) of this section, the measurement of
distance shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure
used as a part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted,
to the nearest property line of the premises of a church or public or private
elementary or secondary school, or the nearest boundary of an affected public
park, residential district or residential lot.
   (C)   For purposes of division (A) of this section, the distance between any
two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of
the structure in which each business is located.
   (D)   No person shall establish, operate or cause the establishment or
operation of any sexually oriented business in violation of the provisions of
this section. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit or limit
the display, sale or rental of descriptive, printed, film or video material, or
any live performance, which, taken as whole, contains serious literary,
artistic, political, medical, educational or scientific value.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.133 OIL AND GAS WELL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the intent of the city to ensure the safe operation of
oil and gas wells within the city. Toward that end, these regulations have been
adopted to supplement any state issued permits which authorize the drilling of
an oil and gas well within the city. The provisions of these regulations are
based upon local conditions which may not be known to the state at the time
such drilling was authorized.
   (B)   Drilling regulations. Any person who has a permit to drill for oil and
gas within the city which has been issued by any department of the state
(“permit holder”), shall adhere to the following regulations.
      (1)   A copy of the state issued permit shall be filed with the city’s
Zoning and Planning Department no later than four weeks before the commencement
of any operations preparatory to drilling in the city. Upon receipt by the
Zoning and Planning Department, a copy of such permit shall be delivered to all
owners and/or occupants of all properties which adjoin the property where a
well is to be drilled.
      (2)   With a copy of the permit, a letter shall be filed with the Zoning
and Planning Department which identifies the owner(s) of the subject property
where the well is to be drilled; by name and address, identifying all persons,
including but not limited to the permit holder, who are responsible for the
drilling and operation of the well. The identification shall include, at a
minimum, names, addresses and work telephone numbers. Any contractors
performing gas or oil well drilling work shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Being registered with the city; and
         (b)   Obtaining a drilling permit from the city in the amount of $500.
      (3)   Plans for all wells, tank batteries, all excavation work
(including, but not limited to, boring pits) and all other site work shall be
presented to the Zoning and Planning Department and the City Engineer not less
than four weeks prior to the commencement of any drilling or other operations.
These plans shall show the topography of the site and all vehicular access to
and from the site, from any road or street.
      (4)   Plans showing all buildings on the subject premises, and all
buildings within 500 feet of the well and tank sites, shall be provided.
      (5)   No well may be drilled, or tank batteries located, in any location
where emergency vehicles (e.g., fire trucks and ambulances) cannot obtain
reasonable access to the site.
      (6)   No well is allowed to be drilled within any distance of any
structure or facility (e.g., a playground) which, based upon the specific facts
and circumstances surrounding such structure or facility, creates a threat to
the health, safety and welfare of said structure or facilities or occupants or
users thereof.
      (7)   Proof of insurance shall be filed with the Zoning and Planning
Department and the Law Director, prior to the commencement of drilling. The
proof of insurance must establish that the permit holder is insured by a
solvent insurer, licensed to do business in the state, with limits of
$3,000,000 per occurrence for personal injury and property damage. The city
shall be named as an additional insured policy.
      (8)   Emergency contact information for all persons engaged in drilling
and operating the well shall be filed with the Zoning and Planning Department
and the City Fire Chief, prior to the commencement of drilling. Such
information shall be immediately updated upon any change of circumstances.
      (9)   Within ten days after drilling operations have been completed, the
permit holder shall do all of the following:
         (a)   Remove all bore pits, and all well spoils from the subject
property;
         (b)   Fill all bore pits with clean fill dirt, and restore the grade
of the site to its previous elevation;
         (c)   Seed all disturbed sites with grass or other vegetative ground,
and ensure such ground cover becomes established; and
         (d)   Notify the Zoning and Planning Department and the City Engineer
that the site has been restored pursuant to the terms of this section. The
Zoning and Planning Department, the City Engineer and any other professional
needed by the city, shall inspect the site within 14 days of the notification.
      (10)   At all times relative to the drilling, operation and capping of
the well, the well and all tank facilities shall be secured from public access
by sufficient fencing and vegetation. The sufficiency of the fencing and
vegetation shall be determined by the Zoning and Planning Department.
      (11)   (a)   Within ten days after the drilling operations have been
completed; the permit holder shall plant sufficient vegetation which, in
conjunction with any fencing and natural vegetation, shall effectively and
permanently screen all above-ground facilities from all neighbors and from all
public and private rights-of-way while such facilities are on the subject
premises.
         (b)   The Zoning and Planning Department, City Engineer and any other
professional needed by the city shall determine the sufficiency of the
screening and vegetation and may order the permit holder to install additional
screening or plant more vegetation.
      (12)   The permit holder shall give the Zoning and Planning Department at
least four weeks advance notice before commencing to drill.
      (13)   A cash bond of $5,000 per well, shall be filed with the Zoning and
Planning Department to ensure sufficient securing and screening of facilities,
as provided herein, and to ensure the proper capping of the well, the removal
of all equipment and the restoration of the site after the well is abandoned.
The city shall return the bond upon the restoration of the site after the well
has been abandoned and all equipment has been removed.
      (14)   Notwithstanding any other provision of city ordinances, drilling
operations may occur 24 hours per day until the permitted depth is reached.
This provision does not obviate the permit holder’s obligation to ensure that
adjacent residents are not inconvenienced or otherwise impacted by any
nuisance, excessive noise or noxious fumes as further regulated in any city
ordinance.
      (15)   It shall be a violation of this section for a permit holder to
violate the terms and conditions of any state issued permit.
      (16)   A deposit in the amount of $2,500, per well, shall be filed with
the city, to ensure payment of any fees which will be incurred by the City
Engineer or any other professional the city determines it must engage. Upon
completion of all involvement by the City Engineer (or other professional), the
city shall return any funds which remain on deposit.
      (17)   (a)   The Zoning and Planning Department shall, within ten
business days of receipt of the plans, pursuant to division (B)(3) of this
section, review said plans and immediately advise the permit holder if anything
shown on the plans does not comply with the regulations set forth herein. In
the event that any permit holder fails to comply with the regulations herein
promulgated, the administrative official responsible for the enforcement hereof
(e.g., the Zoning and Planning Department or City Fire Chief, as designated),
shall provide written notice to the owner of the property and the permit holder
within 48 hours of the failure to comply.
         (b)   Such service shall be made to the addresses identified in
division (B)(2) of this section, and if no address has been provided to any
address identified on the permit issued by the state. The notice shall advise
the owner and the permit holder that if they wish to appeal the decision of the
administrative official, the time for appeal is five days after service of the
notice.
   (C)   Appeal. The determination of any administrative official, in applying
the regulations promulgated hereunder, which is adverse to the rights of any
owner of property or any permit holder may be appealed to the Board of Zoning
Appeals by filing a notice of appeal with the Zoning and Planning Department
within five days of notification by the administrative official that the permit
holder has not complied with the regulation. The appeal shall be heard at the
next Board of Zoning Appeals meeting, but such further hearings may be held as
required for the Board of Zoning Appeals to resolve the appeal. The decision of
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be final within the city.
   (D)   Severability. In the event any provision of these regulations is found
to be unconstitutional or otherwise held to be invalid, the remainder of these
regulations shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.134 JUNK MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The intent of these regulations is to address certain
properties in the city that have junk, dismantled, wrecked and/or unlicensed
vehicles on them. These regulations also provide an opportunity for those
vehicle owners and the properties associated with those vehicles for a hearing
and due process before final action is taken.
   (B)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   Storage of junk, dismantled and/or wrecked motor vehicles.
         (a)   No person shall willfully permit a junk, dismantled and/or
wrecked motor vehicle to remain in the open on private property, which the
person owns, occupies or controls after receipt of an order to remove the junk,
dismantled and/or wrecked motor vehicle. The order shall state that a hearing
appealing the order to remove the junk, dismantled and/or wrecked motor vehicle
may be had, shall describe the vehicle to be removed, and shall be served by
the Police Department or the Zoning and Planning Department in any manner
provided by the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure.
         (b)   If any recipient of an order to remove a junk, dismantled and/or
wrecked motor vehicle fails to appeal the same in writing within ten days after
its receipt to the Property Maintenance Enforcement Board, it shall be
conclusively presumed to establish the junk, dismantled and/or wrecked motor
vehicle as a nuisance and the junk, dismantled and/or wrecked motor vehicle
shall be removed by the Police Department immediately. The fact that a junk,
dismantled and/or wrecked motor vehicle is left on private property without the
filing of an appeal by the recipient of an order to remove a junk, dismantled
and/or wrecked motor vehicle is prima facie evidence of willful failure to
comply with the order.
         (c)   No person shall leave a junk, dismantled and/or wrecked motor
vehicle for any period of time on private property to which such person does
not have the right of possession without the authorization of the person having
the right of possession of such property.
         (d)   No person shall leave a junk, dismantled and/or wrecked motor
vehicle for any period of time on private property stored upon a trailer or
covered with a tarp or any type of vehicle cover.
      (2)   Storage of unlicensed vehicles.
         (a)   No person shall willfully permit an unlicensed motor vehicle to
remain in the open on private property, which the person owns, occupies or
controls after receipt of an order to remove the unlicensed motor vehicle. The
order shall state that a hearing appealing the order to remove the unlicensed
motor vehicle may be had, shall describe the vehicle to be removed, and shall
be served by the Police Department or by the Zoning and Planning Department in
any manner provided by the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure.
         (b)   If any recipient of an order to remove an unlicensed motor
vehicle fails to appeal the same in writing within ten days after its receipt
to the Property Maintenance Enforcement Board, it shall be conclusively
presumed to establish the motor vehicle shall be removed by the Police
Department immediately. The fact that an unlicensed motor vehicle is left on
private property without the filing of an appeal by the recipient of an order
to remove an unlicensed motor vehicle is prima facie evidence of willful
failure to comply with the order.
         (c)   No person shall leave an unlicensed motor vehicle for any period
of time on private property to which such person does not have the right of
possession without the authorization of the person having the right of
possession of such property.
         (d)   No person shall leave an unlicensed motor vehicle for any period
of time on private property stored upon a trailer or covered with a tarp or any
type of vehicle cover.
      (3)   Historical or collector motor vehicle defense. Any person claiming
historical or collector motor vehicle status for any motor vehicle in defense
of a violation of this section must provide proof that said vehicle is
registered as a historical or collector motor vehicle with the state’s Bureau
of Motor Vehicles, has been inspected, and is currently safe to operate on the
highways of the state.
   (C)   Appeals.
      (1)   Any person receiving an order to remove a motor vehicle pursuant to
division (B) of this section shall have a right to appeal the order to remove
to the Property Maintenance Enforcement Board. The appeal shall be filed in
writing within ten days after the order to remove is served.
      (2)   The Property Maintenance Enforcement Board shall hear any appeals
within 45 days after the appeal is filed. The Board shall determine if the
motor vehicle is in violation of division (B) of this section. If the vehicle
is found to be in violation by the Board, the Board shall order that the
vehicle be removed by the Police Department.
   (D)   Storage and disposal of motor vehicles.
      (1)   After a motor vehicle has been determined to be a junk, dismantled,
wrecked and/or unlicensed motor vehicle, as provided herein, the Police
Department shall immediately cause the junk, dismantled, wrecked and/or
unlicensed motor vehicle to be removed from the property where the junk,
dismantled, wrecked and/or unlicensed motor vehicle is located by a salvage
service and stored in a designated facility.
      (2)   Any junk, dismantled, wrecked and/or unlicensed motor vehicle which
has been removed and stored pursuant to this section shall be disposed of in
accordance with the following procedures.
         (a)   The Police Department shall cause a search to be made of the
records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain the owner and any
lienholder of the motor vehicle ordered into storage. If known, the Police
Department shall send or cause to be sent notice to the owner or lienholder at
the owner’s or lienholder’s last known address by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that the motor vehicle has been declared a nuisance and will
be disposed of if not claimed within ten days of the date of mailing of the
notice. The owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle may reclaim it upon
payment of any expenses or charges incurred in its removal and storage, and
presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a certificate of
title to the motor vehicle. If the owner or lienholder of the motor vehicle
reclaims it after a search of the records of the Bureau has been conducted and
after notice has been sent to the owner or lienholder as described in this
section, the owner or lienholder shall pay to the city a processing fee of $300
plus $50 per vehicle.
         (b)   If the owner or lienholder makes no claim to the motor vehicle
within ten days of the date of mailing of the notice, the motor vehicle shall
be disposed of by a motor vehicle salvage service or other facility as provided
in R.C. § 4513.62. The Police Department shall execute in triplicate an
affidavit, as prescribed by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, describing the
motor vehicle and the manner in which it will be disposed of, and that all
requirements of this section have been complied with. The Police Department
shall retain the original of the affidavit for its records, and shall furnish
two copies to the motor vehicle salvage service or other facility. Upon
presentation of a copy of the affidavit by the motor vehicle salvage service,
the Clerk of Courts shall issue to such owner a salvage certificate of title,
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
         (c)   Whenever a motor vehicle salvage service or other facility
receives an affidavit for the disposal of a motor vehicle as provided in this
section, the designated salvage service or facility shall not be required to
obtain an Ohio certificate of title to the motor vehicle in the salvage
service’s or facility’s own name if the vehicle is dismantled or destroyed and
both copies of the affidavit are delivered to the Clerk of Courts.
   (E)   Expenses as a lien. All expenses incurred by the city in removing any
junk, dismantled, wrecked and/or unlicensed motor vehicle, together with an
administrative charge of $300 plus $50 per vehicle, shall be reported to the
City Director of Finance, who shall mail a statement thereof to the owner of
the property, if his or her address is known. If after 30 days the amount
remains unpaid, the City Director of Finance shall certify the total amount of
the expense, the name of the owner of the land, and a sufficient description of
the premises to the County Fiscal Officer to be entered upon the tax duplicate,
to be a lien on the land from the date of entry, to be collected as other taxes
and assessments and returned to the city, pursuant to R.C. § 731.54.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 14-O-03, passed 8-6-2014) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.135 LITTER AND TRASH REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The intent of these regulations is to address certain
properties in the city that have litter or trash on them. These regulations
also provide an opportunity for those owners and occupants of lands affected by
these regulations for a hearing and due process before final action is taken.
   (B)   Throwing or depositing litter in public places; use of receptacles and
dumps. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or on any street, sidewalk or
other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized
private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps.
   (C)   Using receptacles to prevent scattering; damaging receptacles.
      (1)   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized
private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being
carried or deposited by the elements onto any street, sidewalk, or other public
place or private property.
      (2)   No person shall, without authority, upset, damage, tamper with or
destroy a public or private receptacle designed or used for the deposit of
litter or cause or permit its contents to be deposited or strewn in or on any
public place or private premises.
   (D)   Responsibility of landowners.
      (1)   No person shall sweep into or deposit into any ditch, gutter,
street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from
any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
      (2)   The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all
times maintain the premises free of litter. However, this section shall not
prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for
collection.
   (E)   Responsibility of merchants.
      (1)   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into
or deposit into any ditch, gutter, street or other public place within the city
the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway.
      (2)   Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city
shall keep their business premises free of litter.
   (F)   Litter thrown from vehicles.
      (1)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, highway or other public way or other public
way or place within the city, or on private property, except into a litter
receptacle in a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the
elements.
      (2)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road
or highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded or deposited
from the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that
prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
      (3)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
   (G)   Litter in parks.
      (1)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the
city, except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the
park or on any street or other public way or place.
      (2)   Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be
carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and
property disposed of elsewhere as provided herein.
   (H)   Litter in bodies of water. No person shall throw or deposit litter in
any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or any other body of water in a park or
elsewhere in the city.
   (I)   Dropping litter from aircraft. No person in an aircraft shall throw
out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or other object.
   (J)   Billposting. No person shall place, post or affix any notice, poster
or other paper or device on any lamppost, utility pole, structure or tree in
the public right-of-way, except as may be authorized by law.
   (K)   Litter on occupied private property. No person shall throw or deposit
litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such
person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property
may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner
that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements
upon a street, sidewalk, ditch or other public place or upon private property.
   (L)   Litter on vacant private property. No person shall throw or deposit
litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by
such a person or not.
   (M)   Construction sites.
      (1)   Construction sites shall be maintained in such a manner as to
prevent litter from accumulating thereon unrestrained or from being carried by
the elements onto other property. A water- tight, covered waste container,
constructed of durable material and having a capacity of at least 50 gallons,
shall be maintained on the site at all times.
      (2)   Dirt, sand, gravel and similar construction materials shall be
stored on construction sites in such manner as not to be deposited or tracked
on public streets or rights-of-way.
   (N)   Loading and unloading operations. Any owner or occupant of any
establishment or institution at which litter is attendant to the packing and
unpacking and loading and unloading of materials at exterior locations shall
provide at such establishment or institution water-tight, covered containers,
constructed of durable material and having a capacity of at least 50 gallons
for the disposal and storage of such litter, and shall at all times maintain
the dock area free of litter in such manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements on any public place or private
property.
   (O)   Clearing of litter by city.
      (1)   Notice to remove. The Zoning and Planning Department is hereby
authorized to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property, or any
other private property within the city, or the agent of such owner, to properly
dispose of litter located on such owner’s property which is dangerous to public
health, safety or welfare. The notice shall state that a hearing appealing the
notice to remove may be had, shall describe the litter and trash to be removed,
and shall be served by the Police Department or by the Zoning and Planning
Department in any manner provided by the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure.
      (2)   Right to appeal. Any person receiving a notice to remove pursuant
to this section shall have a right to appeal the notice to the Property
Maintenance Enforcement Board. The appeal shall be filed in writing within ten
days after the notice to remove is served. The Property Maintenance Enforcement
Board shall hear any appeals within 45 days after the appeal is filed. If the
property is found to be in violation of these regulations by the Board, the
Board shall order that the property be brought into compliance.
      (3)   Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of
any owner or agent served with a notice to remove, to appeal or to properly
dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within ten
days after service, as provided in this section, the Zoning and Planning
Department shall cause such litter to be removed, and may employ the necessary
labor to perform such work or cause it to be done by the city.
      (4)   Expenses as a lien. All expenses so incurred by the city, including
administrative costs, shall be reported to the Finance Director, who shall mail
a statement to the owner of the land, if his or her address is known. If, after
30 days, such amount remains unpaid, the Finance Director shall certify the
total amount of the expenses, the name of the owner of the land, and a
sufficient description of the premises, to the Fiscal Officer of the county, to
be entered upon the tax duplicate to be a lien on the land from the date of
entry, and to be collected as other taxes and assessments and returned to the
city, pursuant to R.C. § 731.54. The remedy herein provided shall be in
addition to the penalties provided in this chapter.
   (P)   Distributing handbills in or on public places.
      (1)   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on any sidewalk, street, ditch or other public place within the
city. No person shall hand out, distribute or sell any commercial handbill in
any public place.
      (2)   However, it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other
public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without
charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person
willing to accept it.
   (Q)   Placing handbills on vehicles.
      (1)   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or on any vehicle.
      (2)   However, it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person
to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, a
noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept
it.
   (R)   Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises. No person
shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any
private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant.
   (S)   Distributing handbills prohibited where posted. No person shall throw,
deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill on any private
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on
such premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign
bearing the words: “No Trespassing”, “No Peddlers or Agents”, “No
Advertisements” or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the
occupant of such premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right
of privacy disturbed or to have any handbills left on the premises.
   (T)   Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises.
      (1)   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or on private premises which are inhabited, except by
handling or transmitting such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other
person then present in or on such private premises. However, in the case of
inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in division (S) of
this section, unless requested by anyone on the premises not to do so, may
place or deposit such a handbill in or on the inhabited private premises if the
handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent it from being blown
or drifted about the premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places,
except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal
law or regulations.
      (2)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution
of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall
be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being
carried or deposited by the elements onto any street, sidewalk or other public
place or onto private property.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009) Penalty, see §
156.999
§ 156.136 ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM REGULATIONS; OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILERS.
   (A)   Outdoor wood-fired boiler or outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater or
outdoor wood heater or outdoor wood burning furnace means a fuel burning device
specified by the manufacturer for outside installation and designated to heat
interior building space and/or water via the distribution, typically through
pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a water/antifreeze
mixture.
   (B)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers may be permitted only in the C-D, R-1 and
R-2 Zoning Districts after a review and approval by the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   (C)   No person shall construct, install, establish, modify, operate or use
an outdoor wood-fired boiler unless all of the following conditions are met.
      (1)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers must be USEPA Phase 2 program qualified
models, or better.
      (2)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers may be located only in a rear yard.
      (3)   Minimum setback to all property lines shall be 150 feet.
      (4)   Except for the principal residence being serviced, an outdoor wood-
fired boiler shall be placed at least 250 feet from the nearest building
intended for human habitation, place of assembly, education, or occupancy by
the public on the surrounding properties.
      (5)   The maximum height for the outdoor wood-fired boiler and/or
enclosure shall not exceed 15 feet, measured from the average grade at the base
of the furnace to the top, not including the chimney stack.
      (6)   The property owner shall obtain all required building permits from
the County Building Standards Department prior to construction.
      (7)   Operation of outdoor wood-fired boilers is permitted only during
the established burning season, from September 15 through May 1.
      (8)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers shall have a chimney stack that is
recommended by the manufacturer’s specifications. The chimney stack of the
boiler shall be extended to height higher than the highest roof peak of the
principal residence and any other residence within 500 feet of the outdoor
wood-fired boiler, but in no event may the chimney stack exceed 55 feet in
height.
      (9)   The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be located at least 50 feet
from the residential structure on the same lot.
      (10)   The outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be located at least 25 feet
from accessory buildings on the same lot.
      (11)   Installation shall be done by a qualified professional and shall
be operated with strict adherence to manufacturer’s instructions.
      (12)   No person shall operate an outdoor wood-fired boiler in such a
manner as to create a nuisance.
      (13)   As a condition of approval of use, the property owner will provide
for access to the property for inspection of the system by city officials
during periods of operation, to determine compliance with all regulations.
      (14)   Outdoor wood-fired boilers and the area containing the fuel
materials shall be enclosed by a six foot high fence and landscaping and be
completely screened from view of any public right-of-way or from viewing of any
adjoining property.
      (15)   Fuel burned in any outdoor wood-fired boiler shall be only natural
untreated clean wood, wood pellets, corn products, biomass pellets or other
listed fuels specifically permitted by the manufacturer’s instructions, unless
the materials are otherwise prohibited to be used by this section. The
following fuels are strictly prohibited in outdoor wood-fired boilers.
         (a)   Wood that has been painted, varnished or coated with similar
material and/or pressure-treated with preservatives and contains resins or
glues as in plywood, particle board or other composite wood products;
         (b)   Construction and demolition debris, rubbish or garbage,
including, but not limited to, food wastes, food packaging, food wraps, yard
waste, asphalt products, animal waste including manure and carcasses;
         (c)   Any plastic materials including but not limited to nylon, PVC,
ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and
plastic containers;
         (d)   Rubber including tires and other rubber-like products;
         (e)   Newspaper, cardboard, or any paper with ink or dye products;
         (f)   Chemicals, waste petroleum products, creosote waste materials,
paint and paint thinners;
         (g)   Coal; and
         (h)   Any other items not specifically allowed by the manufacturer or
this section.
      (16)   Visible emission standard: no person shall cause or allow the
emission of a smoke plume from any outdoor wood-fired boiler to exceed an
average of 20% opacity for six consecutive minutes in any one-hour period.
      (17)   Nuisance conditions: no person shall cause or allow emissions of
air contaminants to the outdoor atmosphere of such quantity, characteristic or
duration that are injurious to human, plant or animal life or to property, or
that unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
Notwithstanding the existence of specific air quality standards or emission
limits, this prohibition applies to, but is not limited to, any particulate,
fume, gas, mist, odor, smoke, toxic or deleterious emission, either alone or in
combination with others.
   (D)   All wood fire boilers, existing and installed on or before the
effective date of this section shall be subject to the following.
      (1)   All wood fire boilers, existing and installed on or before the
effective date of this section, shall be operated in an environmentally safe
manner.
      (2)   All wood fire boilers, existing and installed on or before the
effective date of this section, shall at all times be operated according to the
manufacturer’s specifications and shall only use environmentally safe fuels.
Failure to operate a wood fire boiler in such a manner or the failure to use
environmentally safe fuels shall constitute a nuisance.
      (3)   Any wood fire boiler, existing and installed on or before the
effective date of this section, that is operated in a manner as to constitute a
nuisance to surrounding properties, as determined by city officials, shall,
after notice from the city’s Zoning and Planning Department, be brought into
compliance with the requirements of this chapter in a timely manner.
Requirements relative to minimum setbacks and distances from other residences
and/or buildings may be waived upon the granting of a variance by the city’s
Board of Zoning Appeals.
      (4)   In enacting this section, City Council determines that without
adequate regulation, existing wood fire boilers can constitute a nuisance as
that term is generally used in the Ohio Revised Code and associated case law.
The city, pursuant to its police powers found in the Ohio Revised Code, has the
authority to abate a preexisting use that has become a nuisance.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 11-O-01, passed 10-26-2011; Ord. 17-O-01,
passed 5-17-2017) Penalty, see §
156.999
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 156.150 PURPOSE.
   The goal of these regulations is to encourage development that contributes
to the city as a unique place, reflecting the community’s physical character
and adding to it in appropriate ways. The architectural design of
nonresidential developments, particularly large scale developments, determines
much of the character and attractiveness along the thoroughfares of the city,
the windows to our community. These regulations serve as a basis to promote
creative architectural designs that are in context with its surroundings.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.151 GENERAL ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   The design of nonresidential buildings and other structures shall comply
with the following standards and guidelines, except as otherwise provided in
plans and policies adopted by the city. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
at some time adopt a design guidebook to provide additional information and
clarification of the standards contained in this section.
   (A)   Compatible and unified design. The design, massing, materials, shape
and scale of all new or modified principal buildings and accessory structures
shall create a unified design on the premises and shall be visually compatible
with the surrounding buildings.
      (1)   Architectural styles similar to or compatible with existing
historical buildings of similar use adjacent to or across the street from the
site shall be encouraged. Compatibility and complementary design among existing
and proposed new structures shall be encouraged in all locations.
      (2)   Scale of new construction similar to that of the majority of
surrounding buildings is encouraged.
      (3)   Alterations and additions to existing buildings shall be compatible
in scale, material, color, placement and character with the existing buildings.
      (4)   Side and rear walls shall be so designed as to relate to and be
compatible with the front or main entry wall and overall design of the
building, although they may be less detailed and articulated.
      (5)   Any facade visible from a residential area should be designed to
incorporate the same architectural features as that of the facade containing
the main entrance.
      (6)   Materials shall be appropriate for the use of the proposed
structures, weathering and the relationship to other materials, including those
used on adjacent structures.
      (7)   Colors and textures shall be appropriate for the size and scale of
proposed structures, weathering and the relationship to other colors and
textures, including those used on adjacent structures.
      (8)   Pole building construction shall be used for accessory buildings
only.
      (9)   Site features such as fences, and walls, compatible in color,
texture, scale, materials and other characteristics with the main building
shall be encouraged.
   (B)   Use of architectural elements to break up mass. Buildings that are
characterized by a flat roof and a continuous wall elevation of uniform height
shall contain three dimensional architectural elements that serve to break up
the horizontal emphasis of the elevation. Building entrances, corners and other
similar features are examples that may be characterized by a separate mass.
      (1)   Architectural elements shall present a balanced design for the
entire building.
      (2)   Architectural details and ornamentation shall be meaningful to the
overall design and appropriate for the size and scale of proposed structures,
weathering and the relationship to other architectural details and
ornamentation, including those used on adjacent structures. Detailing such as
trim, moldings, bands of contrasting siding or brick, and varying textures of
concrete or stone are encouraged as part of an overall design which is in scale
with the building and carefully related to other elements.
      (3)   Varied roof lines, roof details and features such as dormers,
turrets, eave breaks, and overhangs are encouraged in new construction as a
means to break up the mass of large buildings and to provide visual interest.
Flat roofs are discouraged.
      (4)   Windows, doors and other openings shall be so located on the
facades and be of such dimensions as are appropriate for the style, scale and
orientation of the building and in a pattern which contributes to a balanced
facade appearance. Customer entrances should be accentuated. Decorative
elements, caps, brickwork and trim are encouraged around windows and doors to
add interest to the overall design.
      (5)   Distinctive architectural features of existing buildings should not
be altered or removed unless replaced with features of similar composition,
texture, color, design and other characteristics. Restoration of historic
features and building characteristics shall be encouraged.
      (6)   For a single story building, required architectural elements shall
have a height that exceeds the wall height of the dominant portion of the
building.
      (7)   Architectural elements shall be distributed in a manner that limits
the length of a continuous wall section of uniform height to not more than four
times the height of the building.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS
§ 156.165 PURPOSE.
   The intent of these regulations and requirements is to establish minimum
standards for the maintenance of existing natural amenities and the design and
installation of landscape improvements. Landscaping is a critical element of
the physical environment contributing to: development quality; compatibility
between land uses; reduction of negative physical, visual, noise, and lighting
impacts; reduction of the effects of erosive winds and storm water runoff
pollution; preservation of existing natural areas such as woodlands, wetlands
and floodplains within and adjacent to a development site; reestablishment of
native plants; energy conservation by providing shade from the sun and shelter
from the wind; stability of property values; and the overall improved character
of the city.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.166 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter shall apply to new subdivisions, new parks or open space,
new construction, or any substantial expansion, alteration or improvements to
an existing building, structure or paved area of a lot except for individual
single family dwellings and two family dwellings and parking lots of five
spaces or smaller. Substantial expansion of existing structures shall be
defined based on the criteria established below.
 
When Existing Structure is... A Substantial Expansion is...
0—1,000 sq. ft.             50% or greater
1,001—10,000 sq. ft.        40% or greater
10,001—25,000 sq. ft.       30% or greater
25,001—50,000 sq ft.        20% or greater
50,001 sq. ft. and larger     10% or greater
 
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.167 REGISTERED ENGINEER OR ARCHITECT.
   When new development, or the expansion of an existing structure, involves
the construction of more than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area, the
required landscaping plan shall be prepared by an architect or civil engineer
registered in the state.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.168 CONTENTS OF LANDSCAPING PLAN.
   The landscaping plan shall include the following minimum information:
   (A)   North arrow and scale: the landscaping plan shall be drawn on 24 inch
by 36 inch drawing sheets to a reasonable scale for the site, matching the
scale used for site plan or subdivision review. Typically landscaping plans are
prepared between a scale of one inch equals 20 feet for sites less than one
acre and a scale of one inch equals 40 feet for larger sites;
   (B)   The name, address and phone number of the applicant and owner(s) and
the name, address and phone number of the person or firm responsible for the
preparation of the landscaping plans;
   (C)   The date the plans are submitted or the date of revision;
   (D)   All property lines and easements;
   (E)   Existing and proposed contour lines at two-foot intervals with
elevations indicated at sufficient locations of the site to clearly show the
drainage patterns on the site and adjacent to the site;
   (F)   All existing and proposed buildings and other structures, streets,
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, paved areas, railroad tracks, utility poles, fire
hydrants, light standards, signs, fences and other permanent features on the
site and immediately adjacent to the site;
   (G)   Existing and proposed changes to the natural land features on the site
and adjacent to the site including, but not limited to, tree canopy cover,
meadows, planted areas, and water resources. Water resources include ponds,
lakes, streams, wetlands, floodplains, drainage ditches and retention areas,
rivers, and any other body of water or waterway;
   (H)   All proposed new or changes or additions to site grading, natural land
features, buildings and other structures, paved areas, walkways, and other
permanent features on the site;
   (I)   All landscaping and buffering to be retained, protected during
construction, added or removed;
   (J)   All new landscaping materials to be installed shall be indicated on a
schedule which includes the common and botanical names, specified installation
sizes, on-center planting dimensions when applicable, quantities required, and
other remarks as appropriate to describe the plant material selection;
   (K)   Details shall be shown for the planting of trees, shrubs and ground
cover within the buffered or landscaped area. When the list of plant material
to be removed contains existing trees, the landscape plan shall justify that
building location and placement has been developed with due consideration given
to minimizing removal of trees 18 inches in diameter or more. Include details
of barricade methods to protect existing landscape to remain, but which may be
effected by construction traffic patterns or re-grading. Temporary barricades
or fencing shall be erected along the drip line of the tree. If substantial re-
grading above existing conditions is necessary, show details of retaining walls
around the base of the trunk and drainage tile installation to protect the
entire drip line of the tree;
   (L)   Location and description of any and all storm water management or low
impact development techniques used in site design (e.g., rain gardens,
detention/retention ponds, wetland benches, filter strips and the like) shall
be shown;
   (M)   Additional information which is determined necessary by the Zoning
Administrator or the Planning and Zoning Commission to adequately review the
proposal; and
   (N)   The plans shall also include any proposed irrigation plan which shall
include the following:
      (1)   Location and type of all sprinkler heads;
      (2)   Size of mainline and irrigation piping;
      (3)   Location and size of water meter;
      (4)   Location of back flow prevention device;
      (5)   Location and size of all valves; and
      (6)   Location of irrigation controller.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.169 APPROVAL.
   (A)   No site or development plan required under this Zoning Code shall
receive final approval unless a landscaping plan has been submitted and
approved.
   (B)   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the County Building
Standards Department unless the following criteria are fully satisfied with
regard to the approved landscape plan:
      (1)   Such plan has been fully implemented on the site; or
      (2)   Such plan, because of seasonal conditions, cannot be implemented
immediately, but has been guaranteed by a postponed improvement agreement
between the developer and the city.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.170 BUILDING LANDSCAPING STANDARDS.
   Landscaping shall be installed at the base of all building elevations where
a principal entrance is located in the following manner.
   (A)   A minimum of two square feet of landscape area shall be established
for every linear foot of building frontage where landscaping is required.
   (B)   A minimum of one deciduous tree and three shrubs shall be installed
for every 100 square feet of required landscape area.
   (C)   Landscaped areas may be established along the foundation or as
planting islands.
   (D)   Landscaping areas shall be installed within 20 feet of the building
wall.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.171 SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING OF PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   Landscaping on the interior of parking lots. Interior landscaping of
parking lots shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements.
      (1)   For any parking area designed to accommodate 40 or more vehicles, a
minimum of 5% of the parking lot shall be planted as landscaped island areas,
developed and reasonably distributed throughout the parking lot so as to
provide visual and climatic relief from broad expanses of pavement.
         (a)   Each island shall be a minimum of ten feet in any horizontal
dimension.
         (b)   Within the landscaped islands, there shall be provided one major
shade tree for every ten parking spaces.
         (c)   Landscaped areas adjacent to the perimeter of the parking area
shall not be counted as interior parking lot landscaped areas.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section the area of a parking lot shall be
the total vehicular surface area including circulation aisles.
   (B)   Screening along public streets and perimeter of parking areas.
Whenever parking areas consisting of five spaces or more are located such that
the parked cars will be visible from a public street, screening, in addition to
the interior landscaping required in division (A) of this section, shall be
provided and maintained between the parking area and the street right-of-way as
follows.
      (1)   All shrubs, berms, walls and fences shall have a minimum height of
three feet and a maximum height of five feet.
      (2)   Such landscaping and screening shall be located parallel to and
within five feet of the edge of the parking lot.
      (3)   Such landscaping and screening shall be located to not obstruct the
view from vehicles entering and exiting the parking lot per §
156.174(C)(2).
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.172 LANDSCAPING ALONG THE STREET FRONTAGE.
   All areas within the required building and parking setback, excluding
driveway openings, shall be landscaped. The following minimum plant materials
shall be provided and maintained on all lots or developments except lots
devoted to single-family detached and two-family dwellings.
   (A)   One shade tree shall be provided for every 30 linear feet of lot
frontage or fraction thereof, not including drive entrances. Spacing shall take
into account an adjacent lot required to have trees by this section. Each tree,
at the time of installation, shall have a clear trunk height of at least six
feet and a minimum caliper of two inches.
   (B)   One shrub shall be provided for every ten linear feet of lot frontage
or fraction thereof, not including drive entrances.
   (C)   All areas not devoted to trees and shrubs shall be planted with grass,
ground cover or other live landscape treatment, excluding paving or gravel.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.173 SCREENING AND BUFFERING OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
   Protective screening and buffers for residential areas adjacent to
nonresidential areas shall be provided for the purpose of minimizing the
friction between incompatible land uses and improving the aesthetic and
functional quality of new development.
   (A)   Screening and bufferyard requirements. When any nonresidential or
multi-family land use is proposed to abut any C-D, R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-L Zoning
District, a minimum bufferyard composed of a wall, fence, greenbelt or mounding
providing 75% year-round opacity is required.
      (1)   This bufferyard shall consist of either one of the following:
         (a)   A six foot high wall or solid fence shall be placed six feet
from the nonresidential property line. The area between such wall or fence and
the property line shall be treated with tree and shrub plantings to form a
permanent landscaped area; or
         (b)   A greenbelt shall be a strip along the property line of at least
ten feet in width. Such greenbelt shall be planted and maintained with
evergreens such as spruce, pine or firs at least five feet in height or a hedge
of evergreens at least four feet in height situated so as to provide an
effective and permanent visual buffer.
      (2)   A two to five foot undulating earthen mound may be constructed
within the required setback for any yard directly abutting the residentially
zoned property. If constructed, the mound will be constructed adjacent to the
residentially zoned property and will be aligned with any existing mound
located within the setback for any similar yard of any immediately adjacent
property. Said mound shall be as wide as necessary to obtain a maximum slope of
three to one (horizontal to vertical angle of repose). The mound/berm itself
shall have a grass or other suitable vegetative cover to prevent erosion. On
top of the mound or berm, a staggered row of trees and shrubs shall be planted
that maintains dense foliage 365 days a year (coniferous) minimum height of
four feet. Said trees shall be planted an average of ten feet apart.
      (3)   The portion of any screening and bufferyard area not covered by
plantings shall be kept in a healthy growing condition and neat and orderly in
appearance.
      (4)   Where vegetative and/or topographic conditions that provide a
natural screening and buffer exist prior to development of properties in
question, every effort shall be made to retain such conditions.
   (B)   Bufferyard establishment. Once a bufferyard has been approved by the
Planning and Zoning Commission and established by the owner, it may not be
used, disturbed or altered for any purpose.
   (C)   Modification of requirements. The Planning and Zoning Commission may
waive the requirements for a wall, fence or greenbelt if equivalent screening
is provided by existing or planned parks, recreation areas or by topography or
other natural conditions.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.174 LANDSCAPING MATERIALS AND INSTALLATION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Existing vegetation. Existing landscaping material or natural
vegetation shown on a landscaping or site plan that is in satisfactory
condition may be used to satisfy any requirements of this subchapter in whole
or in part, as determined by the Zoning Administrator, if protected and
maintained in accordance to generally accepted nursery industry principles and
procedures during the construction phase of the development.
   (B)   New plant material. All new plant material shall conform to the latest
version of the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1) and shall have
passed any inspection required under state regulations. Alternatives to these
materials that can be shown to meet both the intent and requirements of this
Zoning Code may be approved as part of a landscaping plan.
      (1)   Plant material shall be of standard quality or better, true to name
and type of the required species or variety, and free of disease, insects and/
or damage.
      (2)   Plant material selection should include consideration of soil type
and depth, the amount of maintenance required, spacing, exposure to sun and
wind, the slope and contours of the site, and compatibility with existing
native vegetation preserved on the site.
   (C)   Installation. All required new landscaping, screening and buffering
materials shall be installed in accordance with generally accepted nursery
industry principles and procedures.
      (1)   Nursery stock identification tags. Nursery stock identification
tags shall not be removed from any planting prior to inspection and approval of
final installation by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Vision clearance areas. All landscaped areas on corner lots and
road right-of-ways in buffer yards or median strips must meet traffic safety
vision clearance standards and shall be reviewed by the Service Director. No
vegetation which obscures driver visibility should be planted within a 25-foot
sight distance triangle for a street intersection; however trees with at least
eight feet of limbless trunk may be permitted.
   (D)   Vegetative landscaping materials. The following items are suitable
vegetation for screening use individually or in combination with each other
provided they create the desired density of screening, subject to review and
approval by the Zoning Administrator.
      (1)   Grass and ground cover.
         (a)   Grass of the fescus (Gramineak) or bluegrass (Poaceae) family
shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the county.
Grass species shall be selected to assure slow growth and low water consumption
whenever possible.
            1.   In swales or other areas subject to erosion, solid sod,
erosion reducing nets or suitable mulch shall be used and nursegrass seed shall
be sown for immediate protection until complete coverage otherwise is achieved
and shall be reviewed by the County Soil and Water Conservation District.
            2.   Grass sod shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests
or diseases.
         (b)   Ground cover shall provide 75% complete coverage after one
complete growing season. If approved as part of a landscaping plan, ground
cover may also consist of rocks, pebbles, wood chips, and/or other natural
material.
      (2)   Shrubs and hedges.
         (a)   Shrubs and hedges shall be at least 36 inches average in height
and spread at the time of planting. Where required as buffering, all shrubs and
hedges shall be designed to provide a continuous, year-round, solid visual
screen.
         (b)   Shrubs and hedges shall be permitted in all zoning districts,
but shall not be located within a drainage easement, floodway, floodplain or
other area which would be detrimental to the public health and safety.
      (3)   Trees.
         (a)   Trees shall be desired species which are resistant to insects
and disease and should not be placed in locations which could cause
interference with above and below ground utilities or street lighting. Required
trees shall have the following specifications at the time of planting.
            1.   Deciduous trees shall have a minimum caliper of at least two
inches (as measured six inches above ground) conforming to acceptable nursery
industry procedures at the time of planting. If deciduous trees are to be used
for screening purposes, additional materials listed in this section must be
used to create a dense buffer and tree species should be used which have an
ultimate height no greater than 40 feet.
            2.   Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height at
the time of planting. Evergreen plantings shall be planted at a maximum
distance of 15 feet on center to provide an effective, dense screen within four
years of planting.
         (b)   Every development shall retain all existing trees 18 inches in
diameter or more unless during the landscaping plan review process, it is
determined that the retention of such trees would unreasonably burden the
development.
   (E)   Species.
      (1)   Diversity requirements. Maintaining diversity of trees is important
to preservation of woodland habitat and can be achieved by preventing an over-
dependence on a few species. The over-use of a few species is inevitable
without a conscious effort to vary plant species and families. The use of
several varieties adds interest to the plantings of the city and insures
against the loss of all trees in case of an epidemic disease or insect
infestation striking any one species. The International Society of
Arboriculture’s “Diversification Formula” shall be used as a guideline to
prevent over planting of a single species or family.
      (2)   Desired shade trees.
         (a)   The following deciduous trees are hardy in Zone 5 and reach a
mature height as indicated in the following table:
Desired Shade Trees
Small                  Medium                            Large
Mature Height Under 30 Mature Height Between 30 ft.—50 Mature Height Over 50
ft.                    ft.                               ft.
Desired Shade Trees
Small                  Medium                            Large
Mature Height Under 30 Mature Height Between 30 ft.—50 Mature Height Over 50
ft.                    ft.                               ft.
Hedge maple            Amur cork                         Red maple
Sourwood               River burch                       Norway maple
Hornbeam               Yellowwood                        Sugar maple
Paperbark maple        Thornless honeylocust             European beech
Amur maple             Japanese zelkova                  Red oak
European hornbeam      Dawn redwood                      Pin oak
Dogwood species        Callery pear                      London planetree
Crabapple              Littleleaf linden                 Scarlet oak
Eastern redbud         Hackberry                         Willow oak
                                                       Shumardi oak
                                                       Shingle oak
                                                       Ginko biloba (male
                                                         only)
                                                       Elm
 
         (b)   Other shade trees which are native and hardy to Zone 5 of the
United States Department of Agriculture Plant Hardiness Zone Map may also be
used within the landscaped or buffer yard area.
      (3)   Desired flowering trees. The following deciduous trees are hardy in
Zone 5 and reach a mature height not exceeding 30 feet.
 
Callery pear           Dogwood species     Saucer magnolia
Crabapple              Lilac               Star magnolia
Eastern redbud         Carolina silverbell Hawthorne species
Downy serviceberry     Golden raintree      
Allegheny serviceberry Sweetbay magnolia    
 
      (4)   Desired evergreen trees. The following evergreen trees are hardy in
Zone 5 and can reach a mature height over 30 feet. If not limbed-up, these
trees can create a screen from the ground level up.
 
Desired Evergreen Trees
American holly   Carolina hemlock
Austrian pine    Norway spruce
Canadian hemlock Colorado blue spruce
White fir        Scotch pine
 
      (5)   Desired deciduous shrubs. These perennial woody plants are tolerant
in Zone 5 and grow at least three feet in height.
 
Desired Deciduous Shrubs
Burning bush      Winterberry barberry Spirea species
Viburnum species  Quince               Spreading cotoneaster
Forsythia species Shrub cinquefoil     Greenlane euonymus
Witch hazel       Shrub roses          Rhododendron species
Azalea species    Honey suckle         Privet species
 
      (6)   Desired evergreen shrubs. These perennial woody plants are tolerant
in Zone 5 and grow at least three feet in height.
 
Desired Evergreen Shrubs
Anglojap yew    Spreading yew  Leatherleaf viburnum
Blue holly      Japanese yew   Mugho pine
Chinese juniper Korean boxwood Juniper species
 
      (7)   Undesirable species with potentially harmful characteristics. Trees
which produce nuts, seeds or fruit, or large root systems can create
undesirable hazards to pedestrians, vehicles, and/or public utilities. The
species of trees identified in the following table shall not be planted in such
a manner that the natural drip line of an average adult tree of the species
planted will be any closer than three feet of a parking lot which direct
unfiltered storm water into public storm sewers, a public right-of-way or a
pedestrian walkway.
Undesirable Species with Potentially Harmful Characteristics
Undesirable Species with Potentially Harmful Characteristics
Ailanthus                     Osage-orange
American elm                  Pear, Bradford
Apple common                  Plum
Box elder or ash leaved maple Poplar
Catalpa                       Sassafras
Cherry black                  Siberian elm
Chestnut                      Silver maple
Cottonwood                    Sumac
Gingko biloba (female)        Sweetgum
Hickory                       Thorned hawthorns
Kentucky coffee tree          Tree of heaven
Locust common                 Tulip tree or tulip poplar
Mulberry                      Walnut
Oregon maple                  Willow
 
      (8)   Prohibited species. No person shall plant any trees which the
state’s Department of Natural Resources has quarantined or placed on alert. Any
person who is the owner of any such tree in the City shall cause the same to be
removed, killed or girdled within 60 days after notice from the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.175 MAINTENANCE OF LANDSCAPING AND BUFFERYARDS.
   (A)   All landscaping materials shall be installed and maintained according
to accepted nursery industry procedures.
   (B)   The owner of the property shall be responsible for the continued
property maintenance of all landscaping materials, and shall keep them in a
proper, neat and orderly appearance free from refuse and debris at all times.
   (C)   All unhealthy or dead plant material shall be replaced within one
year, or by the next planting period, whichever comes first.
   (D)   Violation of these installation and maintenance provisions shall be
grounds for the Zoning Administrator to require replacement of the landscape
material, or institute legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this
section.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.176 MODIFICATION.
   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the authority to modify any of
the aforementioned requirements in this subchapter, in considering an
individual site with respect to changes in elevation, environmental impact,
durability of plant material, aesthetic appeal, and any other factor that will
develop a compatible buffer or screen with the surrounding neighborhood at the
time of application.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
NATURAL RESOURCE PRESERVATION REGULATIONS
§ 156.190 RIPARIAN DEVELOPMENT SETBACK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. Since it is hereby determined that the system of streams
within the city contribute to the health, safety and general welfare of the
residents of the city, these riparian development setback regulations are
enacted in order to protect and preserve the water quality within the streams
of the city and to protect residents of the city from property loss and damage
because of flooding and other impacts of the stream. These regulations shall
control uses and development within a riparian setback that would impair the
ability of the riparian area to:
      (1)   Reduce flood impacts by absorbing peak flows, slowing the velocity
of floodwaters and regulating base flow;
      (2)   Stabilize the banks of streams to reduce bank erosion and the
downstream transport of sediments eroded from stream banks;
      (3)   Reduce pollutants in streams during periods of high flows by
filtering, settling and transforming pollutants already present in streams or
in runoff before they enter streams;
      (4)   Provide areas for natural meandering and lateral movement of stream
channels;
      (5)   Reduce the presence of aquatic nuisance species to maintain diverse
and connected riparian vegetation;
      (6)   Provide high quality stream habitats with shade and food to a wide
array of wildlife by maintaining diverse and connected riparian vegetation;
      (7)   Benefit the city economically by minimizing encroachment on stream
channels and reducing the need for costly engineering solutions such as dams
and riprap, to protect structures and reduce property damage and threats to the
safety of watershed residents, and by contributing to the scenic beauty and to
the environment of the city, the quality of life for the city residents and
corresponding property values; and
      (8)   Protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
   (B)   Compliance and violations. No zoning approvals or zoning certificates
shall be issued by the city without full compliance with the terms of these
provisions.
   (C)   Establishment of a riparian setback.
      (1)   Riparian setbacks are established as provided in this subchapter
and as defined in §
156.246. Streams addressed by these regulations are those which meet the
definition of “stream” in §
156.246 and appear on at least one of the following maps:
         (a)   USGS topographical map;
         (b)   Summit County Riparian Setback map; and
         (c)   Soils maps found in the Soil Survey of Summit County, Ohio,
USDA, NCRS.
      (2)   Widths of setbacks are measured as horizontal map distance outward
from the ordinary high water mark on each side of a stream, and are established
as follows:
         (a)   A minimum of 300 feet on each side of all streams draining an
area greater than 300 square miles;
         (b)   A minimum of 100 feet on each side of all streams draining an
area greater than 20 square miles and up to 300 square miles;
         (c)   A minimum of 75 feet on each side of all streams draining an
area greater than 0.5 square miles (320 acres) and up to 20 square miles;
         (d)   A minimum of 50 feet on each side of all streams draining an
area greater than 0.05 square miles (32 acres) and up to 0.5 square miles (320
acres); and
         (e)   A minimum of 30 feet on each side of all streams draining an
area less than 0.05 square miles (32 acres).
      (3)   The following are exempt from the terms and protection of these
regulations: grassy swales; roadside ditches; drainage ditches created at the
time of a subdivision to convey storm water to another system; tile drainage
systems and stream culverts.
   (D)   Modification of riparian setbacks.
      (1)   Where the 100-year floodplain is wider that the riparian setback on
either or both sides of the stream, the riparian setback shall be extended to
the outer edge of the 100-year floodplain. The 100-year floodplain shall be
defined by FEMA and approved by the County Building Standards Department.
      (2)   Because the gradient of the riparian corridor significantly
influences impacts on the stream, the following adjustment for steep slopes
will be integrated into the riparian setback formulae for width determination:
 
Average Percent Slope        Width of Setback
15% through 20%              Add 25 feet
Greater than 20% through 25% Add 50 feet
Greater than 25%             Add 100 feet
 
      (3)   Average percent slope of the streambank is to be calculated for the
area within the riparian setback and is to be measured as a line perpendicular
to the stream channel at the location where structures or uses are proposed in
the plan. All of the following measurements are to be performed using County of
Summit Geographical Information System data (1994, 2000).
      (4)   Calculate slope as follows: change in elevation from the edge of
stream channel to the edge of the riparian setback divided by horizontal map
distance from the edge of the stream channel to the edge of the riparian
setback.
      (5)   Where wetlands protected under federal or state law are identified
within the riparian setback, the riparian setback shall consist of the full
extent of the wetlands plus the following additional setback widths:
         (a)   A 50-foot setback extending beyond the outer boundary of a
Category 3 wetlands;
         (b)   A 30-foot setback extending beyond the outer boundary of a
Category 2 wetlands; and
         (c)   No additional setback shall be required adjacent to Category 1
wetlands.
      (6)   Wetlands shall be delineated by a qualified professional under
guidelines established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency and the site delineation approved by the
appropriate agencies. All wetland delineations shall also include the latest
version of the Ohio Rapid Assessment Method for wetland evaluation approved at
the time of application of the regulations.
      (7)   The applicant shall be responsible for delineating the riparian
setback, including any expansions or modifications as required by this
subchapter and identifying this setback on all subdivisions, site plans and/or
zoning certificate applications. This delineation shall be done at the time of
application of the preliminary plans, or all plans that are required, or at the
time of submission of any permit applications. This delineation shall be
subject to review and approval by the Summit SWCD, which may require additional
studies from the applicant.
      (8)   Prior to any soil disturbing activity, the riparian setback shall
be clearly delineated with construction fencing or other suitable material by
the applicant on-site, and such delineation shall be maintained throughout
soil-disturbing activities. The delineated area shall be maintained in an
undisturbed state unless otherwise permitted by these regulations. All fencing
shall be removed when a development project is completed.
      (9)   No approvals or permits shall be issued by the city prior to
delineation of the riparian setback in conformance with these regulations.
      (10)   Upon completion of an approved subdivision, the riparian setback
shall be permanently recorded on the plat records for the county.
   (E)   Permitted uses in the riparian setback (no permit required).
      (1)   Passive recreational uses, such as hiking, non-motorized bicycling,
fishing, hunting, picnicking and similar uses (as permitted by federal, state
and local laws) and associated structures including boardwalks, pathways
constructed of pervious materials, picnic tables and wildlife viewing areas;
      (2)   Removal of damaged or diseased trees, provided that logs and
branches resulting from the removal of said trees that are greater than six
inches in diameter shall be anchored to the shore or removed from the 100-year
floodplain;
      (3)   Revegetation and/or reforestation with the approval of Summit SWCD.
Species of shrubs and vines recommended for stabilizing flood prone areas along
streams as listed in division (L) of this section; and
      (4)   The County Engineer maintains the right of access to all streams
within the county for the purposes outlined in the R.C. §§ 6131.01 to 6131.64,
6133.01 to 6133.15, 6135.01 to 6135.27 and 6137.051.
   (F)   Permitted uses in the riparian setback with prior approval of the
design (permit required from the city).
      (1)   Streambank stabilization/erosion control measures. Best management
practices (BMPs) for stream bank stabilization or erosion control may be
allowed if such practices are within permitted uses by the local, state and
federal government regulations and are ecologically compatible and emphasize
the use of natural materials and native plant species where practical and
available. Such streambank stabilization/erosion control practices shall only
be undertaken upon approval of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)
by the Summit SWCD.
      (2)   Crossings. In reviewing plans for stream crossings, the city may
confer with the Summit SWCD; the state’s Department of Natural Resources,
Division of Natural Areas; the state’s Environmental Protection Agency,
Division of Surface Water; the County Engineer; the County Department of
Sanitary Sewers; the County Public Health Department; or other technical
experts as necessary.
         (a)   Limited crossings of designated streams through the riparian
setback by vehicles, storm sewers, sewer and/or water lines and public utility
lines will be per the approval of local, county and state governing agencies
and as a part of the regular subdivision review process.
         (b)   One driveway crossing per stream per tax parcel shall be allowed
for individual landowners.
         (c)   Roadway crossings for major and minor subdivisions, open space
subdivisions or any other non-single family residential use shall be designed
and constructed per the County Engineer’s design standards and as approved by
the city’s Planning and Zoning Commission. If more than two crossings per 1,000
linear feet of stream center are required for these areas, the applicant must
apply for a variance.
         (d)   All roadway crossings shall be perpendicular to the stream flow
and shall minimize disturbance to the Riparian Setback and shall mitigate any
necessary disturbances.
      (3)   Storm water retention or detention facilities may be considered
with the riparian setback if the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Storm water quality treatment that is consistent with current
state standards is incorporated into the basin; and
         (b)   The storm water quality treatment basin is located at least 50
feet from the ordinary high water mark of the stream.
   (G)   Prohibited uses in the riparian setback.
      (1)   Construction. There shall be no structures of any kind, except as
permitted under these regulations.
      (2)   Dredging or dumping. There shall be no drilling for petroleum or
mineral products, mining activity, filling or dredging of soils, spoils, or any
material, natural or human-made, except as permitted under these regulations.
      (3)   Roads or driveways. There shall be no roads or driveways, except as
permitted under these regulations.
      (4)   Motorized vehicles. There shall be no use of motorized vehicles of
any kind, except as permitted under these regulations.
      (5)   Modification of natural vegetation. Modification shall be limited
to conservation maintenance that the landowner deems necessary to control
noxious weeds; for such plantings as are consistent with these regulations; and
for the passive enjoyment, access and maintenance of landscaping or lawns
existing at the time of passage of these regulations. The landowner is not
required to plant or undertake any other activities in the riparian setback
provided the landowner allows for natural succession.
      (6)   Parking lots. There shall be no parking lots or other human-made
impervious cover, except as permitted under these regulations.
      (7)   New surface and/or subsurface sewage disposal or treatment area. No
disposal or treatment of sewage shall be allowed except for the following:
         (a)   Undeveloped parcels that have received site evaluation approval
and/or permit approval prior to the enactment of these regulations; and
         (b)   Dwellings served by disposal/ treatment systems existing at the
time of passage of these regulations when such systems are properly sited
(approved site evaluation) and/or permitted in accordance with the County
Public Health Department and/or the state’s Environmental Protection Agency.
Existing failing systems which are located within the riparian setback can be
upgraded only with approval of the County Public Health Department and/or the
state’s Environmental Protection Agency.
   (H)   Nonconforming structures or uses in the riparian setback. Structures
and uses within the riparian setback existing on the date these regulations
became effective, and that are not permitted under these regulations, may be
continued but shall not be expanded except for residential structures or uses
as follows:
      (1)   The expansion conforms to the existing zoning regulations;
      (2)   The expansion shall not impact the stream channel or the 100-year
floodplain;
      (3)   The expansion shall not exceed an area of 15% of the footprint of
the existing structure or use that lies within the riparian setback. Expansions
exceeding 15% of the total footprint within the riparian setback must be
obtained through a variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals; and
      (4)   Nonresidential structures or uses shall be permitted only through a
variance from the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (I)   Boundary interpretation and appeals procedure.
      (1)   When an applicant disputes the boundary of the riparian setback or
the ordinary high water mark of a stream, the applicant shall submit evidence
to the Summit SWCD, with a copy to the Zoning Administrator that describes the
boundary, presents the applicant’s proposed boundary and presents all
justification for the proposed boundary change.
      (2)   The Summit SWCD shall evaluate all materials submitted and shall
make a written recommendation to the Board of Zoning Appeals within a
reasonable period of time not to exceed 60 days. A copy of this recommendation
shall be submitted to the applicant. If during this evaluation the Summit SWCD
requires further information to complete this evaluation, the applicant may be
required to provide additional information.
      (3)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall decide such boundary disputes.
The party contesting the location of the riparian setback or the ordinary high
water mark of the streams as determined by these regulations shall have the
burden of proof in case of any such appeal.
      (4)   Application for a variance shall be as per §
156.041 (Variance Review) of this Zoning Code.
   (J)   Limitations and constraints on variances within the riparian setback.
The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide all
applications for variances to the provisions of this subchapter.
      (1)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consult with representatives of
the Summit SWCD; the state’s Department of Natural Resources, Division of
Natural Areas; the state’s Environmental Protection Agency, Division of Surface
Water; the County Engineer; the County Department of Sanitary Sewers; the
County Public Health Department; or other technical experts as necessary to
consider variance requests.
      (2)   Expansions of residential structures or uses exceeding 15% of the
footprint area and expansions of all nonresidential structures or uses are
subject to consideration based on the following provisions:
         (a)   The expansion conforms to the existing zoning regulations;
         (b)   The expansion must not impact the stream channel or 100-year
floodplain;
         (c)   1.   The expansion of a nonresidential structure or use must not
affect upstream or downstream hydrologic conditions which could cause damage
from flooding or streambank erosion to landowners in those areas.
            2.   A hydrologic study must be completed by nonresidential
applicants only as a process of the variance application.
         (d)   The expansion of a nonresidential structure or use shall not
exceed 25% of the footprint area. The 25% expansion limit is for the portion of
the structure or use that lies within the riparian setback.
      (3)   Requests for variances for subdivisions shall be considered for the
following:
         (a)   An additional stream crossing or crossings for a subdivision or
open space development which is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of
the residents in the subdivision; and
         (b)   A reduction of setback width, not to exceed 10% of the
prescribed riparian setback width.
      (4)   No variances shall be granted for expansion of the following
structures or uses:
         (a)   Facilities which use, store, distribute or sell petroleum-based
products or any hazardous materials, such as but not limited to, asphalt
plants, dry cleaners, gasoline service stations, and road maintenance
facilities; and
         (b)   Facilities which use, store, distribute or sell products which
may contribute higher than acceptable concentrations of dissolved or
particulate matter to storm water runoff around the facility, such as but not
limited to, landfills or transfer stations, junk yards, recycling facilities,
quarries and borrow pits, sand and gravel extraction operations and road salt
storage barns.
      (5)   In reviewing whether or not to grant variances to these
regulations, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider the following:
         (a)   The extent to which the requested variance impairs the functions
of the riparian area, based on sufficient technical and scientific evidence as
provided by the applicant and the agencies listed in the preceding portions of
division (J)(1) of this section;
         (b)   The soil type and natural vegetation of the parcel as well as
the percentage of the parcel that is in the 100-year floodplain;
         (c)   The degree of hardship these regulations place on the applicant
and the availability of alternatives to the proposed activity; and
         (d)   Whether a front, side or rear yard setback variance should be
considered to maintain the required riparian setback area.
   (K)   Inspection of riparian setback.
      (1)   The riparian setback shall be inspected by the Summit SWCD:
         (a)   When a preliminary subdivision plat or other land development
plan is submitted to the city;
         (b)   When a building or zoning permit is requested; and
         (c)   Prior to any soil disturbing activity to inspect the delineation
of the riparian setback as required under these regulations.
      (2)   The riparian setback shall also be inspected annually or as time
permits by the Summit SWCD or approved monitoring entity for compliance with
any approvals under these regulations or any time evidence is brought to the
attention of the Summit SWCD that uses or structures are occurring that may
reasonably be expected to violate the provisions of these regulations.
   (L)   Recommended species. Species of shrubs and vines recommended for
stabilizing floodprone areas along streams: the following list of woody plants
suitable for riparian areas was assembled by Roger Gettig, The Holden Arboretum
for Chagrin River Watershed Partners.
Flood Tolerance       Common Name Shade Tolerance**
High Flood Tolerance*
Flood Tolerance           Common Name               Shade Tolerance**
High Flood Tolerance*
Aronia arbutifolia        Red chokeberry            3
Aronia melanocarpa        Black chokeberry          3
Cephalanthus occidentalis Common buttonbush         5
Clethra alnifolia         Summersweet clethra***    2
Cornus amomum             Silky dogwood             4
Cornus stolonifera        Redosier dogwood          5
(sericea)
Hamamelis vernalis        Vernal witchhazel ***     3
Ilex decidua              Possumhaw ***             3
Ilex glabra               Inkberry ***              2
Ilex verticillata         Common winterberry        3
Itea virginica            Virginia sweetspire ***   1
Magnolia virginiana       Sweetbay magnolia ***     2
Myrica pensylvanica       Northern bayberry         4
Physocarpus opulifolius   Common ninebark           4
Potentilla fruticosa      Bush cinquefoil           4
Sambucus canadensis       American elderberry       1
Salix x cotteti           “Bankers” willow ***  5
Salix exigua              Sandbar willow            5
Salix purpurea            “Streamco” willow *** 5
Viburnum cassinoides      Witherod viburnum         2
Parthenocissus            Virginia creeper (vine)   1
quinquefolia
Moderate Flood Tolerance* Common Name               Shade Tolerance**
Calycanthus floridus      Common sweetshrub         1
Hypericum kalmianum       Kalm St. Johnswort        5
Viburnum dentatum         Arrowwood viburnum        2
Xanthorhiza simplicissima Yellowroot ***            1
Intermediate Flood        Common Name               Shade Tolerance**
Tolerance*
Aesculus parviflora       Bottlebush buckeye ***    2
Aesculus pavia            Red buckeye ***           2
Cornus racemosa           Gray dogwood              2
Lindera benzoin           Common spicebush          1
Rosa setigera             Prairie rose              4
Campsis radicans          Trumpetcreeper (vine)     3
Lonicera dioica           Limber honeysuckle (vine) 2
Corylus americana         American filbert          2
Diervilla lonicera        Dwarf bushhoneysuckle     1
Fothergilla gardeni       Dwarf fothergilla ***     1
Fothergilla major         Large fothergilla ***     1
Hydrangea arborescens     Smooth hydrangea          1
Hydrangea quericifolia    Oakleaf hydrangea ***     1
Mahonia aquifolium        Oregongrape holly ***     1
Rosa carolina             Carolina rose             4
Rubus odoratus            Fragrant thimbleberry     1
Vaccinium stamineum       Common deerberry          2
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi   Bearberry                 4
Cornus rogusa             Roundleaf dogwood         1
Low Flood Tolerance       Common Name               Shade Tolerance**
Corylus americana         American filbert          2
Diervilla lonicera        Dwarf bushhoneysuckle     1
Fothergilla gardeni       Dwarf fothergilla ***     1
Fothergilla major         Large fothergilla ***     1
Hydrangea arborescens     Smooth hydrangea          1
Hydrangea quericifolia    Oakleaf hydrangea ***     1
Mahonia aquifolium        Oregongrape holly ***     1
Rosa carolina             Carolina rose             4
Rubus odoratus            Fragrant thimbleberry     1
Symphoricarpos albus      Common snowberry          1
Vaccinium stamineum       Common deerberry          2
No Flood Tolerance        Common Name               Shade Tolerance**
Amorpha canescens         Leadplant ***             5
Ceanothus americanus      New Jersey tea            3
Comptonia peregrina       Sweetfern                 2
Dirca palustris           Leatherwood               1
Hypericum frondosum       Golden St. Johnswort      5
Juniperus communis        Common juniper            5
Juniperus horizontalis    Creeping juniper ***      5
Rhus aromatica            Fragrant sumac            5
Sambucus pubens           Scarlet elder             1
Symphoricarpos albus      Common snowberry          1
*High Flood Tolerance: generally lowland wet species surviving when flooded or
exposed to high water table more than 40% of the growing season
*Moderate Flood Tolerance: generally lowland wet species surviving when
flooded or exposed to high water table more than 30% of the growing season but
less than 40%
*Intermediate Flood Tolerance: generally lowland wet-mesic species surviving
occasional inundation or elevated water table between 20% and 30% of the
growing season
*Low Flood Tolerance: generally upland mesic and mesic-dry species rarely
inundated or exposed to an elevated water table for periods of short duration,
between 5% and 20% of the growing season
*No Flood Tolerance: generally upland dry species exhibiting immediate and
rapid decline frequently culminating in death if inundated or exposed to
elevated water table for more than 5% of the growing season
**Shade Tolerance: shade tolerance means able to grow in a state of health and
vigor beneath dense shade. In this ranking, shrubs and vines are ranked on a
scale of 1 to 5, with 1 being very shade tolerant, and 5 being very shade
intolerant
NOTE:
1.   The majority of plants listed are available on the local commercial
market and do not displace native species
2.   The cultivated varieties (“cultivars”) of the species listed above may
also be used
3.   Primary information taken from Hightshoe, Gary, 1987, Native Trees,
Shrubs, and Vines for Urban and Rural America, Van Nostrand. NY, NY
4.   For further assistance contact Roger Gettig, Landscape Consulting
Program, The Holden Arboretum or Steve Roloson, ODNR Scenic Rivers Program.
 
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.191 EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL AND POST CONSTRUCTION STORM WATER
QUALITY REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and scope. The purpose of this section is to establish
technically feasible and economically reasonable standards to achieve a level
of erosion and sediment control that will minimize damage to property and
degradation of water resources and wetlands, and will promote and maintain the
health and safety of the citizens of the city.
      (1)   This section will:
         (a)   Allow development while minimizing increases in erosion and
sedimentation; and
         (b)   Reduce water quality impacts to receiving water resources and
wetlands that may be caused by new development or redevelopment activities.
      (2)   This section applies to all parcels in the city used or being
developed, either wholly or partially, for new or relocated projects involving
highways, underground cables or pipelines; subdivisions or larger common plans
of development; industrial, commercial, institutional or residential projects;
building activities on farms; redevelopment activities; general clearing; and
all other uses that are not specifically exempted in division (A)(3) of this
section.
      (3)   This section does not apply to activities regulated by, and in
compliance with, the Ohio Animal Waste and Agricultural Pollution Rules, O.A.C.
Rules 1501:15-5-01 to 155-18, as amended. However, all agricultural building
construction and construction of non-irrigation related ponds are subject to
the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Disclaimer of liability. Compliance with the provisions of this
section shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any
person otherwise imposed by law. The provisions of this section are promulgated
to promote the health, safety and welfare of the public and are not designed
for the benefit of any individual or for the benefit of any particular parcel
of property.
   (C)   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility.
      (1)   Where this section is in conflict with other provisions of law,
regulation or ordinance, the most restrictive provisions shall prevail.
      (2)   If any clause, section or provision of this section is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
      (3)   This section shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a private or public nuisance on their property, and compliance with
the provisions of this section shall not be a defense in any action to abate
such a nuisance.
      (4)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting there from, and
shall not result in the city, its officers, employees, or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting there from.
   (D)   Regulated activities. This section requires that a storm water
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) be developed and implemented for all parcels
on which one acre or more is subjected to soil disturbance and on which any
regulated activity of division (A)(2) of this section is proposed. For parcels
on which less than one acre is subjected to soil disturbance, a SWPPP is not
required; however the owner shall comply with divisions (H)(3)(a) through and
including (H)(3)(b)2.b. of this section and divisions (K) through and including
(N) of this section.
   (E)   Application procedures.
      (1)   Soil disturbing activities submitting a storm water pollution
prevention plan. The applicant shall submit the required number of sets of the
SWPPP and the applicable fees to the county’s Soil and Water Conservation
District (SWCD) and the required number of sets of the SWPPP to the City
Engineer as follows:
         (a)   For subdivisions. After the approval of the preliminary plans by
the Planning and Zoning Commission and with the submittal of the improvement
plans to the City Engineer;
         (b)   For other construction projects. Thirty days prior to soil
disturbing activity; and
         (c)   For general clearing projects. Thirty days prior to soil
disturbing activity.
      (2)   The Summit SWCD shall review the plans submitted pursuant to
division (E)(1)(a) or (E)(1)(b) of this section for conformance with current
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit requirements and
this section and approve, or return with comments and recommendations for
revisions. A plan rejected because of deficiencies shall receive a narrative
report stating specific problems and the procedures for filing a revised plan.
An approved SWPPP shall serve as a permit to commence soil disturbing
activities following a pre-construction meeting.
      (3)   Soil disturbing activities shall not begin, and final plat
approvals will not be issued, without an approved SWPPP.
      (4)   A pre-construction meeting must be held with the SWCD inspector and
the city prior to earthwork activities. The applicant, contractor and
applicant’s engineer should be in attendance at the pre-construction meeting.
      (5)   A SWPPP for individual sublots in a subdivision may not be approved
unless the larger common plan of development or sale containing the sublot is
in compliance with this section.
      (6)   Approvals issued in accordance with this section shall remain valid
for two years. If regulations concerning erosion and sediment control or storm
water quality change prior to the beginning of active construction, a new SWPPP
may be requested.
   (F)   Storm water pollution prevention plan.
      (1)   Submission of plan. The applicant shall submit a storm water
pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) consistent with the requirements of the most
recent Ohio EPA NPDES general construction permit. For specific requirements of
a SWPPP the designer shall refer to the NPDES Ohio general construction permit
and the Summit SWCD SWPPP check list. The SWPPP must address erosion and
sediment control during construction as well as post construction water quality
practices. Post construction practices must meet the requirements of the NPDES
Ohio general construction permit and the city.
      (2)   Certification of plan. The SWPPP shall be certified by a qualified
individual.
      (3)   Incorporation of measures. The SWPPP shall incorporate measures as
recommended by the most current edition of the Rainwater and Land Development
Manual as published by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources or other
technical manuals approved by the Summit SWCD.
      (4)   Trapping efficiency. All sediment basins and traps must maintain a
minimum 75% trapping efficiency throughout the construction period as
determined by engineering calculations contained within the Summit County Water
Quality and Trapping Efficiency Program. The approved program to determine
trapping efficiency is available through the Summit SWCD.
      (5)   Soils erodibility reports. The Summit SWCD may require the SWPPP to
include a soils engineering report based upon his or her determination that the
conditions of the soils are unknown or unclear to the extent that additional
information is required to protect against erosion. This report shall contain
all the information listed below:
         (a)   Data regarding the nature and erodibility of existing soils;
         (b)   If applicable, data regarding the nature and erodibility of the
soil to be placed on the site;
         (c)   Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures; and
         (d)   Conclusions and recommended designs for interim soil
stabilization devices and measures, for permanent soil stabilization after
construction is completed.
   (G)   Compliance with local, state and federal regulations. All submittals
are required to show proof of compliance with all state and federal
regulations. Approvals issued in accordance with this section do not relieve
the applicant of responsibility for obtaining all other necessary permits and/
or approvals from the Ohio EPA, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and other
federal, state and/or county agencies. If requirements vary, the most
restrictive requirement shall prevail. These permits may include, but are not
limited to, those listed below.
      (1)   Ohio EPA NPDES permits authorizing storm water discharges
associated with construction activity or the most current version thereof.
Proof of compliance with these requirements shall be the applicant’s notice of
intent (NOI) number from Ohio EPA, a copy of the Ohio EPA Director’s
authorization letter for the NPDES permit, or a letter from the site owner
certifying and explaining why the NPDES Permit is not applicable.
      (2)   Section 401 of the Clean Water Act. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the Ohio EPA water quality certification application tracking number,
public notice, project approval or a letter from the site owner certifying that
a qualified professional has surveyed the site and determined that § 401 of the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1341, is not applicable. Wetlands, and other
waters of the United States, shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the time an application is made under this
section.
      (3)   Ohio EPA isolated wetland permit. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of Ohio EPA’s isolated wetland permit application tracking number, public
notice, project approval, or a letter from the site owner certifying that a
qualified professional has surveyed the site and determined that Ohio EPA’s
isolated wetlands permit is not applicable. Isolated wetlands shall be
delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers at the
time an application is made under this section.
      (4)   Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. Proof of compliance shall be a
copy of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers individual permit application, public
notice, or project approval, if an Individual Permit is required for the
development project. If an individual permit is not required, the site owner
shall submit proof of compliance with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineer’s
nationwide permit program. This shall include one of the following:
         (a)   A statement from a qualified wetland professional who has
determined that § 404 of the Clean Water Act is not applicable; or
         (b)   A site plan showing that any proposed fill of waters of the
United States conforms to the general and special conditions specified in the
applicable nationwide permit. Wetlands, and other waters of the United States,
shall be delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
at the time an application is made under this section.
      (5)   Ohio Dam Safety Law. Proof of compliance shall be a copy of the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources Division of Water permit application
tracking number, a copy of the project approval letter from the Ohio Department
of Natural Resources Division of Water, or a letter from the applicant’s
engineer certifying and explaining why the Ohio Dam Safety Law, being R.C.
Chapter 1521 and O.A.C. Division 1501:21, is not applicable.
      (6)   Section 156.190 Riparian Setback Development Regulations of this
Zoning Code. Proof of compliance shall be a copy of the Summit SWCD approval
letter, and/or a zoning certificate from the Zoning Administrator. Riparian
setbacks must be shown on the SWPPP.
   (H)   Performance standards.
      (1)   The SWPPP must contain a description and location of all
appropriate best management practices (BMPs) for each construction operation.
Prior to the start of grading and within seven days from the start of grubbing
the applicant must implement such controls. The SWPPP must clearly describe for
each major construction activity the appropriate control measures; the general
sequence during the construction process under which the measures will be
implemented; and the person(s) responsible for implementation. The time frame
for SWPPP implementation shall be consistent with the current Ohio EPA NPDES
construction permit. No project subject to this section shall commence without
a SWPPP approved by the Summit SWCD and the city. No project subject to this
section shall commence without a pre-construction meeting being held with the
Summit SWCD. It will be the applicant’s responsibility to contact the SWCD and
the city.
      (2)   The applicant shall inform all contractors and subcontractors not
otherwise defined as “operators” as defined in the Ohio EPA’s NPDES permit, who
will be involved in the implementation of the SWPPP of the terms and conditions
of the SWPPP. The applicant shall maintain a written document containing the
signatures of all contractors and subcontractors involved in the implementation
of the SWPPP as proof acknowledging that they have reviewed and understand the
conditions and responsibilities of the SWPPP. The written document shall be
created and signatures shall be obtained prior to commencement of work on the
construction site. A copy shall be provided to the Summit SWCD and the city
prior to commencing with the project.
      (3)   All projects regardless of the area of disturbance must utilize
best management practices (BMPs) to minimize and control erosion and off site
sedimentation. The controls shall include the following minimum components.
         (a)   During active construction.
            1.   Non-structural preservation measures. The applicant must make
use of practices that preserve the existing natural condition to the maximum
extent practicable. Such practices may include preserving riparian areas,
preserving existing vegetation and vegetative buffer strips, phasing of
construction operations in order to minimize the amount of disturbed land at
any one time, and designation of tree preservation areas or other protective
clearing or grubbing practices.
               a.   Stream protection. The requirements of §
156.190 of this chapter shall be followed.
               b.   Wetland protection. The setback requirements of the city’s
subdivision regulations shall be followed in addition to state and federal
regulations.
            2.   Erosion control practices. The applicant must make use of
erosion controls that are capable of providing cover over 70% of disturbed
soils. A description of control practices designed to restabilize disturbed
areas after grading or construction shall be included in the SWPPP. The SWPPP
must provide specifications for stabilization of all disturbed areas of the
site and provide guidance as to which method of stabilization will be employed
for any time of the year. Such practices may include: temporary seeding;
permanent seeding; mulching; matting; sod stabilization; vegetative buffer
strips; phasing of construction operations; the use of construction entrances;
and the use of alternative ground cover.
            3.   Runoff control practices. The applicant must make use of
measures that control the flow of runoff from disturbed areas so as to prevent
erosion. Such practices may include rock check dams, pipe slope drains,
diversions to direct flow away from exposed soils and protective grading
practices. These practices shall divert runoff away from disturbed areas and
steep slopes where practicable.
            4.   Sediment control practices. The applicant must install
structural practices that shall store runoff, allowing sediments to settle and/
or divert flows away from exposed soils or otherwise limit runoff from exposed
areas. Structural practices shall be used to control erosion and trap sediment
from a site remaining disturbed for more than seven days. Such practices may
include, among others, sediment settling ponds, silt fences, storm drain inlet
protection, and earth diversion dikes or channels which direct runoff to a
sediment settling pond. All sediment control practices must be capable of
ponding or filtering runoff in order to be considered functional. Earth
diversion dikes or channels alone are not considered a sediment control
practice unless used in conjunction with a sediment settling pond.
            5.   Non-sediment pollutant controls. No solid or liquid waste,
including building materials and concrete wash out water shall be discharged in
storm water runoff. The applicant must implement site best management practices
to prevent toxic materials, hazardous materials or other debris from entering
water resources or wetlands.
            6.   Compliance with other requirements. The SWPPP shall be
consistent with applicable state and/or local waste disposal, sanitary sewer,
or septic system regulations, including provisions prohibiting waste disposal
by open burning, and shall provide for the proper disposal of contaminated
soils located within the development area.
            7.   Trench and ground water control. There shall be no sediment-
laden or turbid discharges to water resources or wetlands resulting from
dewatering activities. If trench or ground water contains sediment, it must
pass through a sediment-settling pond or other equally effective sediment
control device, prior to being discharged from the construction site.
Alternatively, sediment may be removed by settling in place or by dewatering
into a sump pit, filter bag or comparable practice. Ground water dewatering
which does not contain sediment or other pollutants is not required to be
treated prior to discharge. However, care must be taken when discharging ground
water to ensure that it does not become pollutant-laden by traversing over
disturbed soils or other pollutant sources.
            8.   Applicant inspections. An initial inspection of all erosion
and sediment control practices shall be conducted by a qualified individual to
certify that the installations comply with the approved SWPPP. All controls on
the site shall be inspected by the applicant’s agent at least once every seven
calendar days and within 24 hours after any storm event greater than one-half
inch of rain per 24- hour period. The applicant shall assign a qualified
individual to conduct these inspections to ensure that the control practices
are functional and to evaluate whether the SWPPP is adequate, or whether
additional control measures are required. Internal inspections and
documentation of corrective actions taken must be made available upon request.
            9.   Maintenance. The SWPPP shall be designed to minimize
maintenance requirements. All control practices shall be maintained and
repaired as needed to ensure continued performance of their intended function
until final stabilization. All sediment control practices must be maintained in
a functional condition until all up slope areas they control reach final
stabilization. The applicant shall provide a description of maintenance
procedures needed to ensure the continued performance of control practices and
shall ensure a responsible party and adequate funding to conduct this
maintenance, all as determined by the Summit SWCD and the city.
               a.   When inspections reveal the need for repair, replacement or
installation of erosion and sediment control BMPs, the following procedures
shall be followed:
                  i.   When practices require repair or maintenance. If an
inspection reveals that a control practice is in need of repair or maintenance,
with the exception of a sediment settling pond, it must be repaired or
maintained within three days of the inspection. Sediment-settling ponds must be
repaired or maintained within ten days of the inspection;
                  ii.   When practices fail to provide their intended function.
If an inspection reveals that a control practice fails to perform its intended
function as detailed in the SWPPP and that another, more appropriate control
practice is required, the SWPPP must be amended and the new control practice
must be installed within ten days of the inspection; and
                  iii.   When practices depicted on the SWPPP are not
installed. If an inspection reveals that a control practice has not been
implemented in accordance with the schedule, the control practice must be
implemented within ten days from the date of the inspection. If the internal
inspection reveals that the planned control practice is not needed, the record
must contain a statement of explanation as to why the control practice is not
needed.
            10.   Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities are
complete and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of 70%
coverage for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not
covered by permanent structures. In addition, all temporary erosion and
sediment control practices have been removed and disposed of in an acceptable
manner.
         (b)   Post construction water quality practices.
            1.   Non-structural water quality practices. Non-structural post
construction best management practices include preservation, planning or
procedures that direct development away from water resources or limit creation
of impervious surfaces. Practices such as conservation easements, riparian and
wetland setbacks, and conservation subdivision design are all non-structural
controls.
               a.   All non-structural water quality practices must be
protected from disturbance through the construction phase of the project.
               b.   All non-structural water quality practices must be
protected in perpetuity through the use of appropriate legal tools. All
easement or conservation areas must appear on the final plat and be disclosed
to potential buyers.
            2.   Structural water quality practices. Structural post
construction best management practices are permanent features constructed to
provide treatment of storm water runoff either through storage, filtration or
infiltration.
               a.   Establishment. All structural water quality practices must
be established prior to the completion of the project. Structural water quality
practices should be made functional once the disturbed areas on site are
stabilized. If detention/retention facilities were used for sediment control
during development, sediments must be removed prior to the basin being used for
post construction storm water quality.
               b.   Maintenance. The post construction water quality practice
must be maintained in perpetuity by those parties identified in the SWPPP or
the storm water management maintenance agreement.
   (I)   Fees.
      (1)   Application fees. A storm water pollution prevention plan and
abbreviated storm water pollution plan review and filing fee is part of a
complete submittal to Summit SWCD as described in division (E) of this section.
Fees are required to be submitted to the Summit SWCD before the review process
begins. Contact Summit SWCD for their current fee schedule.
      (2)   Inspection fees. During active construction as defined under
division (H)(3)(a) of this section, periodic inspections may be required as
listed. Summit SWCD shall be the primary inspector shall be the primary
inspector for the city. In the event Summit SWCD is unavailable to perform the
required inspections, the city shall have another qualified individual perform
the inspection and reporting services on behalf of the city. The landowner
shall be responsible for the inspection costs. Contact the city for the current
fee schedule. After performing the inspection, the city shall bill the
landowner for the cost of the city’s inspection.
   (J)   Bond. If a storm water pollution prevention plan is required by this
section, then a performance and maintenance bond shall be posted according to
the city’s subdivision regulations. No project will be released from bond if
there is failure to comply with an approved SWPPP.
   (K)   Enforcement.
      (1)   All development areas will be subject to inspections by the Summit
SWCD and/or the city to ensure compliance with the approved SWPPP and divisions
(K)(2) through (L)(6) of this section.
      (2)   After each inspection the Summit SWCD and/or the city may prepare
and distribute a status report to the applicant.
      (3)   If an inspection determines that operations are being conducted in
violation of the approved SWPPP, the city may take action as detailed in
division (L) of this section.
   (L)   Violations.
      (1)   No person shall violate or cause or knowingly permit to be violated
any of the provisions of this section, or fail to comply with any of such
provisions or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made
pursuant to this section, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of any
lands in violation of this section or in violation of any permit granted under
this section.
      (2)   If the SWCD and/or the city determines that a violation of the
rules adopted under this section exists, the city shall issue an immediate stop
work order if the violator failed to obtain any federal, state or local permit
necessary for sediment and erosion control, earth movement, clearing, or cut
and fill activity. In addition, if the SWCD or the city determines such a rule
violation exists, regardless of whether or not the violator has obtained proper
permits, the SWCD or the city shall authorize the issuance of a notice of
violation.
      (3)   If, after a period of not less than 30 days has elapsed following
the issuance of the notice of violation, the violation continues, the city
shall issue a second notice of violation. Except as provided in division (L)(6)
of this section, if, after a period of not less than 15 days has elapsed
following the issuance of the second notice of violation, the violation
continues, the city shall issue a stop work order after first obtaining written
approval from the City Law Director if, in the opinion of the Law Director, the
violation is egregious.
      (4)   Once a stop work order is issued, the city shall request, in
writing, the City Law Director to seek an or other appropriate relief in the
Summit County Court of Common Pleas to abate excessive erosion or sedimentation
and secure compliance with the rules adopted under this section.
      (5)   If the City Law Director seeks an injunction or other appropriate
relief, then, in granting relief, the Summit County Court of Common Pleas may
order the construction of sediment control improvements or implementation of
other control measures and may assess a civil fine of not less than $100 or
more than $500. Each day of violation of a rule or stop work order issued under
this section shall be considered a separate violation subject to a civil fine.
      (6)   No stop work order shall be issued under this section against any
public highway, transportation, or drainage improvement or maintenance project
undertaken by a government agency or political subdivision in accordance with a
statement of its standard sediment control policies that is approved by the
city or the chief of the Division of Soil and Water Resources in the Ohio
Department of Natural Resources.
      (7)   Notwithstanding divisions (L)(2) through (L)(6) of this section, if
the Mayor determines that a violation of any rule adopted or administrative
order issued under this section exists, the Mayor may request, in writing, the
City Law Director to seek and injunction or other appropriate relief in the
Summit County Court of Common Pleas to abate excessive erosion or sedimentation
and secure compliance with the rules of order. In granting relief, the Court
may order the construction of sediment control improvements or implementation
of other control measures and may assess a civil fine of not less than $100 or
more than $500. Each day of violation of a rule adopted or administrative order
issued under this section shall be considered a separate violation subject to a
civil fine.
      (8)   The city’s Planning and Zoning Commission may deny the issuance of
any further plat approvals for the property in question until the site is
brought into compliance with this section.
      (9)   The County Building Standards Department may suspend the issuance
of occupancy certificates within developments that are not in compliance with
this section.
      (10)   The City Engineer may suspend the inspection of site improvements
and/or refuse the release of bonds on developments that are not in compliance
with this section.
   (M)   Appeals. Any person aggrieved by any order, requirement, determination
or any other action or inaction by the city in relation to this section may
appeal to the city’s Board of Zoning Appeals. The aggrieved party may appeal
the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals to the Summit County Court of
Common Pleas. Written notice of the appeal to the Court of Common Pleas shall
be served on the city and a copy shall be provided to the Summit SWCD.
   (N)   SWCD agreement. The Mayor is hereby authorized to negotiate an
agreement with the Summit SWCD on behalf of the city to ensure the Summit SWCD
performs its duties in accordance with this section. City Council’s
authorization is required prior to execution or amendment of such agreement.
   (O)   Cost as lien. Inspection fees as defined under division (I) (Fees) of
this section and fines defined under division (L) (Violations) of this section
shall be billed to the landowner.
      (1)   If the bill is not paid within 30 days or if the address of the
landowner is not known, the Zoning Administrator shall refer the matter to the
City Finance Director, including a statement of all charges for the city’s
services, the amount paid for the performance of the labor and the fees of the
officers who made the service of the notice and return.
      (2)   Upon receipt of such statement of expenses incurred, the City
Finance Director shall make written return to the County Fiscal Officer of the
action taken pursuant to this section, with a statement of the charges for the
city’s services, the amount paid for the performance of the labor, the fees of
the officers who made the service of the notice and return, and a proper
description of the premises, to be entered upon the tax duplicate of the county
for the purpose of making the same a lien upon such lands, to be collected as
other taxes and returned to the city’s General Fund in accordance with R.C. §
731.54.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 10-O-02, passed 4-20-2011)
OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND ACCESS MANAGEMENT
§ 156.205 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be developed to meet the
following minimum standards for number of spaces, location, design and access.
All off-street parking, loading and access designs shall be reviewed for
conformance to the requirements of this subchapter prior to the issuance of a
zoning permit. Off-street parking facilities are required for any proposed new
development or conversion for which a zoning certificate is required. No
parking on the right-of-way of any publicly dedicated thoroughfare shall be
used to satisfy these requirements.
   (A)   Minimum number of required parking spaces.
      (1)   The minimum number of required parking spaces for a land use shall
be sufficient to meet the average parking needs of the proposed use. Where the
off-street parking requirement for a use is not specified in the following
parking spaces matrix, the Zoning Administrator shall apply a standard
developed for a similar land use. Minimum parking spaces for unique land uses
not specified or similar to land uses listed in the parking spaces matrix shall
be determined by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The number of handicapped
parking spaces shall be in accordance with federal, state and local law.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining parking space requirements in the
parking space matrix, the following applications are intended.
         (a)   SQUARE FEET means the usable floor area of the principal
building on a lot used for service to the public and excludes area used
principally for non-public purposes such as storage, incidental repair,
processing, show window, rest rooms and dressing rooms.
         (b)   EMPLOYEE refers to the total number of employees during the
shift of greatest employment.
         (c)   Any derived number with a fractional value of more than one-half
shall be rounded to the next highest whole number.
   (B)   Parking space matrix. The following standards shall be used in order
to determine the minimum number of parking spaces required for the specified
use:
Parking Space Matrix Types of Uses Number of Spaces Unit of Measurement
                                                                                Number Unit of
Parking Space Matrix Types of Uses                                              of     Measurement
                                                                                Spaces
Residential
   Single-family dwellings                                                   2      per dwelling
                                                                                           unit
   Two-family dwellings                                                      2      per dwelling
                                                                                           unit
   Multi-family dwellings                                                    1      per bedroom
   Hotel, motel, lodging, boarding or rooming houses, dormitories, and other 1      per bedroom
sleeping accommodations
   Bed and breakfast facilities                                              2      per facility
                                                                               +0.75  per bedroom
Community Facilities
   Cemeteries                                                                1      per employee
   Child day care home Type A and child day care centers, pursuant to R.C.   4      per employee
Chapter 5104                                                                    +1
   Churches and other buildings for the purpose of worship                   0.25   per seat
   Clubs, lodges, fraternal, charitable or social organizations              1      per 150 sq.
                                                                                           ft.
   Educational institutions                                                  2      per classroom
   Government owned buildings (public, or municipal/county/state or federal) 1      per employee
                                                                                           vehicle
                                                                               +1     per stored
                                                                                           on-site
   Hospitals, clinics, and other institutions for human medical care         0.5    per bed
   Institutions (other than halfway houses) where mentally ill persons receiv0.33   per bed
care
   Libraries, museums, art galleries, art centers and similar uses           1      per 1,000 sq.
                                                                                           ft.
   Nursing homes and care institutions, intermediate care institutions,      0.5    per bed
handicapped or infirm institutions, or child care institutions
   Penal and correctional facilities                                         0.05   per inmate
Recreation and Entertainment
   Auditoriums, stadiums, or indoor theaters                                 0.25   per seat
   Bowling establishments                                                    4      per lane
   Recreational areas and facilities including: government owned and/or other10
operated parks and playgrounds and wildlife refuges and game preserves.
                                                                               +2     per acre
Office and Professional Services
   Medical or dental offices                                                 5      per doctor or
                                                                                           dentist
   Personal services                                                         1      per 200 sq.
                                                                                           ft.
   Post offices                                                              1      per 400 sq.
                                                                                           ft.
   Professional offices, banks and studios                                   1      per 300 sq.
                                                                                           ft.
Retail and Service Uses
   Funeral homes, crematories, or mortuaries                                 1      per employee
                                                                               +25    per viewing
                                                                                           parlor
   Open-air markets                                                          1      per 600 sq.
                                                                                           ft.
   Retail businesses less than 5,000 sq. ft.                                 4      per 1,000 sq.
                                                                                           ft.
                                                                                           1,000 sq.
   Retail businesses more than 5,000 sq. ft.                                 4      per ft. up to
                                                                                           5,000
                                                                                           1,000 sq.
                                                                               +3.5   per ft. over
                                                                                           5,000
   Roadside stands selling only agricultural products produced on site.      2
   Shopping center under 15,000 square feet                                  4      per 1,000 sq.
                                                                                           ft.
                                                                                           1,000 sq.
   Shopping center over 15,000 square feet                                   4      per ft. up to
                                                                                           15,000
                                                                                           1,000 sq.
                                                                               +3.5   per ft. over
                                                                                           15,000
   Wholesale establishments, warehouses, distribution centers, and all uses,            1,000 sq.
facilities, and activities as listed under the storage and distribution heading 1      per ft.
in the land use matrix or similar to those uses listed
Vehicular-Related Sales and Services
   Automobile, truck, trailer, boat and farm implement sales and/or rental,  1      per 200 sq.
services, and/or storage, both new and used                                                ft.
                                                                               +1     per service
                                                                                           bay
   Sales, repair, maintenance, or installation of motor vehicle parts or                500 sq.
accessories (e.g. tires, mufflers, oil and lube) and motor vehicle painting and 1      per ft.
body work
   Gasoline service stations/repair garage                                   0.5    per filling
                                                                                           pump
                                                                               +2     per service
                                                                                           bay
   Gasoline filling station/convenience store                                0.5    per filling
                                                                                           pump
Industrial, Manufacturing Facilities
   All uses, facilities, and activities as listed under this heading in the  1      per 1,000 sq.
land use matrix or similar to those uses listed                                            ft.
 
   (C)   Parking area design. The design and construction of parking areas and
driveways shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator, unless a site plan is
required for approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Parking area
design shall meet the following requirements.
      (1)   Location.
         (a)   Off-street parking for multi-family or nonresidential uses shall
be located in a row or multiple rows of individually-marked parking spaces.
            1.   Each row of parking spaces shall have access from a parking
aisle.
            2.   Parallel parking designs along a parking aisle shall require
preliminary approval by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
         (b)   The parking spaces required for residential uses shall be
located on the lot with the principal building.
         (c)   Parking spaces required for nonresidential uses shall be located
on the lot or within 500 feet of the use measured along lines of public access
to the property, but non-adjacent, off-site parking spaces shall not be allowed
in residential districts.
         (d)   Off-street parking facilities in C-D and Residential Districts
shall not occupy any part of any required front yard and may not be located
closer than five feet to a property line.
         (e)   In zoning districts other than C-D and Residential Districts,
off-street parking facilities are permitted in the required front yard
(provided a minimum of 20 foot wide landscaped strip is located between the
parking area and the street right-of-way line), side yard and rear yards
pursuant to buffer and screening landscaping requirements set forth in §§
156.165 through
156.176 (Landscaping Regulations).
      (2)   Minimum parking space size.
         (a)   The required minimum size of a parking space is indicated in the
following table:
 
Minimum Parking Space Size
Parking Angle (in Degrees) Width   Length  Width of Parking Aisle
90                         9 feet  18 feet 25 feet
60                         9 feet  18 feet 17.5 feet
45                         12 feet 19 feet 13 feet
Parallel parking           9 feet  23 feet 12 feet
 
         (b)   All dimensions for parking spaces shall be exclusive of
driveways, aisles and other circulation areas.
      (3)   General design standards. The following standards shall apply to
the design of off-street parking areas for all new or converted multi-family,
commercial, industrial or quasi-public uses.
         (a)   Construction materials. All parking areas, regardless of size,
shall be improved with hard surface materials (excluding gravel). Pavement type
and thickness shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to
construction, taking into consideration soil conditions and traffic loadings.
         (b)   Turning radii. Parking areas shall be designed to allow for
sufficient turning radii in accordance with approved engineering standards so
as to be adequate for all vehicle movement, including that of fire and safety
vehicles, school buses or other oversize vehicles which may make use of the
area.
         (c)   Storm water management. Storm water runoff created as a result
of improvements to a parking area shall be controlled in such a manner so as to
reduce and/or eliminate drainage onto neighboring properties.
         (d)   Slope. Parking area gradients shall not exceed 5%.
         (e)   Landscaping. Parking lots shall have landscaping pursuant to §§
156.165 through
156.176 (Landscaping Regulations).
         (f)   Lighting. Lighting shall be installed pursuant to §
156.092(H) (Lighting Regulations).
         (g)   Maintenance. All off-street parking areas shall be continually
maintained in satisfactory condition so as to be safe, attractive and free of
any hazard, nuisance or other unsafe condition.
   (D)   Conditional use parking area extension into contiguous residential
zoning districts. In all zoning districts, the extension of parking into a
contiguous residential zoning district shall be a conditional use subject to
the following additional conditions and criteria:
      (1)   The proposed extension is on land owned, rented or leased by the
owners of the lot containing the use or structure;
      (2)   The extension of a parking area may not extend more than 150 feet
into a zone other than in which the structure or use is located;
      (3)   The proposed extension shall be on land contiguous to the lot
containing the use or structure;
      (4)   Parking shall conform to all screening, setbacks and other
requirements of this Zoning Code;
      (5)   The proposed extension does not adversely affect adjacent or
surrounding properties and will contribute to the orderly development and
function of the area;
      (6)   Entrances and exits shall be at least 20 feet distance from any
adjacent property located in any residential district;
      (7)   Such parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger
vehicles and no commercial repair work or service of any kind shall be
conducted on such parking lot;
      (8)   No sign of any kind, other than those designating entrances, exits
and conditions of use shall be maintained on such parking lot;
      (9)   Such parking lot shall be screened pursuant to §
156.173 (Screening and Buffering of Residential Areas); and
      (10)   The Planning and Zoning Commission may modify the foregoing
requirements in specific cases where desirable or warranted, owing to unusual
topography, physical conditions and the use and character of adjacent
properties. The Planning and Zoning Commission may also impose such additional
requirements as it may deem necessary in view of the aforesaid consideration.
   (E)   Joint use of off-street parking areas. In all zoning districts, the
joint use of an off-street parking area to meet or facilitate the minimum
parking space requirements shall require the owner of the off-street parking
area to execute an easement granting or transferring use of specified access
drives, aisles and a specified number of existing parking spaces in perpetuity
to all parties who will collectively and jointly share the use of the facility
to meet minimum parking space requirements and/ or shared aisle or access
drives. Such a joint use of an off-street parking area is subject to the
following additional conditions and criteria:
      (1)   This easement shall be in a form acceptable to the city;
      (2)   The conveyance must contain appropriate provision for assignment of
the easement to any other entity which succeeds the original beneficiaries of
the easement; and
      (3)   The proposed arrangement shall not adversely affect adjacent or
surrounding properties and must contribute to the orderly development and
function of the area.
   (F)   Deferred off-street parking requirements. Due to variations in access
and distance to public transit, ride-sharing patterns and/or shared-parking
facilities, and in situations where the Planning and Zoning Commission is
satisfied that the location, uniqueness or expected need for off-street parking
facilities for a particular use is uncertain, or in circumstances where the
need for off-street parking facilities is assessed to be less than the minimum
requirements set forth in this subchapter, authorization for deferred
completion of the parking requirement prior to issuance of an occupancy permit
by the Summit County Building Standards Department may be provided by the
Planning and Zoning Commission subject to the following:
      (1)   Up to 50% of the required parking area may be deferred from
construction and remain unimproved. The Planning and Zoning Commission, at any
future time it deems appropriate, may determine that some or all of the
deferred parking requirements shall be reinstated to meet increasing parking
demands; and
      (2)   The area of the deferred required parking shall be maintained in an
open space reserve and shall be landscaped pursuant to an approved landscaping
plan and all regulations and requirements set forth in §§
156.165 through
156.176 (Landscaping Regulations).
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 10-O-01, passed 3-3-2010; Ord. 17-O-01,
passed 5-17-2017)
§ 156.206 LOADING REQUIREMENTS.
   Every building over 5,000 square feet of gross floor area used for
nonresidential purposes and which customarily receive or distribute goods by
motor vehicle shall provide sufficient space on the premises for all loading,
unloading and service purposes. No loading or servicing of these buildings
shall be performed on the right-of-way of any publicly dedicated thoroughfare.
   (A)   Minimum number of loading spaces. Buildings over 5,000 square feet of
gross floor area shall provide at least one truck loading and unloading space.
An additional loading space shall be provided for every additional 20,000
square feet of gross floor area in the building.
   (B)   Location. Truck loading spaces shall be provided in a building service
location with direct access from a public street access point or alley/service
drive.
   (C)   Dimension. Loading spaces shall be, at a minimum, 12 feet in width, 40
feet in length and have 14 feet of height clearance.
   (D)   Off-street parking. Loading spaces as required under this section
shall be provided as area additional to off-street parking spaces and shall not
be considered for satisfaction of minimum off-street parking space
requirements.
   (E)   Construction materials. Each loading area shall be improved with hard
surface materials (excluding gravel) from the street apron to the entrance of
the parking area. Pavement type and thickness shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator prior to construction, taking into consideration soil conditions
and traffic loading.
   (F)   Landscaping. Loading spaces shall be completely screened from any
residential use by a bufferyard pursuant to §§
156.165 through
156.176 (Landscaping Regulations).
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.207 ACCESS MANAGEMENT STANDARDS FOR OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   (A)   Number of property access points.
      (1)   Each parcel is permitted to have a single, two-way access from the
public right-of-way or an alley/service drive that will not interfere with
public convenience and that will permit the orderly and safe movement of
vehicles except in cases where an access management plan required as part of §
156.046 (Site Plan Review) clearly demonstrates that an additional access
point:
         (a)   Would not adversely affect the safety and operation of the
highway and minimize traffic congestion;
         (b)   Is necessary for the safe and efficient use of the property;
         (c)   Avoids undue interference with pedestrian access at street
intersection corners; and
         (d)   Would not adversely affect access to adjacent properties.
      (2)   Examples of where a second access point may be justified include
large frontage parcels where access points meet minimum spacing distances,
where a property has the option of a second access point off an alley/service
drive, and corner lots where access to both streets meet minimum intersection
setback requirements. There shall not be more than two access ways abutting any
one street.
   (B)   Location of property access points.
      (1)   Setback from intersection. Each property access point on a street
shall not be closer than 30 feet to an intersecting street right-of-way line.
      (2)   Spacing of adjacent access points.
         (a)   Adjacent property driveway access points shall not require
spacing when separate driveways are located along a mutual property separated
only by required side yard setbacks at the access points.
         (b)   Adjacent access points shall not be located closer than the
following specified distances at the right-of-way line:
 
Posted Speed Minimum Spacing
25 to 35 mph 50 feet
36 to 45 mph 100 feet
 
      (3)   Driveway alignment. New driveways shall be aligned with existing
driveways across a street unless such alignment is shown to be undesirable in
an access management plan required as part of §
156.046 (Site Plan Review). Where such alignments are shown to be undesirable,
the centerlines of opposing driveways shall be offset at least 30 feet.
   (C)   Dimensions.
      (1)   Access apron. An access apron shall be so designed so as to provide
adequate turning and maneuvering for emergency and service vehicles.
         (a)   Each curb cut opening shall have a minimum width of 20 lineal
feet and shall not exceed a maximum width of 30 feet unless otherwise approved.
         (b)   The ODOT Driveway Access Manual should be consulted to ensure
that adequate driveway openings are provided and calculations based on this
manual shall be provided as justification for driveway and curb opening widths
in excess of 30 feet.
      (2)   Driveways.
         (a)   Residential use driveways shall have a width of not less than
ten feet.
         (b)   Commercial and industrial use two-way drives shall have a width
of not less than 20 feet. One-way driveway widths shall be a minimum of 12
feet.
         (c)   The minimum length of a driveway located in the front yard shall
allow for at least one vehicle to fully enter the driveway before encountering
a parking space.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
SIGN REGULATIONS
§ 156.220 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted under the authority of the city in furtherance of
the more general purposes set forth in this Zoning Code. The city hereby
establishes the following sign regulations and provisions:
   (A)   To preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of the city;
   (B)   To afford the business community equal and fair opportunity to
advertise and promote products and services without discrimination;
   (C)   To maintain and enhance the visual environment, and to preserve the
right of the citizens to enjoy the rural character of the city;
   (D)   To ensure that signs are located and designed to reduce sign
distraction and confusion that may be contributing factors in traffic
congestion and accidents, and maintain a safe and orderly pedestrian and
vehicular environment;
   (E)   To minimize reductions in property values and reduce the possible
adverse effect of sign clutter on nearby public and private property;
   (F)   To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign
regulations;
   (G)   To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this Zoning Code; and
   (H)   To provide more open space and protect the natural environment.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.221 SIGN DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of these regulations, a sign shall include any
identification, description, illustration or device which is affixed to or
integrated into a building, structure or land, or otherwise situated on a lot
and which is intended to direct or attract attention to, or announce or promote
a product, place, activity, person, institution or business by means of
letters, words, designs, colors, symbols, flags, banners, fixtures, images or
illuminations. Signs shall be further classified by physical design or
structure, and function or purpose based on the following.
   (A)   Physical characteristics.
      AWNING SIGN. A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the
surface of an awning, which is defined as a shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of non-rigid materials
on a supporting framework.
      CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A portion of a sign with letters, characters or
graphics that are not permanently affixed to the structure, framing, or
background allowing the letters, characters or graphics to be modified manually
or by electronic or mechanical devices from time to time as situations change,
such as a bulletin board or announcement board.
      FREESTANDING SIGN. A sign which is supported from the ground or a
structure, other than a building.
         (a)   MONUMENT SIGN. Any sign identifying a housing or commercial
development or business made of brick, masonry or stone, the bottom of which is
attached directly and permanently to the ground and physically separated from
any other building or structure.
         (b)   POLE SIGN. A freestanding sign supported by a pole, post or
other structure and having more than 50% of the bottom of the sign separated
from the ground by air.
      MARQUEE AND/OR CANOPY SIGN. A sign attached to or supported by a marquee
structure, defined as a permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid
materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building.
      MOBILE AND/OR PORTABLE SIGN. A sign that is on wheels, runners, casters
or has a frame to which wheels, runners or casters may be affixed, parked
trailers, parked vehicles or other mobile devices, including tethered and/or
anchored balloons.
      PROJECTING SIGN. A sign that is attached to a building wall and extending
12 inches or more beyond the face of the wall.
      ROOF SIGN. A sign erected, constructed or maintained wholly upon or over
the roof or parapet wall of any building with the principal support on the roof
structure. A ROOF SIGN is prohibited within the city.
      WALL SIGN. A sign which is erected parallel to or is placed on the
surface of the outside wall of any building and which does not extend more than
12 inches from said building, and shall not project above the roof line or
beyond the corner of the building.
         (a)   WALL PANEL SIGN. A sign consisting of letters, figures, or
elements placed on a panel which is attached to the surface of the outside wall
of any building.
         (b)   BUILDING FACE SIGN. A non-panel sign consisting of individual
letters, figures or elements on a wall.
   (B)   Functional characteristics.
      ABANDONED SIGN. Any sign that no longer identifies a bona fide business,
lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, time of event passed, and/or for
which no legal owner can be found. This definition shall also include any sign
structure, which no longer supports the sign for which it was designed.
      COMMUNITY DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign located at or near the public right-
of-way to provide directions to public and quasi-public facilities in the city.
      CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign identifying the name of a
subdivision, building or public works project or facility during the time of
construction. Such signs may include a description of the project, and may list
the project’s professional firms (such as architects, engineers, developers and
contractors).
      DIRECTIONAL SIGN. A sign located at the driveway entrance or exit and
intended to provide for safe ingress and egress.
      IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign intended to identify the principal use of a
lot, building or building unit according the following:
         (a)   BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign indicating the business
name or logo of a commercial or industrial enterprise and limited to
identification purposes.
         (b)   INSTITUTION IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign displaying the name and/
or organization occupying the premises of a public or quasi-public use
restricted to: church or other place of religious worship; hospital; nursing
home; public or non-profit corporation owned and operated recreational
facilities; governmental owned and/or operated facilities; schools and
cemeteries.
         (c)   SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION. A sign which identifies the name and
address of a completed residential subdivision or a multi-family development.
      INSTRUCTIONAL SIGN. A sign that has a purpose secondary to the use on the
lot that is intended to instruct employees, customers or users as to specific
parking requirements; the location or regulations pertaining to specific
activities on the site or in the building; specific services offered, or
methods of payments accepted. Examples of instructional signs include “Honk
Horn for Service”, “Restrooms Inside”, “Parking for Customers Only”, “Parking
for Residents Only”, menu boards, drive-up tellers, “self-serve”. In
residential districts, instructional signs may include security identification,
no trespassing signs, signs identifying presence of animals, directing
deliveries and the like.
      MEMORIAL SIGN. A sign indicating the name of a building, the date of
construction into a and/or incidental information about its construction or
historical significance, which sign is cut masonry surface or made of bronze or
other permanent material, and mounted at the time the building was constructed
or affixed subsequent to a structure being designated as a historical landmark.
      NAMEPLATE SIGN. A sign attached to the wall of the principal building
indicating only the name and address of the person or business occupying the
lot or building.
      POLITICAL SIGN. A temporary sign advocating the action on a public issue,
promotion of a candidate for public office, or other ballot-oriented
objectives.
      PRODUCT AND SERVICE SIGN. A sign which advertises the services, products,
merchandise or prices of commodities produced, stocked or sold on the premises.
      REAL ESTATE SALES SIGN. A temporary sign which directs attention to the
rental, sale or lease of the property on which the sign is located.
      REQUIRED (PUBLIC SAFETY) OR PUBLIC SERVICE SIGN. A sign erected by a
public authority, utility, public service organization or private industry upon
the public right-of-way or on private property which is required by law or
otherwise intended to control traffic, direct, identify or inform the public,
or provide needed public service as determined by the rules and regulations of
governmental agencies or through public policy.
      TEMPORARY PROMOTIONAL SIGN. A temporary sign of any type (other than a
construction, real estate or political sign) intended to announce special
events, promotions or sales, including garage sales in residential districts.
      TEMPORARY SIGN. A sign that is used only for a limited time and is not
permanently mounted.
      UNIFIED DIRECTORY SIGN. A wall sign erected to identify each business or
tenant located within the building.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.222 MEASUREMENT STANDARDS.
   Sign face area, sign heights and sign location shall be measured according
to the following standards.
   (A)   Determining sign face area or dimension.
      (1)   For a sign which is framed, outlined, painted and otherwise
prepared and intended to provide a background for a sign display, the area
shall include the entire portion within the outside dimensions of the
background or frame.
      (2)   For a sign comprised of individual letters, figures or elements on
a wall or similar surface, or an irregularly shaped freestanding sign, the area
of a sign shall encompass a regular, or a combination of regular geometric
shapes which form, or approximate, the perimeter of all the elements in the
display. When separate elements are organized to form a single sign but the
elements are separated by open space, the area shall be calculated by
determining the geometric form or combination of forms which comprise all the
display area including the space between the elements.
      (3)   The sign area shall include the frame, but shall not include the
pole or other unadorned structural support unless such pole or structural
support is illuminated or otherwise so designated to constitute a display
surface or device.
      (4)   A freestanding sign or a projecting sign shall have no more than
two display surfaces provided that the two display surfaces are arranged back-
to-back and are parallel to each other.
      (5)   Three-dimensional object signs or any signs with three or more
sides used as sign panels shall be measured to include all surface area which
forms a part of the message conveyed by the sign.
      (6)   In the event there is a dispute in determining the sign area or any
sign dimension, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the final
responsibility for making such determination.
   (B)   Determining sign height.
      (1)   The height of a freestanding sign shall be measured from the base
of the sign or supporting structure at normal grade to the top of the highest
element.
      (2)   Normal grade shall be:
         (a)   Existing grade prior to construction; or
         (b)   The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any
filling, berming or mounding solely for the purpose of locating the sign.
   (C)   Determining eligible locations for wall signs.
      (1)   For multi-tenant buildings, the tenant wall area shall be that
portion of the building frontage so occupied by a single activity and
calculated in the same manner as the building wall area.
      (2)   For lots or building units fronting on two or more streets, main
entry drives or off-street parking areas, building wall area shall be
calculated separately for each building frontage and the sign area that is
oriented toward a particular street, main entry drive or parking area shall not
exceed the portion of the building wall area fronting on that street, main
entry drive or parking area.
   (D)   Determining maximum sign area permitted.
      (1)   The maximum area permitted for each business shall be the sum of
the areas of the following identification signs: wall signs, second floor
tenant signs, awning signs, permanent window signs and instructional signs
unless the Zoning Administrator determines such instructional signs which are
clearly intended for instructional purposes and are not larger than necessary
to serve the intended instructional purpose nor are in locations or possess
design characteristics which constitute or serve the purposes of an
identification sign shall not be considered an identification sign and the area
of which shall be exempt from the maximum area permitted for identification
signs.
      (2)   Memorial signs shall be approved as part of the building
construction and shall not be regulated in area provided such signs comply with
the definition and intent of memorial signs.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.223 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   (1)   Signs as permitted in the various zoning districts, shall be
professionally designed, constructed and installed so as to be compatible in
character with regard to the architecture of the building on which they are
located, to the materials, color and size of signs designed or located on the
same building and on adjoining buildings in order to produce an overall unified
effect in accordance with the standards set forth in this section.
      (2)   In addition to ensuring compliance with all of the provisions of
these regulations, the Zoning Administrator shall consider the proposed general
design, arrangement and placement of the sign as well as the appropriateness of
the proposed sign in relationship to other signs and other structures both on
the premises and in the surrounding areas, and shall only approve signs which
are consistent with the intent, purposes, standards and criteria of these sign
regulations.
   (B)   Specific standards for determining the appropriateness of the sign
shall include, but not be limited, to the following conditions.
      (1)   The lettering should be large enough to be easily read but not out
of scale with the building, site or streetscape.
      (2)   The number of items (letters, symbols, shapes) should be consistent
with the amount of information which can be comprehended by the viewer, reflect
simplicity, avoid visual clutter and improve legibility.
      (3)   Signs, if seen in series, should have a continuity of design with
the style of sign generally consistent throughout the building or block.
Continuity of design means uniformity of background color or harmonious use of
a limited range of complementary background colors.
      (4)   The sign should complement the building and adjacent buildings by
being designed and placed to enhance the architecture. The sign shall reflect
the primary purpose of identifying the name and type of establishment.
      (5)   No part of a sign shall project above the parapet line.
      (6)   Illuminated signs shall be prohibited within all residential zoning
districts.
      (7)   Signs in commercial and industrial districts may be internally or
externally illuminated, however all light sources that illuminate such signs
shall be shielded from all adjacent residential buildings and streets, and
shall not be of such brightness so as to cause glare hazardous to pedestrians
or motorists, or as to cause reasonable objection from adjacent residential
districts.
      (8)   No moving parts shall be permitted for any sign or advertising
display within the city, except for those portions of a sign that indicate
time/temperature only and is an integral part of a permitted sign.
      (9)   Signs shall have no secondary or other signage added to the sign
face or sign structure unless approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (10)   No sign shall project into or above a public right-of-way. This
includes all public sidewalks or roadways.
      (11)   Freestanding signs shall be designed and located so as not to
obstruct a driver’s visibility entering or exiting a lot or to be a safety
hazard to pedestrians or vehicles, and shall maintain clear line of sight at an
intersection.
      (12)   All sign structures larger than 32 square feet must carry the name
and address of the owner, advertising agency, the erector, or agent who is
responsible for the maintenance or removal of the sign. All freestanding
permanent business and industrial signs must include the street address number
at the sign location as part of the business identification.
      (13)   Wall signs shall not project more than 12 inches from the building
wall to which it is attached and shall be set back from the end of a building
or party wall line for a distance of at least three feet and shall not project
above the building wall.
      (14)   Signs on corner lots: no freestanding sign shall be permitted
within a triangle formed between points on the front and side street right of
way lines within 30 feet from their intersection.
      (15)   Continuity: signs and their placement shall be considered in
relation to their surroundings, and if seen in series on a building wall or
walls, shall have a continuity of design with respect to shape, materials and
colors.
      (16)   Style and color: the style or design of signs shall be consistent
throughout a particular building or group of buildings; the colors of signs
shall be compatible with the color of the building facade and other existing
signs.
      (17)   Graphics: the lettering on a sign shall be clearly legible and in
scale with the sign surface upon which it is placed.
      (18)   Materials: signs shall be constructed of materials which are of
appropriate quality and durability, and which are compatible with the materials
of the building upon which the signs are placed. A sign should be constructed
with a minimum of different types of elements and materials so as to provide a
consistent overall appearance. All signs shall be designed, constructed and
erected in a professional and workmanlike manner, in conformance with all
applicable building codes, and with materials which are durable for the
intended life of the sign.
      (19)   Changeable copy may be included as part of the sign message.
Changeable copy may be in the form of manually-operated reader boards or
electronic message centers. The maximum height limit shall be 12 inches on
electronic message copy and a limit of 50% of total signage may be used for
changeable copy with manually-operated copy. All freestanding signage featuring
electronic message centers shall be ground-mounted with a maximum height of ten
feet, not to exceed 30 square feet per sign face (including the message
portion). Such signage may be expanded to a maximum of 50 square feet per sign
face when located on a corner or large lot with a linear frontage of greater
than 300 feet. Electronic message centers shall be legible and shall not move
or flash in such a manner (e.g., in speed or intensity) as to be a distraction
or disturbance to passing pedestrians or motorists or to adjacent residential
districts, but in no instance any faster than once every four seconds.
Electronic message centers are not permitted as stand-alone entities and must
be incorporated with a freestanding identification sign. No moving parts are
permitted on any sign within the city.
      (20)   Instructional signs shall contain the minimum information and the
minimum area necessary to convey the message and instruct the viewer in the
safe and efficient use of the facility.
      (21)   The Zoning Administrator and/or the Planning and Zoning Commission
may prepare from time to time or authorize the preparation of illustrations
which interpret these design and construction standards. Such illustrations may
include drawings, photographs of signs within the city and elsewhere, and
drawings or photographs of signs which have been approved pursuant to these
regulations. Any such interpretive illustrations shall be approved by a
majority vote of the Planning and Zoning Commission, and when approved, shall
be considered administrative guidelines which assist in the interpretation of
these design and construction standards. Any sign proposed which is consistent
with these illustrations shall be in prima facie compliance and be subject to
further review by the Zoning Administrator with final review and approval only
by the Planning and Zoning Commission to ensure full compliance with these
regulations.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.224 SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   The following sign regulations are in addition to the maximum sign area and
height regulations as set forth in §
156.231.
   (A)   Residential subdivision identification signs. A freestanding
residential identification sign shall be permitted for each entrance to a
subdivision pursuant to the maximum sign area and height limitations as
prescribed by the following provisions.
      (1)   Such freestanding sign shall be placed on private property no
closer than ten feet to the right-of-way and shall be located no closer than 20
feet to a side lot line.
      (2)   A freestanding identification sign may be placed in the right-of-
way provided such sign shall be located on the center island of a boulevard
entrance, placed no closer than 25 feet to the intersecting street’s right-of-
way.
      (3)   A maximum of two sign faces shall be permitted per entrance: either
as a double-sided freestanding sign or as two single-sided signs either
freestanding or mounted on a wall or other entrance feature. In any case, the
sign and its supporting structure shall comply with all city sign regulations.
   (B)   Requirements for freestanding identification signs. Freestanding
identification signs for institutions and commercial and industrial
establishments shall comply with the following regulations.
      (1)   Such signs shall be monument signs unless otherwise permitted.
      (2)   Such signs shall be permitted only when the principal building
conforms to the minimum building setback and lot width requirements specified
in the district regulations.
      (3)   Such signs shall be located no less than ten feet from the right-
of-way and no less than 20 feet from a side lot line.
      (4)   For a corner lot, one freestanding sign shall be permitted per
street frontage provided that the lot has at least 100 feet of lot frontage on
each street and the signs are located a minimum of 30 feet from the
intersection.
   (C)   Content of freestanding signs.
      (1)   Multiple-tenant facilities. When a freestanding sign is permitted
on a site with more than one tenant, it is the property owner’s responsibility
to determine if the sign area shall be devoted to identification of the
building(s), be a directory for all or only a select group of tenants, or some
combination thereof.
      (2)   Product and service signs. Up to a maximum of 50% of the area of
the freestanding identification sign may be devoted to advertising using a
product and service sign.
      (3)   Changeable copy. Changeable copy may be included as part of the
sign message. Changeable copy may be in the form of manually-operated reader
boards or electronic message centers.
      (4)   Illuminated signs. Illuminated signs shall be prohibited within all
residential zoning districts.
      (5)   Directional signs. A maximum of two directional signs shall be
permitted per access drive for institutional, commercial and industrial uses
pursuant to the maximum sign area limitations and height limitations. Such
signs shall be located no less than five feet from a side lot line, and may be
located at or near the right-of-way but shall not be in the right-of-way.
Directional signs shall not obstruct the line of sight for vehicular or
pedestrian traffic.
      (6)   Pump island signs. Retail outlets having fuel pump islands may
have, for pricing and service information only, not more than one double-faced
sign or two single-faced signs per pump island. Such sign shall not be greater
than 24 inches by 48 inches be confined to the pump islands, shall be
permanently attached, and may be illuminated. No zoning certificate or fee
shall be required.
      (7)   Construction signs. A non-illuminated construction sign shall be
permitted in all districts pursuant to the maximum sign area limitations and
height limitations.
         (a)   There shall be not more than one construction sign per lot
located no less than ten feet from the right-of-way and 20 feet from a side lot
line.
         (b)   A zoning certificate for a construction sign shall be valid for
a period of one year. The construction sign shall be erected on the lot only
during the period of time that the building project is under construction and
while a valid building permit is in force. Such sign shall be removed within 14
days.
         (c)   In the event construction extends beyond the one year time
period, a request for an extension of the construction sign permit shall be
submitted to the Zoning Administrator for review and approval.
      (8)   Political signs. Political signs are permitted on private property
with the owner’s permission in all districts pursuant to the maximum sign area
limitations and height limitations provided that they:
         (a)   Shall not be illuminated; and
         (b)   Shall not be placed on utility poles or on public property or
street right-of- ways, but may adjoin the right-of-way line provided such signs
do not obstruct vehicular and pedestrian line of sight distance.
      (9)   Real estate sales signs. Real estate sales signs are permitted in
all districts pursuant to the maximum sign area limitations and height
limitations provided that they comply with the following provisions.
         (a)   One such sign shall be permitted per street frontage located no
less than ten feet from the right-of-way and 20 feet from a side lot line.
         (b)   Such signs shall not be illuminated.
         (c)   May be located at or near the right-of-way, shall be no less
than feet from a side lot line, and shall not be placed upon or in a street
right-of-way or attached to or upon any street identification or utility pole.
         (d)   Real estate signage shall only be allowed on the property listed
for sale.
         (e)   Off premises, directional “open house” signs pertaining to sale,
auction, lease or rental of property may be used provided they are posted no
sooner than 5:00 p.m. on Friday and removed by 7:00 a.m. on the following
Monday.
      (10)   Community programs and activities. Signs promoting community
programs and/or activities within the city and sponsored by public or quasi-
public organizations shall be permitted pursuant to the maximum sign area
limitations and the height limitations as well as the following provisions:
         (a)   Shall be posted on private property with the owner’s permission
for a period not to exceed 30 days;
         (b)   Any freestanding sign proposed to be located on or over a public
right-of-way or other publicly owned land shall only be approved by the Zoning
Administrator; and
         (c)   Banners over the public right-of-way may be erected to promote a
public activity sponsored by a community group and that will be held within the
city. The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to approve the erection
of banners proposed for locations on or over a public right-of-way, subject to
the restrictions as outlined above. No banner shall be erected for a period of
greater than two weeks. Furthermore the Zoning Administrator shall have the
authority to impose additional requirements not in conflict with this Zoning
Code.
      (11)   Seasonal sales signs. Signs for periodic sales or promotions by
commercial or business uses and non-profit or quasi-public organizations shall
be permitted pursuant to the maximum sign area limitations and height
limitations with the following provisions:
         (a)   One freestanding sign or one banner shall be permitted to be
placed on the premises where the sale is to occur;
         (b)   A temporary freestanding sign shall be located no less than ten
feet from the right-of-way and no less than 20 feet from any side lot line. A
temporary banner shall be placed only on the building’s front wall;
         (c)   Such temporary sign or banner shall be intended to advertise a
special event or promotional sale activity; and
         (d)   Such temporary sign or banner shall be permitted a maximum of
four times a year in increments of 15 days each. There shall be no more than
one temporary sign per each 15-day period.
      (12)   Community directional signs. Community directional signs for the
purpose of providing directions to public, quasi-public, religious, educational
and major recreational facilities within the city may be permitted as a
conditional use when reviewed and approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and subject to the following conditions:
         (a)   Shall not be illuminated;
         (b)   The area and height of the sign shall be a function of the
number of facilities being addressed and may be limited by the Planning and
Zoning Commission; and
         (c)   Application for a community directional sign shall include an
agreement signed by the owner of the proposed site authorizing the erection and
continuing maintenance of the sign and landscaping. The sign proposal shall
indicate proposed landscaping of the site in the area of the sign.
      (13)   Future location signs. Signs indicating the site of the future
location of a business may be temporarily placed at said location. Such sign
must be maintained in a good state of repair. The fee for a temporary sign
indicating the site as the future location of a business shall be a set by City
Council. Upon completion of construction, this fee shall be applied toward the
fee for a permanent sign at the location of the completed business.
      (14)   Portable signs. Portable signs are permitted in all districts for
a period not to exceed 30 days, with not more than four periods, each separated
from the other by not less than 45 days, being permitted in any 12-month
period. Portable signs must be removed from sight after each permitted time
period.
      (15)   Home sale signs. Home sale signs shall have a maximum size of
eight square feet and a maximum height of four feet and permitted during the
duration of the sale.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 17-O-01, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 156.225 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM REGULATION.
   The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this Zoning Code:
   (A)   Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable
federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance;
   (B)   Any sign inside a building, not attached to a window or door, that is
not legible from a distance of more than three feet beyond the building in
which such sign is located;
   (C)   Works of art that do not include a commercial message;
   (D)   Religious and other holiday lights and decorations containing no
commercial message when displayed during the appropriate time of the year;
   (E)   Required public purpose/safety signs as needed to achieve the intended
public purpose and which contain no commercial message of any sort;
   (F)   Flags of the United States, the state, the city, foreign nations
having diplomatic relations with the United States, and any other flag adopted
or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction. These
flags must be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of
the United States for the Stars and Stripes. Any flag not meeting these
conditions shall be considered a sign and shall be subject to regulations as
such; and
   (G)   All federal, state, county or city government owned signs.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.226 SIGNS PROHIBITED UNDER THIS ZONING CODE.
   All signs not expressly permitted under this Zoning Code or exempt from
regulation hereunder in accordance with the previous section are prohibited
within the city. Such signs shall include, but are not limited to:
   (A)   Animated, flasher, blinker, racer type, moving or revolving signs,
inflatable signs and tethered balloons, streamers, exposed light bulbs, strings
of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except those exempt
under the previous section; and other similar features;
   (B)   Signs containing any words or symbols that would cause confusion
because of their resemblance to highway traffic control or directional signals;
and
   (C)   Outdoor advertising (billboards).
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.227 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   Except as otherwise stated herein, a zoning certificate or conditional use
certificate shall be required for all signs. The procedures for obtaining a
zoning certificate are as follows.
   (A)   Review procedures. Signs shall be erected, modified, or replaced only
upon the submission of proper plans and specifications and upon review and
approval by the Zoning Administrator according to the following:
      (1)   A zoning certificate shall not be required for the following signs
when such signs are in full compliance with these sign regulations:
         (a)   Home occupation nameplate signs consisting of only one unlighted
nameplate of not more than two square feet in area announcing the name and the
home occupation shall be permitted;
         (b)   Open house, auction, yard sale and garage sale signs shall be
placed on premises only and shall be prohibited on all utility poles, and
within the road right-of-way;
         (c)   Political signs with an area of six square feet or less shall be
permitted within all zoning districts, whereas political signs of 16 square
feet or less shall only be permitted within the B-1, B-2 and I-1 and I-2 Zoning
Districts;
         (d)   Real estate signs with an area of six square feet or less shall
be permitted within all zoning districts, whereas real estate signs of 16
square feet or less shall only be permitted within the B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-
2 Zoning Districts; and
         (e)   Memorial signs.
      (2)   (a)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the responsibility to
review and approve (or disapprove):
            1.   Business identification signs including freestanding, wall
signs, awning signs, canopy signs, unified directory, secondary tenant and home
occupation signs;
            2.   Real estate signs having an area greater than 16 square feet;
            3.   Changeable copy signs;
            4.   Construction signs;
            5.   Directional signs;
            6.   Seasonal sales signs;
            7.   Product and service signs;
            8.   Instructional signs;
            9.   Temporary promotional signs for community programs and
activities that do not involve banners and signs in the public right-of-way;
            10.   Replacement of a previously approved sign for an existing
business provided only a change in the sign face is proposed;
            11.   Institutional signs;
            12.   Shopping center signs;
            13.   Multiple tenant directory signs;
            14.   Portable signs; and
            15.   Residential identification signs.
         (b)   However, the Zoning Administrator may refer the decision on any
of the above signs to the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration if
the Zoning Administrator determines that the sign, as proposed, is more
appropriately the responsibility of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
      (3)   Community directional signs shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   (B)   Application requirements. The sign company providing the permanent or
freestanding sign shall be considered the applicant for all sign applications
and shall be so noted on the application. Submission of a zoning certificate
application for a proposed sign shall include the following:
      (1)   The full name and full address of the owner of the lot on which the
sign is to be located, the owner of the sign, and the sign provider;
      (2)   The signature of the sign company as the applicant;
      (3)   A detailed site plan drawn to scale showing:
         (a)   The exact dimensions of the lot or property, the location of all
dwellings and/or buildings on the lot, the location and size of all driveways
and access drives, and the identification of and distances to all adjacent
dwellings, buildings and/or land uses; and
         (b)   The exact location of the proposed sign(s) on the site.
      (4)   Elevations and plans drawn to scale showing the exact type and size
dimensions and structure for the proposed sign(s), the proposed location and
type of lighting, and the associated landscaping and plantings;
      (5)   A drawing or description indicating the exact sign coloration,
logos, shape, text and/or message;
      (6)   Any other pertinent data necessary for the determination of
compliance with the purposes and objectives of this Zoning Code and
comprehensive land use plan; and
      (7)   Payment of any required application and sign fees, bonds, or other
performance and/ or maintenance guarantees.
   (C)   Site plan review.
      (1)   Generally. All signs will be subject to site plan review by the
Planning and Zoning Commission when included with any major nonresidential
development.
      (2)   Sign policy for multi-tenant buildings. For multi-tenant buildings
in commercial or industrial districts, and individual buildings located in
business and industrial parks, the applicant shall submit with the application
for site plan review basic sign parameters as to the location, size and style
of proposed signs. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall approve with the
site plans for new buildings, or at the time a specific sign request is made
for a tenant identification sign in an existing building, the basic sign
policies for each tenant sign. The Zoning Administrator may approve the
subsequent individual tenant signs upon specific application when such proposed
signs comply with the sign policy established by the Planning and Zoning
Commission. Such approved sign policy shall be made part of all leases or sales
of stores or other tenant space.
   (D)   Modification to existing sign. Any proposed change in an existing
sign, sign structure or lighting, shall be approved according to the review
procedure set forth in this section prior to said change being made.
   (E)   Variances. Regardless of any provisions of these sign regulations, the
Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the exclusive power to grant variances to
the requirements and provisions contained herein. Said variances shall be based
on the Board of Zoning Appeals consideration of the sign proposed, the general
characteristics of the proposed site and surrounding area, and any unique or
unusual circumstances which, in the exercise of their sound judgment, justify a
modification of any requirement, or specification while maintaining the overall
purpose and integrity of the sign regulations.
      (1)   Variances shall be non-assignable and shall expire one year from
the date of enactment, unless prior thereto, the applicant commences the actual
construction or placement of the sign in accordance with the granted variance.
      (2)   Granting of a variance shall be in response to a unique set of
conditions, circumstances or characteristics and shall not be construed as
having general application to other sign proposals or be the basis for other
variance requests.
   (F)   Fees. Concurrent with the filing of an application for any sign,
unless specified otherwise in these sign regulations, an application fee shall
be paid to the city in the amount established by ordinance. No refund of any
part of an application fee shall be made to an applicant in cases of denial of
the requested sign(s).
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 17-O-01, passed 5-17-2017)
§ 156.228 MAINTENANCE.
   All signs shall be maintained in accordance with the following standards.
   (A)   The property owner, owner of the sign, tenant and agent are required
to maintain the sign in a condition fit for the intended use and in good
repair, and such person or persons have a continuing obligation to comply with
all building code requirements.
   (B)   A sign in good repair shall be free of peeling or faded paint, shall
not be stained, show uneven soiling or rust streaks; shall not have chipped,
cracked, broken or bent letters, panels or framing; shall not otherwise show
deterioration; and shall comply with all other applicable maintenance standards
of the city.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator may order any sign to be painted or
refurbished at least once a year, if needed, to keep the sign in a neat and
safe condition.
   (D)   If the sign is deemed by the Zoning Administrator not to be in good
repair or in an unsafe condition, such sign shall be considered an unsafe
building and structure and all city regulations applicable for the repair or
removal of such sign shall apply.
   (E)   Whenever any awning, freestanding, marquee/canopy, projecting and/or
wall sign, either conforming or nonconforming to these regulations, is required
to be removed for the purpose of repair, re-lettering, or repainting, the same
may be done without a certificate, or any payment of fees, provided there is no
alteration or enlargement to the structure or the mounting of the sign itself,
and the sign is accessory to a legally permitted or nonconforming use. This
regulation shall not apply to mobile, portable and/or temporary signs.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.229 ALTERATION/REMOVAL OF UNSAFE, OBSOLETE AND NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   Every sign or other advertising structure, including supporting
materials, in existence upon adoption of these regulations, that violates or
does not conform to the provisions herein shall be altered, or replaced only in
conformance with the provisions of these regulations, and only upon the review
and approval of the Zoning Administrator, except that signs that are damaged to
50% or less of the current fair market value may be restored to their former
condition. However, in recognition of the desirability of the upgrading of
existing signage and as an incentive to the nonconforming sign owner, the Board
of Zoning Appeals may consider and grant variances to any of the provisions
contained in these sign regulations, if the nonconforming sign owner is willing
to agree to achieve sign compliance within a specified and agreed upon number
of years.
   (B)   Any conforming or nonconforming sign and supporting materials existing
which no longer advertises a bona fide business, or which no longer serves the
purpose for which it was intended, or which is not maintained in accordance
with these sign regulations shall, within 30 days of business termination or
the time such sign becomes obsolete or not properly maintained, be removed by
the certificate holder, property owner, sign owner, sign provider, or person
having the beneficial use of the building or structure upon which such sign may
be found. Signs which are not so removed are hereby declared to be a nuisance
subject to abatement by the city.
   (C)   Written notification from the Zoning Administrator concerning the
removal of a sign shall be complied with within 30 days. Failure to comply with
the abatement order shall result in the Zoning Administrator having
authorization to cause removal of such sign and supporting material. Any
expense incidental to this removal shall be paid by the owner of the property
upon which said sign is located. Failure to pay the cost for such removal shall
result in a lien upon the premises, which lien shall be filed with the County
Fiscal Office, to remain a lien or record, until paid. The lien shall accrue
interest at the maximum rate permitted by state law prior to payment.
   (D)   If the Zoning Administrator shall find that any sign or other
advertising structure is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or
has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of the
provisions of this Zoning Code, notice shall be given in writing by the Zoning
Administrator to the certificate holder thereof, sign owner, property owner or
sign provider. If the certificate holder, sign owner, property owner or sign
provider fails to remove or alter the structure so as to comply with the
standards herein set forth within 30 days after such notice, such sign or other
advertising structure may be removed or altered to comply with these
regulations at the expense of the certificate holder or the owner of the
property upon which it is located, sign owner or sign provider. The Zoning
Administrator shall refuse to issue a certificate to any certificate holder,
sign owner, property owner or sign provider who refuses to pay costs so
assessed. The Zoning Administrator may cause any sign or advertising structure
which is in immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and
without notice.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.230 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner, sign erector, the
owner of the business being identified or advertised and/or the owner of the
property upon which the sign is to be placed to ensure that any sign erected,
altered, modified or maintained is in compliance with all applicable provisions
of these sign regulations and any other conditions specified in the approval of
a sign. Failure to come into compliance after notice as specified in this
section shall be a violation.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall declare any violations a nuisance and
order in writing the correction of all conditions which are found to be in
violation of these regulations.
   (C)   Where the sign regulations provide that a zoning certificate or
approval of the Zoning Administrator is required prior to the erection of a
sign, and no certificate or approval has been obtained, violations shall be
corrected within ten days after the written order is issued or the sign in
question shall be removed by the city.
   (D)   Any violation involving temporary signs, excluding temporary
promotional signs shall be corrected within ten days after the written order is
issued or the sign in question shall be removed by the city. If the permit
holder, sign owner, property owner or sign provider fails to remove or alter
the temporary sign within ten days after such notice, such sign or other
advertising structure may be removed or altered by the city to comply with
these regulations at the expense of the permit holder, the owner of the
property upon which it is located, the sign owner or the sign provider. The
Zoning Administrator may refuse to issue a permit to any permit holder, sign
owner, property owner or sign provider who refuses to pay costs so assessed.
The Zoning Administrator may cause any sign or advertising structure which is
in immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without
notice.
   (E)   In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public
health or safety, such sign shall be removed immediately upon notification of
such pending danger or the sign in question shall be removed by the city.
   (F)   All other violations shall be corrected within ten days after the
written order is issued or the sign in question shall be removed by the city.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any temporary
promotional sign placed in the right-of-way may be immediately removed by the
city. Any sign removed under this division (G) by the city shall be stored at a
designated location by the city for a period not to exceed ten days. If the
owner of the temporary promotional sign does not remove the sign from storage
within ten days, the sign will be deemed abandoned and disposed of by the city.
   (H)   Any violation not corrected within the period of time specified above
shall be referred to the Law Director for the city for commencement of formal
legal proceedings against the violator or violators.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.231 MAXIMUM SIGN AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
Maximum Sign Area and Height Regulations
Type of Sign Maximum Area (Sq. Ft.) Maximum Height (Feet) Other
Maximum Sign Area and Height Regulations
                                               Maximum     Maximum
Type of Sign                                   Area (Sq.   Height  Other
                                               Ft.)        (Feet)
Nameplate                                      2           N/A
Wall signs
                                                                   1 per
   Home occupation                          2           N/A     dwelling
                                                                   unit
   Multi-family developments                32          N/A     [A]
                                                           For buildings
                                                           located in
                                                           commercial districts
                                                           with a building wall
                                                           area of 1,000 sq.
                                               Lineal feet ft. or more and
                                               of building located 400 ft. or
                                               or business more from the street
   Commercial, industrial and institutional unit        right of way; the
uses                                           frontage X  maximum area shall
                                               1.5 up to   be 7.5% of wall
                                               100 sq. ft. area. For buildings
                                                           in industrial
                                                           districts with a
                                                           wall area of 1,000
                                                           sq. ft. or more, the
                                                           maximum shall be 5%
                                                           of wall area
Monument sign
                                                                   Per sign
                                                                   face, max.
   Residential subdivision                  32          6       of 2 sign
                                                                   faces per
                                                                   subdivision
   Multi-family developments                32          6       [A]
   Commercial, industrial and institutional 50          8
uses
                                                                   See §
   Changeable copy/electronic message                           156.223(B)
                                                                   (19)
Canopy                                         10          N/A
Unified directory                              16          N/A
Directional                                    4           3
Construction
   Single-family lot                        16          N/A
   Major subdivision/multi-family uses      32          N/A
Political
   Residential district                     6           N/A
   All other districts and institutional    16          N/A
properties
Real estate
   Less than 1 acre                         8           N/A
   Between 1—5 acres                      16          N/A
   More than 5 acres                        32          N/A
Temporary promotional
   Residential district                     8           N/A
   Commercial/industrial                    32          N/A
[A]   Only one sign per street frontage permitted; it shall be a wall or
freestanding sign, but not both
 
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
DEFINITIONS
§ 156.245 INTERPRETATION.
   For purposes of this Zoning Code, certain terms are here within defined and
clarified. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; the
singular number shall include the plural, and the plural number shall include
the singular; the word SHALL is to be taken to be mandatory or imperative; the
words CAN or MAY are permissive; the word SHOULD is suggestive and not
compulsory; the word BUILDING shall also include the word “structure”; the word
USED shall include the words “arranged”, “designed”, “constructed”, “altered”,
“converted”, or “intended to be used”; the word PERSON shall include the words
“individual”, “firm”, “partnership”, “limited partnership”, “corporation”,
“association”, “subdivider”, “syndicate”, “organization”, “non-profit entity”,
“limited company”, “trust”, as well as an individual, or developer (as defined
herein) or any legal entity which may own and/or use land, structures, or
buildings; the word LOT shall include the words “plot”, “parcel”, “sublot” and
“site”; the word DWELLING shall include the words “home”, “residence”, “abode”,
“domicile” and “habitation”; the word ERECT shall include the words “build” and
“construct”; the word STREET shall include the words “road”, “highway”,
“thoroughfare”, “alley”, “avenue”, “boulevard”, “drive”, “lane”, “circle”,
“court”, “terrace”, “trail”, “spur” and “cul-de-sac”. Words not defined herein
shall be as defined in Black’s Law Dictionary and/or Webster’s II New
Collegiate Dictionary and/or The Latest Illustrated Book of Development
Definitions, published in 2004. Any changes, revisions, updates or subsequent
editions of the aforementioned publications shall be applicable to this section
in perpetuity.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009)
§ 156.246 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUT or ABUTTING. To touch along a common boundary. Also includes the words
CONTIGUOUS, ADJACENT and ADJOINING.
   ACCESS MANAGEMENT. The process of providing and managing access to land
development while preserving and regulating the flow of all modes of traffic in
terms of design, public safety and welfare, capacity, speed, and the prevention
of congestion. This traffic can include, but is not limited to, automobile,
truck, mass transit, bicycle and pedestrian forms.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. See BUILDING, ACCESSORY.
   ACRE. See LAND, ACRE.
   ADDITION. The process of adding area and cubic content to an existing
building or structure.
   ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein
coin-operated or token-operated, or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled, still or motion picture machine projectors or other
image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time, where the images displayed are distinguished or
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment which, as
one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form
of consideration any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations, which depict or describe specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia, other than medical or
contraceptive devices, which are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities.
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
      (1)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity;
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical area or by specified sexual activities; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown and are characterized by the
depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity
or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADVERSE IMPACT. Any deleterious effect on receiving waters, including their
quality, quantity, surface area, aesthetics or usefulness for human or natural
uses. Such deleterious effect is or may potentially be harmful or injurious to
human health, welfare, safety or property, or which unreasonably interfere with
the enjoyment of life or property, including outdoor recreation.
   AGRICULTURE. The use of land for farming; dairying; pasturage; ranching;
aquaculture; apiculture; horticulture; silviculture, viticulture; animal
husbandry, including, but not limited to, the care and raising of livestock,
equine and fur-bearing animals; poultry husbandry and the production of poultry
and poultry products; the production of field crops, fruits, vegetables,
nursery stock, ornamental shrubs and trees, flowers, sod or mushrooms; any
combination of the foregoing; the processing, drying, storage and marketing of
agricultural products when those activities are conducted in conjunction with,
but are secondary to, such husbandry or production. The above agricultural
pursuits shall not include the feeding of garbage or refuse to animals. A use
shall be considered agricultural if it is the primary use of the property.
   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or
designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word AIRCRAFT includes
drones, fixed wing airplanes, gliders, helicopters and lighter-than-air
dirigibles and balloons.
   ALTERATION. Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members of an
existing building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders or interior
partitions, as well as any change of ingress or egress, or any enlargement to
or reduction of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or
the moving of a building or structure from one location to another.
   ANIMALS, ANIMAL OR POULTRY HUSBANDRY. The production, care, control,
management and marketing of animals and/or poultry.
   ANIMALS, DOMESTIC. Tame, domesticated; capable or being kept near or about
the dwellings of humankind; species such as horses, cows, sheep, goats, hogs
and poultry; household pets not included.
   ANIMALS, HOUSEHOLD PETS. Species such as dogs or cats, which are commonly
kept within the dwellings of humankind.
   ANIMALS, POULTRY. Domesticated birds kept for eggs or meat.
   APARTMENT. A room or suite of rooms designed to live in and generally
located in a building occupied by more than one household.
   APPLICANT. Any person who executes the necessary forms to procure official
approval of a project or a permit to carry out construction of a project.
   AREA. See BUILDING, AREA OF FLOOR, LAND, ACRE and LOT, AREA.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection container.
   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION. The use of a lot for the retail sale of
gasoline, oil, grease, batteries, tires, accessories and other related products
to the traveling public; the effecting of adjustments, replacements and repairs
to motor vehicles excluding painting and body work; the washing, waxing and
polishing of motor vehicles by means other than automatic conveyors.
   AUTOMOBILE WASH. A building or portion thereof devoted to an automatic
conveyor-type cleaning, washing and waxing process, or a building or portion
thereof having individual bays with rental cleaning, washing and waxing
devices.
   BAR, TAVERN or SALOON. An area primarily devoted to the sale and serving of
alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the
consumption of such beverages.
   BASEMENT. The lowest story of a building, partly or wholly underground,
having more than one- half of its height below the average finished grade at
the exterior front face of the building.
   BED AND BREAKFAST INN. A building, or part thereof, other than a motel,
hotel or restaurant, where meals and/or lodging are provided for compensation
and containing a minimum of four guestrooms and a maximum of eight guestrooms.
   BED AND BREAKFAST RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A building, or part thereof, other
than a motel, hotel or restaurant, where meals and/or lodging are provided for
compensation and containing no more than three guestrooms.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) Conservation practices or protection
measures which reduce impacts from a particular land use. BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES for construction are outlined in Rainwater and Land Development,
Ohio’s Standard for Storm Water Management, Land Development, and Urban Stream
Protection prepared by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources. Schedules of
activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices,
pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and
other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants
directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters or storm water
conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures
and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water
disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
   BI-LEVEL. A building that has its finished floor level for the lowest
occupied or living floor at some dimension below the average finished grade at
the exterior front face of the building, and which consists of two occupied or
living floors or stories.
   BOARD. The City of New Franklin Board of Zoning Appeals (also known as the
BZA) or the City of New Franklin Property Maintenance Enforcement Board (also
known as the PMEB).
   BOATHOUSE, PRIVATE. A building devoted to the purpose of housing and/or
storing watercraft of any nature, which are owned by the occupants of the
dwelling which the boathouse serves.
   BUFFER. A naturally vegetated area or vegetated area along the exterior
boundaries of a development which is landscaped and maintained as a traditional
open space in order to eliminate or minimize conflicts between such development
and adjacent land uses or to protect a natural feature from development.
   BUFFER ZONE. An area separating two different zoning districts, designed and
intended to cause each to blend more easily with the other.
   BUILD. See ERECT.
   BUILDABLE AREA. The area remaining on a zoned lot after the minimum yards
and open space requirements have been met.
   BUILDING. A structure enclosed within exterior walls and having a roof of
more or less permanent construction, which is separated from other buildings by
open space, and is intended to be used for sheltering persons, animals,
property or business activity.
   BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A building which is subordinate in nature and purpose,
and serves a principal building on the same lot, and contributes to the
comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants or users of the principal
building. Types of ACCESSORY BUILDINGS include boathouses, garages, carports,
roadside stands, stables, storage buildings and temporary buildings.
   BUILDING, AREA OF FLOOR. The sum of the areas of all floors of a building as
measured from the outside faces of the exterior walls, or from the centerline
of walls separating two occupancies. This shall also include the area of a
covered patio where the roof structure has support posts attached to the
ground. In the case of dwellings or dwelling units, the area of unfinished
basement space and attached garages shall be deducted from the overall area to
yield the resulting area of living space for zoning considerations.
   BUILDING, CLEARANCES FROM. The clear distance, as measured from the exterior
face of a wall of a building, to another building wall or to a lot line.
   BUILDING, COVERAGE. The area of land covered or permitted to be covered by
buildings, expressed as percentages of the lot area.
   BUILDING, DETACHED. One that is separate, unconnected, standing alone.
   BUILDING, DILAPIDATED. The neglect of necessary repairs to a building,
allowing it to fall into such a state of disrepair, ruin or decay that it is no
longer adequate for its intended purpose.
   BUILDING ENVELOPE. The portion of a lot or parcel that contains the
principal building and accessory structures, required setbacks and on-site
wastewater system and water well, if required.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT. The vertical distance from the finished grade to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard
roof, or the highest height level to the peak of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
   BUILDING (INSECURE, UNSAFE, STRUCTURALLY UNSOUND). Dangerous, damaged,
decayed, rotten, liable to give way or collapse.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. The building that is used for the primary purpose to
which a lot and zoning district are devoted.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line establishing the limits of a yard which abuts
a street and in which no building may be located.
   BUILDING, STORY. See STORY and STORY, HALF.
   BUSINESS. Activity, employment, trade, occupation or profession having to do
with the operation or details of barter, trade, industry, commerce or other
activities for financial gain or livelihood.
   BUSINESS CENTER. A building complex which contains multiple compatible
business uses.
   CARPORT, PRIVATE. An accessible and usable permanent, roofed parking
structure of not less than ten by 20 feet (inside dimensions), and open on one
or more sides. A CANOPY CARPORT is a carport structure made of canvass or mesh
type materials supported by a fixed or movable frame which is securely fixed to
a foundation or wall and used to shelter motor vehicles, trailers, equipment or
implements from the sun or weather. A CANOPY CARPORT is a prohibited use per §
156.125(A)(9) of this Zoning Code.
   CENTRALIZED SEWER AND WATER SYSTEMS. Systems by which individual lots are
connected to common sewer and water collection or distribution networks.
   CERTIFIED PROFESSIONAL IN EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL (CPESC). A
professional who has met the requirements of and has been certified by CPESC
Inc.
   CHILD DAY CARE CENTER and CHILD DAY CARE HOME. A facility as defined in R.C.
Chapter 5104.
   CHURCH. See RELIGIOUS LAND USE FOR PUBLIC WORSHIP.
   CITY. The City of New Franklin, Summit County, Ohio.
   CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
   CLEAN WOOD. Wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a
similar material, has not been pressure treated with preservatives and does not
contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products.
   CLEARCUTTING. The removal of trees and other vegetation from a site in
preparation of the development of same.
   CLEARING. Any activity which removes the trees and/or vegetative ground
cover.
   CO-LOCATION. The use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than
one wireless telecommunications provider.
   COMMERCIAL. Of, occupied with or relating to commerce.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written manner, including any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or
thing;
      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales;
      (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition or event of any kind for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; and
      (4)   Which, while containing reading matter other than the advertising
matter, is predominately and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL USE (INDOOR). Indoor recreation and entertainment
facilities including, but not limited to, those required for indoor court
sports, shooting ranges, athletic clubs, arcades, bowling alleys, theaters,
auditoriums, lodge halls and social clubs.
   COMMERCIAL RECREATIONAL USE (OUTDOOR). Outdoor recreation and entertainment
facilities including, but not limited to, drive-in theaters, golf driving
ranges, miniature golf ranges, excluding rifle ranges, skeet shooting or pistol
ranges, or other ranges for the use of firearms.
   COMMISSION. The City of New Franklin Planning and Zoning Commission. (Also
known as the PZC).
   COMMUNITY. The City of New Franklin and its designated representatives,
boards or commissions.
   COMPATIBLE. The characteristics of differing uses or activities that permit
them to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict.
   COMPLETE APPLICATION. An application for a zoning request that contains the
following:
      (1)   Submittal and completion of all applicable application forms;
      (2)   Submittal of all required supporting application information; and
      (3)   Submittal of all required fees.
   COMPOSTING. The biological decomposition of organic waste materials.
   COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE DEVELOPMENT PLAN. Mapped and/or written proposals for
the future development of the City of New Franklin.
   CONDITIONAL USE. A use, subject to certain conditions, that may be granted
on terms other than “as of right” (use granted on the basis of an application
alone). CONDITIONAL USES are granted only by the city’s Planning and Zoning
Commission.
   CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits.
These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre
or more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and
grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition.
   CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT. The placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner except that where
demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun
preparatory to rebuilding, such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be
actual CONSTRUCTION COMMENCEMENT; and provided that work shall be diligently
carried on until completion of the building involved.
   CONSTRUCTION ENTRANCE. The permitted points of ingress and egress to
development areas.
   CONVALESCENT HOME. A rest home or boarding home for the aged or mentally or
physically infirmed, conducted within any abode, building, institutional
residence or home used for the reception and care, for a consideration, of
three or more persons, who, by reason of age or mental or physical infirmities,
are not capable of properly caring for themselves, for which a license has been
issued by the Department of Public Welfare of the state.
   CUL-DE-SAC. See STREET, CUL-DE-SAC.
   DAMAGED OR DISEASED TREES. Trees that have split trunk, broken tops, heart
rot, insect or fungus problems that will lead to imminent death, undercut root
systems that put the tree in imminent danger of falling, lean as a result of
root failure that puts the tree in imminent danger of falling, or any other
condition that puts the tree in imminent danger of being uprooted or falling
into or along a stream, roadway or onto a structure.
   DECK. A raised from grade flat-floored roofless area adjoining a dwelling,
usually having handrails all around, and usually built of wood or composite
materials.
   DEFINED CHANNEL. A natural or human-made depression in the terrain which is
maintained and altered by the water and sediment it carries.
   DEVELOPMENT AREA. A parcel or contiguous parcels owned by one person or
persons, or operated as one development unit, and used or being developed for
commercial, industrial, residential, institutional or other construction or
alteration that changes runoff characteristics.
   DIAMETER/DIAMETER-BREAST-HEIGHT (D.B.H.). The diameter of any tree trunk,
measured at four and one-half feet above average grade. For species of trees
whose normal growth habit is characterized by multiple stems (e.g., hazelnut,
vine maple) DIAMETER shall mean the average diameter of all stems of the tree,
measured at a point six inches from the point where the stems digress from the
main trunk. In no case shall a branch more than six inches above average grade
be considered a stem. For the purposes of enforcement, if a tree has been
removed and only the stump remains, the size of the tree shall be the diameter
of the top of the stump.
   DISH ANTENNA. See EARTH STATION.
   DISTRICT. See ZONING DISTRICT.
   DISTURBED AREA. An area of land subject to erosion due to the removal of
vegetative cover and/or soil disturbing activities.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. See ANIMAL, DOMESTIC.
   DRAINAGE. The removal of excess surface water or groundwater from land by
surface or subsurface drains.
   DRAINAGE AREA. That area contributing runoff to a single point, and/or its
watershed.
   DRIP LINE. The ground line around a tree that defines the limits of the tree
canopy.
   DWELLING. Home; residence; abode; domicile; habitation; the building or
buildings occupied by a family as a place or residence. Commercial
establishments such as motels are not included in this definition.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling designed for or used exclusively for
residence purposes by one family.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A dwelling designed for or occupied by three or more
families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building designed for and used exclusively by two
families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms providing complete living facilities for
one family, including equipment for cooking or provisions for the same, and
including room or rooms for living, sleeping and eating.
   EARTH STATION. A device used for the purpose of transmitting or receiving
satellite signals.
   EMINENT DOMAIN. The legal right of government to acquire or “take” private
property for public use or purpose upon paying just compensation to the owner.
   ENCLOSURE. An area of confinement, typically outlined by fencing.
   ERECT. To cause to have built or put up by the fitting together of
materials, parts or elements; construct.
   EROSION. The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice or
other geological factors.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL. The control of soil, both mineral and organic,
to minimize the removal of soil from the land surface and to prevent its
transport from a disturbed area by means of wind, water, ice, gravity or any
combination of those forces.
   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by
public utilities or municipal departments, or commissions, of underground or
overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems,
collection, communications, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires,
mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduit, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call
boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith, but not including buildings reasonably necessary for the
furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal
departments or commissions or for the public health or safety or general
welfare.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit, whether or not related to each other by birth or marriage,
as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house, lodging house, hotel,
tourist dwelling, sorority or fraternity. A FAMILY may also include domestic
servants and gratuitous guests.
   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FENCE or WALL. Any structure composed of wood, steel, iron, masonry, stone,
plastic, vinyl or other material erected in such a manner and positioned as to
enclose or partially enclose any property or any part of any property.
Structures erected other than on lot lines or in close proximity to lot lines,
which have solely an ornamental purpose and which do not in fact serve the
purpose of enclosing or partially enclosing property or of separating property
from adjoining property, shall not be included within the definition of the
word FENCE or WALL.
   FENCE, VISION IMPAIRING. Includes any type fence, wall or grouping of
bushes, shrubs or plants, which impede, bar, block or obscure vision.
   FINAL STABILIZATION. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been
completed and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a density of at least
70% coverage for the area has been established or equivalent stabilization
measures, such as the use of mulches or geotextiles, have been employed.
   FIRST FLUSH. The delivery of a large load of pollutants during the early
part of storms due to rapid runoff of accumulated pollutants. The first flush
in these guidelines is defined as the runoff generated from a one-year 24-hour
storm event from land which has been made impervious from predevelopment
conditions through land grading and construction and/or development activities.
   FISCAL OFFICER. The Summit County Fiscal Officer or their successor.
   FLOOD OR SPOT LIGHT. Any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector
or a refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a
particular direction.
   FLOOR AREA. See BUILDING, AREA OF FLOOR.
   FRONTAGE. See LOT, FRONTAGE.
   FRONTAGE, LOT. That portion of a lot line abutting on a road right-of-way.
   FULLY SHIELDED LIGHT FIXTURE. A light fixture constructed in such a manner
that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a
diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of
the fixture, is projected below the horizontal.
   GARAGE, MOTOR VEHICLE REPAIR. A building, or portion thereof, in which motor
vehicles are repaired, and in which vehicle painting and body and fender work
are incidental.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A building or portion of a dwelling, devoted to the purpose
of sheltering or storing motor vehicles, trailers, equipment or implements.
   GARAGE, PUBLIC. A building, or portion of a building, in which more than
four motor vehicles are, or are intended to be, housed under arrangements made
with patrons for renting or leasing such space and accommodation, and in which
no repair work is carried on.
   GARBAGE. The matter, substance or waste resulting from the growing,
handling, storage, preparation, cooking and/or consumption of food, including
animals (including fat and bones), fowl, fish, fruits and vegetables, including
animal and bird feeds.
   GAS. Natural gas and all other fluid hydrocarbons not defined as oil.
   GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. See AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION.
   GRADE, FINISHED. The datum or reference level obtained by averaging the
elevation of the finished surfaces along the front face of a building.
   GRADE, NATURAL. The elevation of the undisturbed natural surface of the
ground prior to any excavation or fill.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration or physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or
otherwise managed.
   HEALTH CARE FACILITY. An institution for human medical care such as a
hospital, clinic, sanitarium, convalescent home, nursing home and home for the
aged.
   HEIGHT OF BUILDING. See BUILDING, HEIGHT.
   HELIPORT. An area, at ground level or elevated on a structure, intended to
be used by helicopters for takeoffs and landings.
   HOME. See DWELLING.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An accessory use for a revenue-producing art, craft or
profession, which is conducted entirely within the confines of a dwelling and/
or an accessory building solely by the inhabitants thereof, which use is
clearly incidental to the use as a dwelling. Motor vehicle repair or adjustment
of any type whatsoever shall be prohibited.
   HOSPITAL. A building containing beds for four or more patients, devoted to
the diagnosis and treatment of human ailments.
   HOTEL or MOTEL. A building in which lodging is provided to the public for
compensation and is open to temporary or transient guests, as distinguished
from a boarding house or a lodging house.
   HOUSE, HOUSING OR HOUSED (ANIMALS). To provide with shelter and sustenance.
   IMPERVIOUS COVER. Any surface that cannot effectively absorb or infiltrate
water. This may include roads, streets, parking lots, rooftops, sidewalks and
other areas not covered by vegetation.
   INCIDENTAL. Likely to arise from, and of secondary importance to, the
principal permitted use of a building or lot.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as
defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(14).
   INSTITUTION. A building occupied by a non-profit establishment or a non-
profit corporation for public use.
   JUNK YARD. More than 25 square feet of land or building where discarded or
salvaged materials of any nature whatsoever are sold, stored for more than 15
days, bought, exchanged, baled, packed, sorted, dismantled or handled.
   KENNEL. An establishment for breeding, training or boarding dogs or cats.
   LAND, ACRE. Horizontal area measure of land, consisting of 1/640 square mile
or 43,560 square feet.
   LAND, LOT. See LOT.
   LAND, PARCEL. A tract or plot of land.
   LAND, SECTION. A parcel of land consisting of one square mile or 640 acres.
   LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT. A professional landscape architect registered with the
state.
   LANDSCAPING. Changing, rearranging and/or adding to the original vegetation
or scenery of a parcel of land to produce an aesthetic effect appropriate for
the use to which the land is devoted. LANDSCAPING may include the reshaping of
the land. Cultivation of grass may constitute landscaping.
   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. A contiguous area where multiple
separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules under one plan.
   LATTICE TOWER. A support structure constructed of vertical metal struts and
cross braces forming a triangular or square structure which often tapers from
the foundation to the top.
   LIGHT CUTOFF. The point at which all light ray emitted by a lamp, light
source or luminaire are completely eliminated (cut-off) at a specific angle
above the ground.
   LIGHT CUTOFF ANGLE. The angle formed by a line drawn from the light source
to a line perpendicular to the ground beyond which no light is emitted from the
light source.
   LIGHT TRESPASS. The shining of direct light produced by a light fixture
beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located.
   LITTER. Garbage, refuse and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other used
or waste material, including appliances, fixtures, lumber, bottles, cans,
glass, ceramic, paper, rags, wire, metal parts, plastic materials, vehicle
parts and components, tires or rubber in any shape or form, drums, barrels,
roofing material, siding material, broken concrete, broken asphalt, bricks,
drywall, tree and shrub stumps, limbs, clippings, branches and other waste
building material, which, if thrown, stored or deposited, as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
   LIVING SPACE. The dwelling area that results from deducting the area of
unfinished basement space and attached garage from the overall floor area of a
dwelling.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building,
or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial motor vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials,
and which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
   LOT. A parcel of land, legally surveyed, described and platted, having fixed
boundaries, used for placement for principal and accessory buildings, or
utilized for principal and accessory uses, together with such open spaces and
frontage on a dedicated public street as are required.
   LOT, AREA. The area contained within the lot lines. No area within the
confines of road right-of way shall be included for purposes of any of these
regulations.
   LOT, BUILDING LINE. The line, parallel to the front property line, described
by the minimum front setback distance.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot at the point of intersection of any two intersecting
streets.
   LOT, COVERAGE. The portion of a lot that is covered by any buildings.
   LOT, DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between the road right-of-way line
of the street and the rear lot line.
   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE. A lot, other than a corner lot, that abuts more than
one street.
   LOT, FLAG/IRREGULARLY SHAPED. A lot not meeting the minimum frontage
requirements and where access to the public road is by an easement or driveway.
   LOT, FRONTAGE. The width of a lot as measured along the road right-of-way
line. Corner lots shall be construed as having frontage on both streets that
they abut.
   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot which is part of a recorded subdivision, or which has
been individually legally recorded with the appropriate Summit County offices.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The line separating a lot from the street upon which it
fronts.
   LOT LINE, REAR. The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot
line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. A lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line.
   LOT LINES. The property lines defining the limits of a lot.
   LOT, PARCEL. A division of land separated or proposed to be separated from
other divisions of land by description on a recorded subdivision plat, recorded
survey map, or by metes and bounds for purposes of sale, lease or separate use.
   LOT, PRINCIPAL USE. The primary use of a lot as stipulated for the various
zoning districts.
   LOT, WIDTH OF. The width of a lot as measured at the minimum building
setback line and parallel to the front lot line, and to a distance equal to the
minimum rear yard setback from the rear of the principal building. Not
applicable to accessory buildings.
   LOT, YARD. See YARD.
   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE AND COLLECTOR THOROUGHFARE. Thoroughfares designated as
such on the adopted comprehensive land use plan and thoroughfare plan.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A home which is factory-assembled, non self-propelled,
transportable in one or more sections, meets all zoning criteria, and is
designated for and placed upon permanent foundations at the building site.
   MARINE RELATED USES. Marine related use shall refer to the sale, service and
storage of marine vehicles.
   MARINE VEHICLES. Include watercraft and boats of any size and function,
including, but not limited to, power boats, pontoon boats, sailboats, paddle
boats, kayaks, canoes and jet skis or wave runners.
   MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE. The level of pollutant reduction that site
owners of small municipal separate storm sewer systems regulated under 40
C.F.R. parts 9, 122, 123 and 124, referred to as the national pollutant
discharge elimination system (NPDES) storm water phase II must meet.
   MEAN. A point midway between two extremes in number or quantity; average;
medium.
   METES AND BOUNDS. A system for describing and identifying land by measures
(metes) and direction (bounds) from a point of reference. Surveyors utilize
this system.
   MOBILE HOME. A non self-propelled vehicle so designed and constructed as to
permit the use and occupancy thereof for human habitation when connected to
utilities, whether resting on wheels, jacks, blocks or other temporary
foundation, and used or so constructed as to permit its being used as a
conveyance upon the public streets, and exceeding an overall length of 30 feet.
MOBILE HOMES of any type are not permitted in any zoning district except in
existing trailer parks.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A lot or parcel of land under single ownership, upon which
three or more mobile homes are parked, either free of charge or for revenue
purposes. MOBILE HOME PARKS are not permitted in any zoning district.
   MONOPOLE. A support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting
hollow metal tube securely anchored to a foundation.
   MOTEL. See HOTEL or MOTEL.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in R.C. § 4501.01(B).
   MOTOR VEHICLE, JUNK. Any motor vehicle which meets any three of the
following requirements:
      (1)   Is three years old or older;
      (2)   Is extensively damaged, such damage including, but not limited to,
any of the following: missing wheels, tires, motors or transmission;
      (3)   Does not comply with all safety laws and requirements provisions as
found in R.C. Chapter 4513 et seq.;
      (4)   Has a fair market value of $1,500 or less; and/or
      (5)   Is not running and not operable (OPERABLE meaning able to be
started and driven under its own power).
   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). A regulatory
program in the Federal Clean Water Act that prohibits the discharge of
pollutants into surface waters of the United States without a permit.
   NATURAL SUCCESSION. A gradual and continuous replacement of one kind of
plant and animal group by a more complex group. The plants and animals present
in the initial group modify the environment through their life activities
thereby making it unfavorable for themselves. They are gradually replaced by a
different group of plants and animals better adapted to the new environment.
   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office of the United States, in
accordance with federal statute regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law, and, in
addition thereto, means and includes any periodicals or current magazines
regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the
public.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, including any sample
or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature not included in the definitions of commercial handbill and
newspaper.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign which lawfully occupied a building or land as
of the effective date of the Zoning Code, or any amendment thereto, that does
not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located.
   NONCONFORMING USE. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the
effective date of this Zoning Code, or amendments thereto, and that does not
conform to the provisions of the Zoning Code in the district in which it is
located.
   NOXIOUS WEED. Any plant defined as a “noxious weed and rank vegetation” in §
521.10 in the Codified Ordinances of the County of Summit, Ohio.
   NPDES PERMIT. National pollution discharge elimination system permit, issued
by Ohio EPA for construction activities.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity
or displays specified anatomical areas is provided solely to be sketched,
drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY.
      (1)   The appearance of a human bare buttock, an anus, genitals or an
areola of a female breast; or
      (2)   A state of dress which fails to cover opaquely a human buttock, an
anus, genitals or an areola of a female breast.
   NUISANCE. An act of circumstance which causes annoyance or offense to
another or to the community at large, is offensive to the senses, or endangers
personal health or safety.
   OHIO EPA NPDES GENERAL CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. A permit issued by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency to an applicant for the discharge of storm
water from sites where construction activity is being conducted with discharges
to subsequent receiving waters. (Permit Number OHC000003 as amended)
   OHIO RAPID ASSESSMENT METHOD. A multi-parameter qualitative index
established by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency to evaluate wetland
quality and function.
   ONE HUNDRED (100) -YEAR FLOODPLAIN. Any land susceptible to being inundated
by water from a base flood, which is the flood that has a 1% or greater chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For the purposes of these
regulations, the 100-YEAR FLOODPLAIN shall be defined by FEMA and approved by
the County of Summit Department of Building Standards.
   ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK. The point of the bank or shore to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a district
marked by erosion, destruction or prevention of woody terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized characteristic.
The ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK defines the channel of a stream.
   OUTDOOR WOOD-FIRED BOILER. A fuel burning device specified by the
manufacturer for outside installation and designated to heat interior building
space and/or water via the distribution, typically through pipes, of a fluid
heated in the device, typically water or a water/antifreeze mixture. OUTDOOR
WOOD-FIRED BOILER is also known as an outdoor wood-fired hydronic heater or
outdoor wood heater or outdoor wood burning furnace.
   PARCEL. A tract of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a use,
building or group of buildings and their accessory uses and buildings as a
unit, together with such open spaces and driveways as are provided and
required. A PARCEL may contain more than one contiguous lot individually
identified by a “permanent parcel number” assigned by the Summit County Fiscal
Office.
   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or other
public area in the city owned by any governmental agency and devoted to active
or passive recreation.
   PARKING SPACE. An off-street parking space shall consist of an area of 180
square feet or more, together with properly related access to a public street
and adequate maneuvering room.
   PEAK FLOW. The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point and time
resulting from a storm event.
   PERMITTED USE. A use by right as specifically authorized in a particular
zoning district.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
   PETS, HOUSEHOLD. Small animals, such as dogs or cats, that may customarily
live within a dwelling.
   PHASING. Clearing a parcel of land in distinct sections, with the
stabilization of each section before the clearing of the next.
   PLAT. A map showing the location, boundaries and ownership of individual
properties.
   PLOT. Included with the words LOT, PARCEL and SITE.
   PLOT PLAN. See SITE PLAN.
   POLE BARN. A nonresidential structure where posts and trusses (typically
made of wood) not utilizing a concrete or masonry foundation are used as the
main structural support for roof and walls, which are typically covered with a
metal skin. POLE BARNS are normally used for agricultural purposes, for
construction trade storage, or for general storage and are not intended for
human habitation.
   POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. POLLUTANTS may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables, pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a
building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   POLLUTION. Any contamination or alteration of the physical, chemical, or
biological properties of any waters that will render the waters harmful or
detrimental to: public health, safety or welfare; domestic, commercial,
industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses;
livestock, wildlife, including birds, fish or other aquatic life.
      (1)   NON-POINT SOURCE. Pollution generated by various land use
activities rather than from an identifiable or discrete source, and is conveyed
to waterways through natural processes, such as rainfall, storm runoff, or
ground water seepage rather than direct discharge.
      (2)   POINT SOURCE. Pollution traceable to a discrete point or pipe.
   PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT. Any enclosed unit of any type construction or
material, designed for permanent or temporary storage, which can be transported
by a vehicle and left on-site.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The primary use of land and structures, as distinguished from
secondary or accessory use.
   PRIVATE PREMISES or PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other
structure designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant, and includes any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, sidewalk and abutting
property between the property line and the curb line, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.
   PRIVATE USE. Belonging to and intended for the use of an individual person,
group, company or interest.
   PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER/SURVEYOR. A professional registered in the State of
Ohio by the appropriate board.
   PROPERTY. As referenced within this Zoning Code shall include land, real
property and/or real estate except as otherwise indicated.
   PUBLIC. Open to common use, whether or not under public ownership.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
   PUBLIC USE. Belonging to, accessible to, and intended for the use of the
entire community.
   PUBLIC UTILITY. As defined by the R.C. § 4905.02 and sections referenced
therein.
   PUBLIC WAY. An alley, avenue, boulevard, bridge, channel, ditch easement,
express freeway, highway, land, parkway, right-of-way, road, sidewalk/walkway,
street subway, tunnel, viaduct, walk or other ways in which the general public
or a public entity have been granted an interest, privilege or a right, or
which are dedicated, whether improved or not to use such property for its
intended purposes.
   QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. Professional engineers, professional surveyors and
landscape architects registered in the State of Ohio or a certified
professional in erosion and sediment control as recognized by CPESC Inc.
   QUASI-PUBLIC USE. Belonging to and intended for the use of a church, private
school, hospital or other non-profit institution.
   RAINWATER AND LAND DEVELOPMENT MANUAL (RWLD). A publication of the Ohio
Department of Natural Resources that contains Ohio’s minimum technical
standards for post construction storm water quality and erosion and sediment
control standards.
   RAISED PATIO. A non-ground level patio that is at least three feet in height
above the natural grade.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street
cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial
wastes.
   RELIGIOUS LAND USE FOR PUBLIC WORSHIP. A building and/or lot used for public
religious worship and instruction; churches, chapels, temples, mosques and
synagogues are included in this definition.
   REMOVAL. Removal of a tree(s), through either direct or indirect actions
including, but not limited to, clearing, cutting, causing irreversible damage
to roots or trunks; poisoning; destroying the structural integrity; and/or any
filling, excavation, grading, or trenching in the drip line area of a tree
which has the potential to cause irreversible damage to the tree, or relocation
of an existing tree to a new planting location.
   REPAIR. Reconstruction or renewal of part of an existing structure.
   RESIDENCE. Included with the words “dwelling”, “home”, “abode”, “domicile”
and “habitation”.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment where meals are served, to the public, for
payment.
   RETAINING WALL. A wall or similar structure, three feet or over in height,
specifically intended to be used at a grade change for the purpose of holding
soil on the up-hill side from slumping, sliding or falling. RETAINING WALLS
that are not laterally supported at the top and that retain in excess of 24
inches of unbalanced fill shall be designed to ensure stability against
overturning, sliding, excessive foundation pressure and water uplift. RETAINING
WALLS shall be designed for a safety factor of one and one-half or greater as
determined by the design engineer.
   RETENTION. A practice designed to store storm water runoff by collection as
a permanent pool of water without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration or attenuated release when runoff volume exceeds the permanent
storage capacity of the permanent pool.
   RIPARIAN AREA. A transitional area between flowing water and terrestrial
ecosystems, which provides a continuous exchange of nutrients and woody debris
between land and water. This area is at least periodically influenced by
flooding. RIPARIAN AREAS, if appropriately sized and managed, help to stabilize
banks, limit erosion, reduce flood size flows and/or filter and settle out
runoff pollutants, or perform other functions consistent with the purposes of
these regulations.
   RIPARIAN CORRIDOR. The landscape features on both sides of a stream,
including soils, slope and vegetation, whose alteration can directly impact a
stream’s physical characteristics and biological properties.
   RIPARIAN SETBACK. The area set back from each bank of a stream to protect
the riparian area and stream from impacts of development, and streamside
residents from impacts of flooding and land loss through erosion. RIPARIAN
SETBACKS are those lands within the County of Summit that fall within the area
defined by the criteria set forth in these regulations.
   RIPRAP. A combination of large stone, cobbles and boulders used to line
channels, stabilize storm sewer outfalls and reduce runoff velocities.
   RUBBISH. Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and
noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin
cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar
materials.
   RUNOFF. The portion of rainfall, melted snow, or irrigation water that flows
across the ground surface and is eventually conveyed to water resources or
wetlands.
   SATELLITE TELEVISION ANTENNA. See EARTH STATION.
   SECRETARY. The Secretary of the City of New Franklin Planning and Zoning
Commission (PZC), City of New Franklin Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) or the
City of New Franklin Property Maintenance Enforcement Board (PMEB).
   SEDIMENT. The soils or other surface materials that are transported or
deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, gravity or any combination of
those forces, as a product of erosion.
   SEDIMENTATION. The deposition or settling of sediment.
   SETBACK. The distance from a lot line to the nearest face of a principal or
accessory building. Lot lines at abutting roads shall occur at the nearest edge
or line of the road right-of-way.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater or adult theater. A SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS does not include a nude model studio.
   SILVICULTURE. The care and cultivation of forest trees.
   SITE. Included with the words “lot”, “plot” and “parcel”.
   SITE PLAN. A drawing, to scale, showing all elements of uses proposed for a
parcel of land.
   SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION DISTRICT (SWCD). An entity organized under
O.A.C. Chapter 1515 referring to either the Soil and Water Conservation
District Board or its designated employees, hereinafter referred to as the
Summit SWCD.
   SOIL DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Clearing, grading, grubbing, excavating, filling
or other alteration of the earth’s surface where natural or human made ground
cover is destroyed and which may result in, or contribute to, erosion and
sediment pollution.
   SOIL ERODIBILITY. The susceptibility of soil to erosion and the amount and
rate of runoff, as measured under the standard unit plot condition. Soil
erodibility factors are available in the Summit County soil survey.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Human genitals.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, the pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral and/or anal copulation; and/or
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated.
   STABILIZATION. The use of BMPs, such as seeding and mulching, that reduce or
prevent soil erosion by water, wind, ice, gravity or a combination of those
forces.
   STABLE, PRIVATE. A building devoted to the housing of horses, cattle or
other domestic animals, which are owned by the occupants of the dwelling or
dwellings which the stable serves.
   STAFF. The staff of the New Franklin Zoning and Planning Department.
   STEALTH FACILITY. Any communications facility which is designed to blend
into the surrounding environment. Examples of STEALTH FACILITIES may include
architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted antennas
painted to match the existing structure, antennas integrated into architectural
elements, and antenna structures designed to look like light poles, clock
towers, bell steeples, barn silos and the like.
   STORAGE BUILDING. A building devoted to the purpose of housing of chattels
and possessions of any and every kind.
   STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-
made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs and other drainage structures.
   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT. A site plan depicting the dispersal of runoff storm
water from a property at a rate calculated to eliminate erosion and flooding.
   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A plan which includes
appropriate structural and non-structural conservation best management
practices that address all minimum components of the NPDES permit and conform
to the specifications of Natural Resource Conservation Service handbook,
Rainwater and Land Development and subsequent updates.
   STORM WATER QUALITY TREATMENT. The removal of pollutants from urban runoff
and improvement of water quality, accomplished largely by deposition and
utilizing the benefits of natural processes.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the next floor above it, or from floor space to roof surface
at the topmost floor level.
   STORY, HALF. The topmost floor level of a building having a roof structure
such as gable, hip or gambrel that limits the amount of usable floor space
attainable therein. A HALF-STORY is limited to two-thirds or less of the
overall floor space of said floor level.
   STREAM. A surface watercourse with a well defined bed and bank, either
natural or artificial, which confines and conducts continuous or periodical
flowing water in such a way that terrestrial vegetation cannot establish roots
within the channel.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A local street having one end open to vehicular traffic
and the other end permanently closed with a vehicular turnaround.
   STREET, PRIVATE. A road or thoroughfare which affords the principal means of
access to abutting property, but which has not been dedicated to the public and
become subject to easements therefore. PRIVATE STREETS are not maintained by
the city.
   STREET, PUBLIC. A road or thoroughfare which has been dedicated to the
public for public use or subject to public easements therefore, and which
affords the principal means of access to abutting property.
   STREET, RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land dedicated for use as a public road or
thoroughfare.
   STREET, RIGHT-OF-WAY LINE. The dividing line between a lot and the street
upon which it abuts.
   STREET, ROAD OR THOROUGHFARE. The full width between property lines; lines
bounding every public way of whatever nature, with a part thereof to be used
for vehicular traffic.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. An addition to a building or structure, or a change
to any component of its structural system.
   STRUCTURE. Anything built, constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground, or attachment to something having a fixed location on
the ground. A STRUCTURE may include a principal building, an accessory
building, or an accessory structure.
   STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY. A structure that may be attached to or detached from
the principal building or use of the same lot or parcel, and serves a purpose
clearly subordinate and customarily incidental to the use of the principal
structure or use of land. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES include, but are not limited to
porches, decks, raised patios, pergolas, arbors, gazebos, pavilions, chimneys,
outdoor fireplaces, retaining or decorative walls, fences, signs, playhouses,
play forts and antennas.
   SUBLOT. See LOT, PARCEL.
   SUMMIT COUNTY STORM WATER MANAGEMENT MANUAL. Summit County’s storm water
management requirements developed and updated by the County Engineer.
   SWCD or SUMMIT SWCD. The Summit County Soil and Water Conservation District.
   SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL. A body of water in an artificial receptacle or
container, whether located indoors or outdoors, used or intended to be used for
public, semi-public or private swimming by adults or children, or both adults
and children, whether or not any charge or fee is imposed upon adults or
children, operated and maintained by any person as defined herein and shall
include all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other
facilities appurtenant to and intended for the operation and maintenance of a
swimming pool, and also all swimming pools operated and maintained in
conjunction with or by clubs, motels, hotels and community associations.
   SWIMMING POOL, FAMILY. A swimming pool used or intended to be used solely by
the owner or lessee thereof and his or her family, and by friends invited to
use it without payment of a fee.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The technology that enables information to be exchanged
through the transmission of voice, video, or data signals by means of
electrical or electromagnetic systems.
   TEMPORARY BUILDING. A structure that shall be used for a limited amount of
time. A structure that is not permanently anchored to another structure or the
ground.
   THOROUGHFARE PLAN. A mapped and/or written proposal for future road
development for the City of New Franklin and its affected area. (R.C. § 711.10)
   TREE. A self-supporting woody plant characterized by one main trunk or, for
certain species, multiple trunks, with a potential at maturity for a trunk
diameter of two inches and potential minimum height of ten feet.
   TRASH. Any broken, discarded or worthless things, rubbish or refuse.
   UNSTABLE SOILS. A portion of land that is identified by the City Engineer,
Summit County Building Standards Department and/or the Summit SWCD as prone to
slipping, sloughing, or landslides, or is identified by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service methodology as having a low
soil strength.
   U.S. EPA PHASE 2 PROGRAM QUALIFIED MODEL. A heater that is certified by the
U.S. EPA to meet a particulate matter emission limit of 0.32 pounds per million
British thermal units (lb/MMBtu) heat output. A white hangtag indicates that a
unit meets the Phase 2 emission performance level. These heaters are 90%
cleaner than unqualified models.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which a parcel of land or its buildings is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained.
   USED CAR LOT. Any lot on which two or more motor vehicles (which have been
titled in a name other than the manufacturer or original dealer) in operating
condition are offered for sale or displayed for the public.
   VARIANCE. A modification of the terms of the relevant regulations which is
not contrary to the public interest and where, due to conditions peculiar to
this property and not the result of any action by the applicant, a literal
enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship
to the applicant.
   VARIANCE (RIPARIAN SETBACK). A modification of the enforcement of the
riparian setback regulations which will not be contrary to the public interest
and where, due to conditions peculiar to this property and not the result of
the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulation would
result in undue hardship to the applicant.
   VETERINARY ANIMAL HOSPITAL OR CLINIC. A building devoted to the care,
grooming, diagnosis and treatment of animals, and may include overnight
accommodations for observation.
   WASTEWATER. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm
water, discharged from a facility.
   WATER RESOURCE. Any public or private body of water including lakes and
ponds, as well as any brook, creek, river or stream having banks, a defined
bed, and a definite direction of flow, either continuously or intermittently
flowing.
   WATERSHED. An area of land that drains into a particular watercourse,
usually divided by topography.
   WELL. Any bore hole, whether drilled or bored, for the production,
extraction or injection of any gas or liquid mineral, excluding potable water
to be used as such, but including natural or artificial brines and oil field
waters.
   WETLAND. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar
areas.
   WETLAND PROFESSIONAL. An individual with training and experience in wetland
delineation acceptable to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA. The physical device through which
electromagnetic, wireless telecommunications signals authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission are transmitted or received. Antennas used by amateur
radio operators are excluded from this definition.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT BUILDING. The structure in which the
electronic receiving and relay equipment for a wireless telecommunications
facility is housed.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A facility consisting of the equipment
and structures involved in receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a
mobile radio communications source and transmitting those signals to a central
switching computer which connects the mobile unit with the land-based telephone
lines.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER. A structure intended to support equipment
used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals, including
monopoles, guyed and lattice construction steel structures.
   YARD. A required open space included as part of a lot unoccupied and
unobstructed by any structure or portion of any structure.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the full width of a lot and being the
perpendicular distance between the street right-of-way line and the nearest
portion of any building or structure existing or proposed for construction on
said lot. Where the right-of-way line is not established, the right-of-way
shall be assumed to be 60 feet. Where a major or collector thoroughfare is
designated on the land use and thoroughfare plan, the front yard depth shall be
measured from the proposed street right-of-way.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the full width of a lot between the side
lot lines and being the perpendicular distance between the rear lot line and
the nearest portion of the principal building.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard between the nearest portion of any building or structure
existing or proposed to be constructed on said lot and the property line, in a
yard are that is not classified as either a front yard or a rear yard of the
lot.
   ZONING. The legal right for local governments to regulate the use of real
property to prevent conflicting land uses and promote orderly development. Such
rights include, but are not limited to, regulating: the use, height, bulk and
location, including percentage of lot occupancy, building setback lines and
other structures.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The official responsible for granting zoning
certificates, exercising site inspections, effecting conditional use
certificates and variances as granted by the City of New Franklin Board of
Zoning Appeals and/or the City of New Franklin Planning and Zoning Commission,
and administering and enforcing these zoning regulations.
   ZONING CERTIFICATE. See ZONING PERMIT.
   ZONING DEPARTMENT. The City of New Franklin Zoning and Planning Department.
The Administrator and support staff responsible to the Mayor for the “day-to-
day” administration of the Zoning and Planning Department.
   ZONING DISTRICT. A portion of the City of New Franklin designated in the
zoning regulations and delineated on the zoning districts map, in which uniform
requirements for land and building use and development standards are
prescribed.
   ZONING PERMIT. The written document, granted and issued by the Zoning
Administrator after finding that an applicant’s use of structures and land, as
evidenced by the application, complies with the requirements of these zoning
regulations, or meets the permitted conditions of a variance or conditional
use. A ZONING PERMIT is also known as a ZONING CERTIFICATE.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 10-O-02, passed 4-20-2011; Ord. 11-O-02,
passed 3-2-2011; Ord. 11-O-01, passed 11-26-2011; Ord. 14-O-02, passed 6-18-
2014; Ord. 17-O-01, passed 5-17-2017; Ord. 17-O-02, passed 8-2-2017; Ord. 18-O-
08, passed 12-5-2018)
§ 156.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for
which no other penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions
of §
10.99.
   (B)   Oil and gas well regulations. Whoever violates the provisions of §
156.133 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. A separate
violation shall be deemed to occur on each day during or on which a violation
or noncompliance occurs or continues. In lieu of or in addition to the
prosecution of a violation of this chapter, and upon the authorization of the
Mayor, the City Law Director may institute an appropriate action or proceeding
in a court of proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful condition, to
restrain, correct or abate a violation, nuisance, or to require compliance with
these regulations other applicable laws, ordinances or rules.
   (C)   Junk motor vehicle regulations. In addition to the penalties set forth
herein, whoever fails to remove a junk, dismantled, wrecked and/or unlicensed
motor vehicle in violation of §
156.134, after receipt of a proper order to remove, is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the third degree. Each motor vehicle found to be in violation of these
regulations shall constitute a separate offense. Every 20 days that a motor
vehicle is in violation of these regulations shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (D)   Litter and trash regulations.
      (1)   Throwing or depositing litter in public places; use of receptacles
and dumps. Whoever violates §
156.135(B) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (2)   Using receptacles to prevent scattering; damaging receptacles.
Whoever violates §
156.135(C) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (3)   Responsibility of landowners. Whoever violates §
156.135 (D) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (4)   Responsibility of merchants. Whoever violates §
156.135(E) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (5)   Litter thrown from vehicles. Whoever violates §
156.135(F) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (6)   Litter in parks. Whoever violates §
156.135(G) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (7)   Litter in bodies of water. Whoever violates §
156.135(H) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (8)   Dropping litter from aircraft. Whoever violates §
156.135(I) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (9)   Billposting. Whoever violates §
156.135(J) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (10)   Litter on occupied private property. Whoever violates §
156.135(K) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (11)   Litter on vacant private property. Whoever violates §
156.135(L) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (12)   Construction sites. Whoever violates §
156.135(M) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (13)   Loading and unloading operations. Whoever violates §
156.135(N) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (14)   Distributing handbills in or on public places. Whoever violates §
156.135(P) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (15)   Placing handbills on vehicles. Whoever violates §
156.135(Q) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (16)   Depositing handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises. Whoever
violates §
156.135(R) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (17)   Distributing handbills prohibited where posted. Whoever violates §
156.135(S) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
      (18)   Distributing handbills at inhabited private premises. Whoever
violates §
156.135(T) is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
   (E)   Alternative energy system regulations; outdoor wood-fired boilers.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any property owner to fail to comply with
the terms of §
156.136, or create a nuisance condition for neighboring property owners.
      (2)   If the city’s Zoning and Planning Department determines that a
violation of the code or permit has occurred, the property owner shall be
notified of the violations, in writing.
      (3)   If the alleged violation does not pose an immediate threat to the
public health or safety, the parties shall engage in good faith negotiations to
resolve the issues at hand. Such negotiations shall be conducted within 30 days
of the notice of violation.
      (4)   If the conditions pose an immediate threat to the public health or
safety, the city shall require the offending outdoor wood-fired boiler to be
discontinued until, through negotiations with all parties involved, a solution
or system-modification can be achieved to resolve the problem.
      (5)   If the city’s Zoning and Planning Department determines that the
parties have not resolved the alleged violation, the Planning and Zoning
Commission may revoke the conditional use permit, as applicable, and/or
institute enforcement proceedings or other remedy at law to ensure compliance
with this section.
(Ord. 08-O-03, passed 5-20-2009; Ord. 11-O-01, passed 10-26-2011; Ord. 14-O-03,
passed 8-6-2014; Ord. 17-O-01, passed 5-17-2017)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   REZONINGS
      
II.   VACATIONS
      
III.   RENAMING STREETS AND ALLEYS
      
IV.   EASEMENTS
TABLE I: REZONINGS
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Changing the zoning classification of property
                          containing approximately 44.62 acres of land situated
Ord. 11-O-03  6-15-2011   north and west of the intersection of Rex Hill Road
                          and Vanderhoof Road from C-D (Conservation) to I-2
                          (Manufacturing and Storage).
                          Changing the zoning classification of Parcel Numbers
                          2600355 and 2600356 at the southeast corner of
Ord. 12-O-06  12-19-2012  Manchester Road and West Turkeyfoot Lake Road (Route
                          619) from B-2 (Heavy Commercial) to R-2 (Medium
                          Density Residential).
                          Changing the zoning classification of 105 parcels of
Ord. 12-O-07  4-17-2013   property from R-3 (High Density Residential) to R-L
                          (Lakefront Residential).
                          Changing the zoning classification of four parcels of
                          property, (Parcel Numbers 2302723, 2302364, 2300478,
Ord. 14-O-04  2-4-2015    2300479) located at 5032, 5010 and 5044 South Main
                          Street, from R-2 (Medium Density Residential) and R-
                          3 (High Density Residential) to B-l (Light
                          Commercial).
                          Changing the zoning classification of 34 parcels of
                          property from C-R (Commercial Residential) to B-1
Ord. 15-O-01  8-19-2015   (Light Commercial), 76 parcels of property from C-R
                          (Commercial Residential) to R-2 (Medium Density
                          Residential) and 23 parcels of property from C-R
                          (Commercial Residential) to C-D (Conservation).
                          Changing the zoning classification of properties
                          along the Manchester Road corridor, three parcels of
                          property from R-2 (Medium Density Residential) to B-
                          1 (Light Commercial), three parcels of property from
                          B-2 (Heavy Commercial) to B-1 (Light Commercial),
                          four parcels of property from C-D (Conservation) to
                          R-2 (Medium Density Residential), 14 parcels of
Ord. 15-O-02  8-19-2015   property with split zoning (R-2 (Medium Density
                          Residential) and C-R (Commercial Residential)) to B-
                          1 (Light Commercial), five parcels of property with
                          split zoning (C-D (Conservation) and C-R (Commercial
                          Residential)) to B-1 (Light Commercial) and two
                          parcels of property with split zoning (C-D
                          (Conservation) and C-R (Commercial Residential)) to
                          R-2 (Medium Density Residential).
                          Changing the zoning classification of one parcel of
Ord. 15-O-03  8-19-2015   property, located at 6885 Manchester Road, zoned C-R
                          (Commercial Residential) to R-2 (Medium Density
                          Residential) and C-D (Conservation).
                          Changing the zoning classification of one parcel of
Ord. 16-O-04  - -2016     property, located at 4332 Manchester Road, from R-2
                          (Medium Density Residential) to B-1 (Light
                          Commercial).
                          Changing the zoning classification of eight parcels
Ord. 19-O-01  2-20-2019   of property along the Manchester Road corridor from
                          B-1 (Light Commercial) to B-2 (Heavy Commercial).
                         
 
TABLE II: VACATIONS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. 16-O-07  - -2016     Vacating Wyman Drive from Florian Drive to the
                          southern terminus of Wyman Drive.
Ord. 16-O-02  3-16-2016   Vacating a portion of the unnamed alley running
                          between Parcel Numbers 2301384 and 2301385.
                         
 
TABLE III: RENAMING STREETS AND ALLEYS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
                          Designating the segment of Coleman Drive from
Ord. 19-O-04  4-17-2019   Barrymore Avenue to Temple Avenue an alley, naming
                          that segment Coleman Alley.
                          Declaring a section of Renninger Road from Deborah
Res. 22-R-28  5-4-2022    Drive to Center Road as the Lieutenant Edward R.
                          Fassnacht Memorial Highway.
                         
 
TABLE IV: EASEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. 17-R-83  12-6-2017   Granting an easement to NEXUS Gas Transmission LLC
                          over certain city roads.
                         
 
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
Historical References to the Ohio Revised Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
HISTORICAL REFERENCES TO THE OHIO REVISED CODE
R.C. Code Section Code Section
R.C. Code Section               Code Section
1.01                            10.01(A)
1.02                            10.02
1.05                            10.02
1.14                            10.03(C)(1) - (C)(4)
1.15                            10.03(C)(5)
1.23                            10.05(A), (B)
1.42                            10.03(A)
1.43                            10.03(B)
1.44                            10.02
1.45                            10.03(C)(6)
1.46                            10.03(D)
1.47                            10.18(A)
1.48                            10.18(B)
1.49                            10.18(C)
1.50                            10.07
1.51                            10.06(A)
1.52                            10.06(B)
1.54                            10.04(D)
1.55                            10.05(C)
1.56                            10.05(D)
1.57                            10.04(A)
1.58                            10.04(B), (C)
1.59                            10.02
121.22                          30.02
128.01(A)                       136.20(A)
128.32(E) - (G)                 136.20(B) - (D)
128.99(A), (B)                  136.20(E)
701.01                          10.02
715.67                          130.99(A)
901.51                          131.21(A), (B)
901.99(A)                       131.21(C)
1349.17                         131.31(A) - (C)
1349.99(A)                      131.31(D)
1533.171(A)                     131.24(A),
                                135.05(A)
1533.99(C)                      131.24(B),
                                135.05(B)
2901.01                         130.02
2901.02                         130.03
2901.03                         130.04
2901.04                         130.05
2901.05                         130.13
2901.06                         130.14
2901.08                         130.15
2901.09                         130.21
2901.11                         130.16
2901.13                         130.06
2901.21                         130.07
2901.22                         130.08
2901.23                         130.09
2901.24                         130.10
2903.05                         135.02
2903.06                         135.03
2903.08                         135.03(F)
2903.09                         135.01
2903.10                         135.19
2903.13                         135.04(A)
2903.14                         135.04(B)
2903.16                         135.19
2903.21                         135.06(B)
2903.211                        135.06(C)
2903.22                         135.06(A)
2903.31                         135.17(A) - (D)
2903.311(B), (C)                135.17(E)
2903.33                         135.20(A)
2903.34                         135.20(B)
2903.341                        135.20(C)
2903.35                         135.20(D)
2903.36                         135.20(E)
2905.03                         135.07
2905.12                         135.09
2907.01                         133.01
2907.04                         133.02
2907.06                         133.03
2907.08                         133.05
2907.09                         133.04
2907.10                         133.06
2907.23                         133.07(A) - (C)
2907.231                        133.07(D) - (F)
2907.24                         133.08(A) - (D)
2907.241                        133.08(E) - (H)
2907.25                         133.09
2907.26                         133.13
2907.31                         133.10(A) - (E)
2907.311                        133.11
2907.33                         133.12
2907.35                         133.10(F)
2907.36                         133.14
2907.37                         133.15
2907.38                         133.16
2907.39                         133.17
2907.40                         133.18
2909.01                         131.01
2909.03                         131.02(A) - (D)
2909.06                         131.03(A)
2909.07                         131.04
2909.08(A) - (E)                131.05
2909.09                         131.03(B)
2909.10                         131.34(A) - (D)
2909.101                        131.34(E), (F)
2909.11(B) - (D)                131.02(E)
2909.31                         136.21(E), (F)
2911.21                         131.06(A) - (F)
2911.211                        131.06(G)
2911.23                         131.06(H)
2911.32                         131.07
2913.01                         131.01
2913.02                         131.08
2913.03                         131.09
2913.04                         131.10(A) - (J)
2913.07                         131.33
2913.11                         131.11
2913.21                         131.12
2913.31(B), (C)(2)              131.26
2913.32                         131.27
2913.33                         131.13
2913.34                         131.29
2913.40                         131.23(C)
2913.401                        131.23(D)
2913.41                         131.14
2913.42                         131.15
2913.43                         131.16
2913.44                         131.28
2913.441                        132.11
2913.45                         131.17
2913.47                         131.23(A)
2913.48                         131.23(B)
2913.51                         131.18
2913.61(B) - (E)                131.19
2913.71                         131.20
2913.72                         131.25(A)
2913.73                         131.25(B)
2915.01                         134.01
2915.02(A) - (G), (K)           134.02
2915.03                         134.03
2915.04                         134.04
2915.05                         134.05
2915.06                         134.14(A), (B)
2915.061                        134.14(C)
2915.09                         134.06
2915.091                        134.10
2915.092                        134.11
2915.093                        134.12(A) - (F)
2915.094                        134.13
2915.10                         134.07
2915.11                         134.08
2915.12                         134.09
2915.13                         134.12(G)
2915.14                         134.15
2917.01                         132.10
2917.03                         132.01(A) - (C)
2917.031                        132.01(D)
2917.04                         132.02
2917.05                         132.03
2917.11                         132.04
2917.12                         132.05
2917.13                         132.06
2917.14                         132.15
2917.21                         132.07
2917.211                        133.20
2917.31                         132.08
2917.32                         132.09
2917.40                         132.13
2917.41                         132.14
2919.01                         135.10
2919.11                         135.11
2919.12                         135.11
2919.121                        135.11
2919.122                        135.11(H)
2919.14                         135.12
2919.18                         135.11(I)
2919.21                         135.13
2919.22(A) - (E), (H)           135.14
2919.23                         135.15(A)
2919.231                        135.15(B)
2919.24                         135.18
2919.25                         135.16
2919.27                         135.23
2921.01                         136.01
2921.04                         136.17
2921.13                         136.02(A) - (F)
2921.14                         136.14
2921.15                         136.19
2921.21                         136.03
2921.22                         136.04
2921.23                         136.05
2921.24                         136.16(A) - (D)
2921.25                         136.16(E), (F)
2921.29                         136.21(A) - (D)
2921.31                         136.06
2921.32                         136.07
2921.321                        136.15
2921.33                         136.08
2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)     70.02
2921.36                         136.13(A) - (G)
2921.37                         136.13(H)
2921.42                         136.09
2921.43                         136.10
2921.44                         136.11
2921.45                         136.12
2921.51                         132.12
2921.52(A) - (D)                136.18
2923.02                         130.11
2923.03                         130.12
2923.11                         137.01
2923.12                         137.02
2923.1211(B), (C)               137.13(A)
2923.1212                       137.13(C)
2923.122(C) - (G)               137.11
2923.126                        137.13(B)
2923.131                        137.12
2923.15                         137.03
2923.16                         137.04
2923.162                        137.09
2923.18                         137.10
2923.19                         137.06
2923.20                         137.07
2923.201                        137.14
2923.211                        137.08
2923.24                         137.05
2925.01                         138.01
2925.03(A) - (C), (I)           138.02
2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G)    138.06
2925.11                         138.03
2925.12                         138.04
2925.13(A) - (C), (F)           138.05
2925.14                         138.13(A) - (G)
2925.141                        138.13(H)
2925.31                         138.07
2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G) 138.10(A)
2925.33                         138.10(B)
2925.34                         138.19
2925.36(A) - (C)                138.08
2925.37(A), (G)                 138.12
2925.50                         138.09
2925.51                         138.11(A) - (F)
2925.511                        138.11(G)
2925.55                         138.18(A)
2925.56                         138.18(B)
2925.57                         138.18(C)
2925.58                         138.18(D)
2925.62                         138.20
2927.01                         135.28
2927.02                         135.25(A)
2927.021                        135.25(B)
2927.022                        135.25(C)
2927.023                        135.25(D)
2927.024                        135.25(E)
2927.03                         135.21
2927.11                         131.35
2927.12                         135.22
2927.15                         135.08
2927.17                         133.19
2927.27                         130.20
2929.21                         130.99(B)
2929.22                         130.18
2929.23                         133.99
2929.24                         130.99(C)
2929.25                         130.99(D)
2929.26                         130.99(E)
2929.27                         130.99(F)
2929.28                         130.99(G)
2929.31                         130.99(H)
2929.41                         130.19
2935.041                        131.22
2935.28                         70.08
2935.36(E)                      130.02
2981.07                         131.30
2981.11                         130.17(A)
2981.12                         130.17(B)
2981.13(A)                      130.17(C)
3701.81                         135.27(A) - (C)
3701.99(C)                      135.27(D)
3715.05                         138.18(E)
3715.06                         138.18(F)
3716.11                         135.24(A)
3716.99(C)                      135.24(B)
3719.08(A), (E)                 138.14(A), (B)
3719.172(A), (B)                138.15(A), (B)
3719.19                         138.09
3719.99(C)                      138.14(C)
3719.99(E)                      138.15(C)
3767.201                        70.09(A)
3767.99(D)                      70.09(B)
3781.55                         133.04(E)
3791.031                        135.26
4501.01(LL)                     70.01
4501.01(TT)                     72.061(G)
4503.05                         71.02
4503.11(A), (D)                 71.01(B), (G)(2)
4503.111                        71.01(C), (G)(3)
4503.12(A), (D)                 71.01(D), (G)(4)
4503.21                         71.01(A), (G)(1)
4503.236                        71.03
4505.18                         71.04
4506.01                         71.45
4506.011                        71.46
4506.03                         71.48(A) - (C), (G)
4506.04                         71.47(A), (B), (D)(1), (D)(2)
4506.05                         71.48(D) - (G)
4506.10(A), (E)                 71.49
4506.12(I), (J)                 71.47(C), (D)(3)
4506.15                         71.50(A), (D)
4506.17(H), (N)                 71.50(B), (D)
4506.19                         71.51
4506.20                         71.52
4506.23                         71.50(C)
4506.99                         71.99
4507.02(A)                      71.22(A)
4507.03                         71.22(B)
4507.04                         71.22(C)
4507.05(F), (I)                 71.21(B), (K)
4507.071(B) - (J)               71.21(C) - (K)
4507.213                        71.22(D)
4507.30                         71.20
4507.31                         71.21(A), (K)
4507.321                        71.23
4507.35                         71.26
4507.36                         71.27
4507.99                         71.99
4509.102                        136.02(G)
4509.74                         73.33
4510.037                        71.28(C)
                                71.28(D),
4510.04                         71.30(H),
                                71.31(E),
                                71.32(D)
4510.05                         71.25(A)
4510.11                         71.28(A)
4510.111                        71.28(B)
4510.12                         71.29
4510.14                         71.30(A) - (F)
4510.15                         71.25(B), (C)
4510.16                         71.31(A) - (I)
4510.21                         71.32(A) - (C)
4510.44                         73.08
4511.01                         70.01
4511.03                         70.03
4511.031                        70.38
4511.04                         70.04(A) - (D)
4511.041                        70.04(E)
4511.042                        70.04(F)
4511.05                         70.05
4511.051                        70.06
4511.08                         70.07
4511.12                         70.30
4511.121                        70.30(A), (G)(1)
4511.13                         70.31(B) - (E), (G)(2)
4511.131                        70.32
4511.132                        70.33
4511.14                         70.34
4511.16                         70.35
4511.17                         70.36
4511.18                         70.37
4511.181                        73.01(N)
4511.19(A) - (M)                73.01(A) - (M)
4511.191(A), (D)                73.02(A), (H)
4511.192                        73.02(B) - (G)
4511.194                        73.03
4511.20                         73.05
4511.201                        73.06
4511.202                        73.07
4511.203                        71.24
4511.204                        72.131
4511.205                        72.132
4511.21(A) - (G), (O), (P)      73.10(A) - (G), (I), (K)(1)
4511.211                        73.10(J), (K)(2)
4511.213                        72.120(B) - (D)
4511.214                        73.16(A) - (D)
4511.215                        73.16(E), (F)
4511.216                        73.16(G)
4511.22                         73.11
4511.23                         73.13
4511.24                         73.12
4511.25                         72.001
4511.251                        73.09
4511.26                         72.003
4511.27                         72.004
4511.28                         72.005
4511.29                         72.006
4511.30                         72.007
4511.31                         72.008
4511.32                         72.009
4511.33                         72.010
4511.34                         72.011
4511.35                         72.012
4511.36                         72.013
4511.37                         72.014
4511.38                         72.015
4511.39                         72.016
4511.40                         72.017
4511.41                         72.030
4511.42                         72.031
4511.43                         72.032
4511.431                        72.033(A), (F)
4511.432                        72.033(B) - (F)
4511.44                         72.034
4511.441                        72.035
4511.45                         72.036(A) - (D)
4511.451                        72.037
4511.452                        72.038
4511.454                        72.036(E)
4511.46                         72.039
4511.47                         72.040
4511.48                         72.041
4511.481                        72.060
4511.49                         72.055
4511.491                        72.059
4511.50                         72.056
4511.51                         72.057
4511.511                        72.058
4511.512                        72.061(A) - (F)
4511.513                        72.062
4511.514                        72.063
4511.52                         75.01
4511.521                        75.02
4511.522                        75.03
4511.53                         75.04
4511.54                         75.05
4511.55                         75.06
4511.56                         75.07
4511.60                         72.002
4511.61                         72.075
4511.62                         72.076
4511.63                         72.077
4511.64                         72.078
4511.65                         70.10
4511.66                         76.01
4511.661                        76.02
4511.67                         76.03
4511.68                         76.04
4511.681                        76.06
4511.69                         76.05
4511.70                         72.115
4511.701                        72.116
4511.71                         72.117(A), (C)(1)
4511.711                        72.118(A), (C)
4511.712                        72.119
4511.713                        72.118(B), (C)
4511.714                        72.117(B), (C)(2), (D)
4511.72                         72.120(A), (C)
4511.73                         72.121
4511.74                         72.122(A), (B), (F)(1), (2)
4511.75                         72.090
4511.751                        72.091
4511.76(C), (F), (G)            72.092
4511.761                        72.093
4511.762                        72.094
4511.763                        72.095
4511.764                        72.096
4511.77                         72.097
4511.771                        72.098
4511.772                        72.099
4511.79                         73.04
4511.81(A) - (H), (K), (L)      72.123
4511.82                         72.122(C) - (E), (F)(3)
4511.84                         72.126
4511.85                         72.127
4511.99                         70.99(A)
4511.991                        70.99(B)
4513.02(A), (H)                 74.01
4513.021                        74.02
4513.03                         74.03
4513.04                         74.04
4513.05                         74.05
4513.06                         74.06
4513.07                         74.07
4513.071                        74.08
4513.08                         74.09(A)
4513.09                         74.10
4513.10                         74.11(A)
4513.11                         74.12(A)
4513.111                        74.12(B)
4513.112                        74.12(C)
4513.113                        74.12(D)
4513.114                        74.12(E)
4513.115                        74.12(F)
4513.12                         74.13
4513.13                         74.14
4513.14                         74.15
4513.15                         74.16
4513.16                         74.17
4513.17                         74.18(A) - (E), (G)
4513.171                        74.18(F), (G)
4513.18                         74.19
4513.181                        74.20
4513.182                        74.21(A), (B)
4513.19                         74.22
4513.20                         74.23(A)
4513.201                        74.24(A), (B)
4513.202                        74.25(A) - (C)
4513.21                         74.26
4513.22                         74.27
4513.23                         74.28
4513.24                         74.29
4513.241(C) - (J)               74.31(B), (C)(2)
4513.25                         74.30(A)
4513.26                         74.31(A)
4513.261                        74.32
4513.262                        74.33
4513.263                        72.124
4513.27                         74.34(A) - (C)
4513.28                         74.35
4513.29                         74.36(A)
4513.30                         74.51(A)
4513.31                         74.52(A), (B)
4513.32                         74.53(A)
4513.33                         74.54
4513.34                         74.50(A) - (E)
4513.36                         73.15(A), (B)
4513.361                        73.14
4513.50                         74.38(A)
4513.51(A), (B), (D)            74.38(B), (C)
4513.66                         70.12(A) - (C)
4513.68                         70.12(D) - (H)
                                74.11(B),
                                74.21(C),
                                74.23(B),
                                74.24(C),
                                74.25(D),
                                74.30(B),
4513.99                         74.31(C)(1),
                                74.34(D),
                                74.36(B),
                                74.50(F),
                                74.51(B),
                                74.52(C),
                                74.53(B)
4519.01                         75.25
4519.02                         75.34
4519.20                         75.26(A), (B), (D)(1)
4519.22                         75.26(C), (D)(2)
4519.40                         75.27
4519.401                        73.16(H)
4519.41                         75.28
4519.44                         75.29
4519.45                         75.30
4519.46                         75.31
4519.47                         75.32
4519.48                         75.33
4519.66                         75.35
4549.02                         73.30
4549.021                        73.31
4549.03                         73.32
4549.05                         70.11
4549.08                         71.06
4549.081(B), (C)                70.30(F), (G)(3)
4549.10                         71.07
4549.11                         71.01(E), (G)(5)
4549.12                         71.01(F), (G)(6)
4549.18                         71.05
4549.20                         74.39
4731.481                        138.17(A)
4731.99(F)                      138.17(B)
4734.161                        138.17(A)
4734.99(B)                      138.17(B)
4933.18                         131.32(A) - (C)
4933.19                         131.32(D)
5577.02                         74.55(A)
5577.03                         74.56(A)
5577.04                         74.56(B)
5577.041                        74.56(C)
5577.042                        74.61(A) - (D)
5577.043                        74.61(E) - (H)
5577.044                        74.61(I) - (K)
5577.045                        74.61(L)
5577.05                         74.57(A) - (H)
5577.06                         74.57(I)
5577.10                         74.58(A), (B)
5577.11                         74.59(A)
5577.12                         74.60
5577.15                         74.53(C)
5577.99(A)                      74.55(B)
5577.99(C)                      74.56(D)(1),
                                74.57(J)
5577.99(D)                      74.58(C)
5577.99(E)                      74.59(B)
5589.08                         72.128(A), (B)
5589.081                        74.37(A) - (C)
5589.12                         131.10(K)(1)
                                72.128(C),
5589.99(B)                      74.37(D),
                                131.10(K)(2)
                                
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
09-R-49  10-7-2009   30.01
17-R-83  12-6-2017   TSO IV
18-R-06  2-21-2018   30.15
18-R-23  5-16-2018   93.01
19-R-05  1-16-2019   33.30—
                     33.44
19-R-40  5-15-2019   33.01
22-R-20  4-6-2022    TSO I
22-R-28  5-4-2022    TSO III
23-R-91  11-15-2023  30.01
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.  Date Passed Code Section
28(92-93) 10-11-1993  135.29
05-40     4-6-2005    Ch. 77, Sch. I
05-64     9-7-2005    91.01—
                      91.06
                      90.01—
05-65     10-5-2005   90.08,
                      90.99
05-99     12-7-2005   150.01
05-118    1-18-2006   94.01—
                      94.06
06-O-02   4-5-2006    155.01—
                      155.17
07-O-01   3-21-2007   31.01
                      153.01—
07-O-05   7-18-2007   153.18,
                      153.99
08-O-02   9-3-2008    135.30
                      154.001—
                      154.010,
                      154.025,
                      154.040—
                      154.051,
08-O-04   9-17-2008   154.065—
                      154.074,
                      154.085—
                      154.090,
                      154.105,
                      154.106,
                      154.999
09-O-02   4-15-2009   154.006,
                      154.025
                      156.001—
                      156.008,
                      156.020—
                      156.024,
                      156.040—
                      156.047,
                      156.060,
                      156.061,
                      156.075,
                      156.090—
                      156.092,
                      156.105—
                      156.111,
08-O-03   5-20-2009   156.125—
                      156.136,
                      156.150,
                      156.151,
                      156.165—
                      156.176,
                      156.190,
                      156.191,
                      156.205—
                      156.207,
                      156.220—
                      156.231,
                      156.245,
                      156.246,
                      156.999
09-O-03   11-4-2009   30.16
10-O-01   3-3-2010    156.205
10-O-03   12-1-2010   Ch. 77, Sch. I
11-O-02   3-2-2011    156.127,
                      156.245
10-O-02   4-20-2011   156.191,
                      156.245
11-O-03   6-15-2011   TSO I
                      156.136,
11-O-01   10-26-2011  156.245,
                      156.999
12-O-02   6-20-2012   92.01—
                      92.10
12-O-03   7-18-2012   150.02
12-O-06   12-19-2012  TSO I
12-O-07   4-17-2013   TSO I
13-O-02   9-4-2013    156.092
13-O-01   11-6-2013   156.092,
                      156.125
14-O-01   5-21-2014   90.05
14-O-02   6-18-2014   156.245
14-O-03   8-6-2014    156.134,
                      156.999
14-O-04   2-4-2015    TSO I
15-O-01   8-19-2015   TSO I
15-O-02   8-19-2015   TSO I
15-O-03   8-19-2015   TSO I
                      34.01—
15-O-05   11-18-2015  34.22,
                      34.99
16-O-04   - -2016     TSO I
16-O-07   - -2016     TSO II
16-O-01   2-17-2016   34.09
16-O-02   3-16-2016   TSO II
16-O-03   4-20-2016   34.01
16-O-05   7-20-2016   156.041
                      156.021,
                      156.022,
                      156.075,
                      156.125,
                      156.127—
17-O-01   5-17-2017   156.129,
                      156.131,
                      156.136,
                      156.205,
                      156.224,
                      156.227,
                      156.245
                      156.075,
17-O-02   8-2-2017    156.128,
                      156.245
16-O-01   2-21-2018   34.23
                      151.01—
                      151.03,
                      151.15—
18-O-02   6-20-2018   151.24,
                      151.35—
                      151.39,
                      151.99
18-O-03   7-18-2018   152.01—
                      152.03
18-O-08   12-5-2018   156.245
18-O-09   12-5-2018   156.125
18-O-10   12-5-2018   156.125
19-O-01   2-20-2019   TSO I
19-O-04   4-17-2019   TSO III
                      90.01—
19-O-09   7-3-2019    90.09,
                      90.99
                      50.01—
19-O-11   8-21-2019   50.14,
                      50.99
20-O-01   4-1-2020    33.16
                      110.01—
20-O-02   8-19-2020   110.08,
                      110.99
20-O-03   9-16-2020   30.30
20-O-04   10-7-2020   32.01—
                      32.08
20-O-05   11-4-2020   33.15
20-O-06   12-30-2020  33.16
                     
 
